















































Hansard: June 20, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1821 
 June 20, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of people who have 
great concerns over the condition of Highway 47 between 
Estevan and the Boundary dam resort. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, Bienfait, 
Torquay, Regina, and Lignite, North Dakota. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents of the city of Swift Current who are proposing a 
constructive alternative to the government’s plans for a 
permanent CT (computerized tomography) scan in the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital to serve the Southwest. And the 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reconsider its plans to allocate the used CT 
scanner to Swift Current and instead provide a new CT 
scanner to Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners today are from the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
signed by Saskatchewan people who are concerned that 
deregulation and privatization in the electrical industry is 
causing electrical rates to increase very dramatically in other 
jurisdictions. And the prayer is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electric industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Coronach, Fife Lake, Assiniboia, and Rockglen. 

Thank you and I so submit. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again I rise with a petition from citizens from all over 
Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned about the 
deplorable condition of Highway 43. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this literally is signed by a number of areas 
in the province, including Assiniboia, Vanguard, Wymark, 
Pambrun, Swift Current, Stewart Valley, and Ponteix. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of the citizens from west central Saskatchewan 
concerned with the alarming rate of rural school closures. And 
this prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to retain schools in rural communities 
such as Denzil and supply adequate education for rural 
families of our province. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by the good folks 
from the town of Denzil. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
the province who are very concerned with this government’s 
inaction in dealing with the issue surrounding the Qu’Appelle 
lakes. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with First 
Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to its normal level and 
end the economic harm and uncertainty that this dispute has 
caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the area of 
Pasqua Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Lloydminster, Spiritwood, and St. Walburg. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions tabled 
yesterday have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they 
are hereby read and received and tabled as addendums to 
sessional papers no. 12, 35, 36, 100, 120, 124, 126, 140, and 
141. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 68 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs: how many status 
Indians are presently registered within Saskatchewan; and 
how many non-status Indians are there in Saskatchewan? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 68 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: 
during the fiscal year 1999-2000 when then SIGA CEO 
took many out-of-province trips at SIGA’s expense, did 
any of the individuals now sitting on the SIGA board, the 
current SIGA CEO, or any other current employees of 
SIGA, any current members of the Legislative Assembly, 
or any current employees of SLGA go on any of these trips; 
if so, who went, where did they go, and for what reason? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 68 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: in view of the extremely 
dry conditions in the northwest part of the province will the 
government open wildlife habitat lands to temporary 
grazing by local ranchers? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

your gallery this morning, Mr. Speaker, are three . . . four 
Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker, who are being recognized 
as outstanding young farmers. Three are being recognized as 
outstanding young farmers. One, of course, is an alumni, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Today in your gallery is Lionel and Melody Ector from Elbow 
— I’ll just ask them to give a little wave here if they could; 
Melody’s not with him this morning as you can see, but we met 
this morning — Ryan and Christine Melsted from Wynyard and 
Cam and Cyndi Seidle from Medstead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young farmers have been selected for 
Saskatchewan. They’re our regional representatives. One of 
these families will be selected to the national finals in 
Vancouver which is happening in December. Carla and Warren 
Kaeding from my part of the province, from Saltcoats, were the 
outstanding young farmers in 1999. And Peter and Shirley 
Voldeng are the current outstanding Saskatchewan farmers 
from Naicam. 
 
And so this morning, Mr. Speaker, I want, I want the Assembly 
to recognize these families. These are the future of our 
province, Mr. Speaker, who not only are building our industry 
but are innovators and developers and making a difference in 
agriculture in our province. 
 
So I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming them to Saskatchewan and to the legislature, and the 
very best in your work towards the national finals and thank 
you for making a difference in our province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I, on behalf of 
the official opposition, I would like to join the minister in 
welcoming these outstanding young families to our legislature. I 
know that a lot of work has already been done for you to get 
this far in this particular competition. It takes a lot of effort. 
 
And I was personal . . . or am personal friends with Peter and 
Shirley Voldeng, who were winners last year, and was very 
proud to have them represent our province. 
 
And I’m sure any one of you will also represent our province in 
the nationals extremely well. So we thank you for your efforts, 
and welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery is a gentleman, a Saskatoon-based gentleman who 
works for . . . is the business representative for the Sheet Metal 
Workers’ International Association. I’m referring of course to 
Gunnar Passmore. And I emphasize the Saskatoon base because 
while Mr. Passmore has an apartment in Saskatoon, he actually 
has his principal residence in Sedley, Saskatchewan where his 
wife and 12-year-old son live, and where he has restored a 
gorgeous home — a 1903 home. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I questioned Gunnar about this, and I 
said: isn’t it difficult conducting a long-term marriage and 
family? He said, well no actually because in the building trades 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

 

we get used to it you know; we journey a lot. And that is 
actually where the term journeyperson came from. 
 
And I think it is an important bit of information for members of 
this Assembly to have to reflect just for a moment on the 
sacrifice — the personal sacrifice — that the men and women in 
construction and the building trades have given to build this 
great province and this great country of ours. 
 
I ask all people to welcome Gunnar Passmore to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to point 
out to all members in the gallery, Member of Parliament for 
Cypress Hills, David Anderson. David Anderson happens to be 
my Member of Parliament. He has a large area to serve and 
we’re happy to see that now that the summer session has broken 
in Ottawa that he is able to get out into the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I’m in the Rosetown-Biggar constituency I 
always tell my constituents that I represent them; that means 
they’re the boss. So it’s nice to be able to turn the tables and say 
that since Mr. Anderson is my representative that perhaps in 
this case I’m the boss. I hope he would accept that in the proper 
way. 
 
We wish him well and ask all members to welcome him to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to take a moment and introduce a visitor in the gallery, in 
your gallery, Sherry Leach. Sherry is with the Southeast 
Regional College’s educational foundation. 
 
But in particular I wanted to introduce Sherry because of the 
excellent work she’s been doing in helping move IT 
(information technology) forward in the post-secondary sector. 
She of course recently was host of the E-World Conference that 
was held here in Regina that brought together the educational 
partners and vendors from around the province. 
 
Sherry, of course, is also the member-in-waiting for Weyburn. 
And I notice that when she was last here she was seated at the 
back row of your gallery. I know she’s working her way down. 
I think a couple more weeks, Sherry will be able to take her seat 
rightfully here on this side of the Assembly. 
 
So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 
morning to introduce to you and through to all members of the 
Assembly, 12 students sitting in the west side of your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, from the town of Wilkie. 
 
These students are from the St. George School in Wilkie. 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Gary Boechler. 
They’re also accompanied by a couple of chaperones, Mr. 

Speaker, Mrs. Sittler and Mrs. Bachman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to have all members of the Assembly 
please join me in welcoming these young people to your gallery 
today and to watch the proceedings in the House. And, young 
people, I will be able to join you about 11 o’clock, and we’ll be 
able to go through what happened here this morning a little bit 
and have some discussion around the operation of the House. 
Welcome. 
 
Everyone please join me in welcoming the people from Wilkie. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Aboriginal Day 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure 
many of the members of this Assembly are aware, tomorrow is 
the first day of summer. While celebrating the summer solstice, 
many Canadians will be joining together to celebrate National 
Aboriginal Day. 
 
This day gives us an opportunity to reflect on the heritage and 
culture of our First Peoples and to celebrate the many past and 
present contributions of First Nations, Métis, and Inuit people to 
the province of Saskatchewan. We must also look to the future 
and the important role our Aboriginal people will continue to 
play in shaping that future. Aboriginal people enrich our 
province with their culture, traditions, spirituality, the arts, 
knowledge, and their wisdom. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can be proud that it is home to the 
First Nations University of Canada, the only one of its kind in 
the nation. It is only fitting that we celebrate the grand opening 
of this institution on National Aboriginal Day. This 
breathtaking feat of architectural excellence is a reality today 
because of the elders’ desire for an Indian institution of higher 
education. 
 
This college will play a unique role amongst Canada’s many 
post-secondary institutions and it is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that 
all members will participate in the many celebrations for 
National Aboriginal Day around the province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow, June 21, is National 
Aboriginal Day, a day set aside for all Canadians to 
acknowledge and celebrate the cultures and contributions to 
Canada of the First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples. It was 
first celebrated as a national event in 1996 and has been 
growing ever since. 
 
Mr. Speaker, June 21 was chosen as the date for National 
Aboriginal Day because of the cultural significance of the 
summer solstice as the first day of summer and the longest day 
of the year. It’s a day that many Aboriginal groups mark as a 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

time to celebrate their heritage. 
 
Setting aside a day for Aboriginal peoples is part of the wider 
recognition of Aboriginal people’s important place within the 
fabric of Canada and their ongoing contributions to the country. 
As Governor General Adrienne Clarkson has said: 
 

(It’s an important) It is an opportunity for all of us to 
celebrate our respect and admiration for First Nations, for 
Inuit, (and) for Métis — for the past, (for) the present and 
(for) the future. 

 
Whether it is the First Nations University of Canada, Gabriel 
Dumont Institute, Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies, or Dumont Technical Institute, there is no 
question that Saskatchewan and First Nations and Métis people 
have made great strides in their contributions to education in 
Saskatchewan and across the country. 
 
Leadership is also being taken in mining, forestry, 
telecommunications, and other areas. The respect for language 
and culture is now being addressed in the context of 
modern-day science and technology. 
 
The future is indeed wide open in the partnerships with 
Aboriginal peoples in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Centre 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 10, I 
attended the annual meeting of the Regina Community Clinic 
and was pleased to hear their proposal to establish a fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder centre. 
 
The purpose of the centre is to assess, diagnose, and coordinate 
plans for the care of children, youth, and adults. They will have 
an integrated team approach to meet the long-term needs. The 
centre will also provide education and training for community 
agencies that provide services to FASD (fetal alcohol spectrum 
disorder) victims, their families, and caregivers. 
 
Experts have concluded in many studies that the key to 
minimizing the secondary effects of FASD is early diagnosis. 
The human costs are immeasurable. Recent estimates for the 
lifetime financial costs to social programs for FASD victims are 
$7 million. These costs span extra health care, social assistance, 
education, and justice. 
 
Dr. Jo Nanson of Saskatoon found that nearly 50 per cent of 
young offenders appearing in provincial courts were born with 
FASD. These individuals are moving undiagnosed through the 
criminal justice system. How many of these people, with proper 
diagnosis and early intervention, could have been steered down 
a different path? 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to applaud the Regina Community 
Clinic, not only for their past service but for their courage to 
take on the worthy project of establishing an FASD centre for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Moose Jaw Beef Sale 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today Roberge Transport of Moose Jaw, along with 
our local cattle producers, will be holding a very special 
promotion to support the Canadian beef industry. 
 
Beginning at 9:30 this morning, producers, along with Roberge, 
will be at the Moose Jaw Civic Centre with 45,000 pounds of 
Canadian lean ground beef. This beef will be offered for sale to 
consumers at $1 a pound. The Shriners will also be there to help 
out this event by cooking hamburgers with meat donated by this 
promotion, and the money will go to supporting the Shriners 
burn fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past month has been a very stressful one for 
the beef industry in Saskatchewan and right across Canada. And 
it’s been felt quite immediately within Moose Jaw in the 
transport industry where Roberge, with offices in Moose Jaw 
and Lloydminster, is one of the largest livestock hauling 
operations in North America, employing 150 people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened over this time is that the 
testing and the extensive work done by the CFIA (Canadian 
Food Inspection Agency), the departments of Agriculture, beef 
producers, and our ministers of Agriculture, has confirmed that 
Canada has one of the best systems of checks and balances to 
maintain food safety for our consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very pleased, along with my colleague from 
Moose Jaw North, to attend the promotion this afternoon. And 
it’s important that everyone get behind the men and women 
involved in the beef industry during this very challenging time 
and turn out at the promotion. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Radville Benefactor — Frank Rak 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
was a unique announcement at the Radville Long Creek Rodeo 
last weekend. The announcer asked the crowd to observe a 
moment of silence and remember one of Radville’s long-time 
citizens, Mr. Frank Rak. 
 
A few weeks ago the 88-year-old Mr. Rak passed away and left 
his money to the community. With the money he left there is 
enough to buy a new ambulance. And the remainder of the 
money will be put into the Father Yandeau Foundation to 
purchase much needed equipment for the Radville health care 
facility. 
 
My understanding is that Mr. Rak was a very good-natured 
person who through the years lived a very humble life. I did not 
personally know Mr. Rak, but this Scripture speaks to the kind 
of person Mr. Rack must have been and I quote: 
 

Take care! Don’t do your good deeds publicly, to be 
admired, because . . . (they) will lose the reward from your 
Father in Heaven. When you give a gift to someone in 
need, don’t shout about it (to the hypocrites) as the 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

 

hypocrites do — blowing trumpets in the synagogues and 
streets to call attention to their acts of charity! Give your 
gifts in secret, and your Father, who knows all secrets, will 
reward you. Matthew 6:1-4. 
 

May we all remember Mr. Rak for his generosity and his 
kindness to the community of Radville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon’s Broadway Theatre 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. As everyone knows, the 
Broadway Theatre is the crown jewel of the most vibrant street 
in the province, Broadway Avenue, in the constituency of 
Saskatoon Nutana — a street everyone should visit at least once 
a year to get a taste of what’s hip and what’s happening. 
 
The Fringe Festival from August 1 to 10 is one good time to 
come but any day, any time is worth it. 
 
I want to talk about the Broadway Theatre. The theatre was 
built in 1946. It has served our neighbourhood in the city of 
Saskatoon as an independent movie theatre, as home of the 
Saskatoon soaps, as a place for live variety shows, and a home 
for a number of other events. Today it is Canada’s only 
community-owned, non-profit repertory cinema. It has been run 
for the last nine years by a volunteer board known as the 
Friends of the Broadway. Like so much along the boulevard, 
the theatre is unique. 
 
I’m pleased to tell the Assembly that the friends of the theatre, 
along with their friends, have raised $1.4 million, including 
$300,000 from our province’s Centenary Fund, during the past 
decade. This work has been done to restore the theatre to its 
former glory. I am pleased that our publicly owned electrical 
utility, SaskPower, has just contributed $25,000 to the reno 
fund giving financial support back to our community which 
SaskPower serves. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the Assembly, take a 
110 kilometre per hour trip up to Saskatoon, make sure you stop 
at Broadway, and you’ll be glad you did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Order of Military Merit Awards 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today Canada’s Governor General will appoint 42 members of 
the Canadian regular and reserve forces to the Order of Military 
Merit. Created in 1972, the Order of Military Merit recognizes 
meritorious service and devotion to duty by members of the 
Canadian Forces. 
 
There are three levels of membership in the Order of Military 
Merit: commander, officer, and member. Today’s ceremony 
will recognize two commanders, 13 officers, and 27 members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a Saskatchewan connection to those being 
honoured today. Lieutenant-Colonel Harley Rogers is being 
appointed an Officer of Military Merit. He is from Moose Jaw 
and is currently posted in Ottawa. 

Also receiving the Order of Military Merit are two friends of 
mine: Dave Bashow, Lieutenant-Colonel, who hails from 
Fredericton, New Brunswick and is currently posted in 
Kingston, Ontario. Dave is a fighter pilot and we had the 
opportunity to fly the CF-104 at the same time. 
 
Also receiving the OMM (Officer of the Order of Military 
Merit) is Commander Anne Gourlay-Langlois from Halifax. 
Anne is another individual that I was privileged to have worked 
alongside many years ago in Edmonton. 
 
Of the two individuals receiving the Commander of Military 
Merit, I’m very honoured to say that I know and have worked 
with Major-General Ric Findley. 
 
As a 1987 recipient of this award myself, I know how much this 
award means to those being selected for it today. I ask all 
members of the House to recognize the many years of service 
and dedication of the 42 members of the Canadian Forces who 
are being honoured with the OMM (Order of Military Merit) 
today in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Compensation Program for Beef Industry 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
The federal Minister of Agriculture announced the BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy) compensation package for the beef 
industry two days ago. The Saskatchewan government will be 
administering the program in this province. At his news 
conference on Wednesday, the minister indicated that people 
affected might see some financial compensation in their hands 
in 10 to 14 days, or approximately the first week in July. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how his department is 
planning on administering the program and where people 
affected by the BSE situation can go for more details? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what I did yesterday is met 
with the financial institutions in the province for the second 
time since the BSE issue has been presented to us. And we had 
a discussion about how and when we’ll get the money out to the 
producers directly. And the Leader of the Opposition Sask Party 
is right. I said to the media that it would be two to three weeks 
before the money actually makes its way, the provincial and 
federal supported money. In the meantime the financial 
institutions have again agreed that they would provide the 
backstop to the industry until such time as the subsidy money 
comes on its way. 
 
We’ve established, Mr. Speaker, already, the toll-free line. The 
toll-free line will have three components of it. It will have a 
production, a program component to it to describe the program. 
It will have a marketing component to it so that the people will 
know who to phone if in fact they want to get their livestock to 
the processors. And it will have the stress component to it as 
well because there will be issues that people will have to deal 
with that will be traumatic to their families. 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

So the line’s in place. The inquiry information will be going out 
within the next day or two to all producers in Saskatchewan to 
advise them on all the details. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
minister just went from making a two-week commitment to 
making a three-week commitment to provide this 
compensation. 
 
Meanwhile the Alberta government officially announced their 
part of the BSE compensation package yesterday. And their 
Agriculture minister, Shirley McClellan, said that their 
application forms would be ready today. She also indicated 
there would be very quick turnaround as payments would be 
available to the applicants within days. Now this is quite a 
difference from what was said yesterday, 10 to 14 days; and 
today, two to three weeks, Mr. Speaker. Why the delay? 
 
Mr. Speaker, early on in the BSE crisis, June 6 was offered up 
by the minister as the day when many feedlot operators would 
find themselves at the financial breaking point, after two full 
weeks of trade restrictions due to the BSE discovery. Now he’s 
suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that they might have to wait even 
longer. He’s saying now another two to three weeks, and we’re 
at June 20. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the people of Saskatchewan who have 
been affected by the BSE crisis have access to application 
forms from the federal-provincial program and might when they 
actually expect compensation? Why are we so far behind 
Alberta on this one? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we are 
exactly at the same place as Alberta is, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 
been working with Alberta on developing the information 
package; we’ve been working with Alberta on developing the 
application form; and we’ve been working with Alberta on 
developing the information piece that will go to producers. In 
the next day or two we’ll have the application form in the mail 
to the producers so that they can make the application. 
 
The member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition 
Saskatchewan Party, asked when will people receive money. 
Well as soon as we receive the application forms back, we’ll 
have established a program within our program department and 
we’ll manually cut the cheques when the information comes 
back to us. 
 
(10:30) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, to have all of the money administered and all 
of the application forms and all of the compensation back to 
producers across the province will take a couple of weeks; 
there’s no question about that. Because in Saskatchewan today 
and in Canada today we know who the large feedlots are — 
over 1,000 head — and we know who the packers are. 
 
What we do not know, Mr. Speaker, in an accurate way across 
Canada, is those producers who have small herds today that will 

also need to be compensated. And it is they, Mr. Speaker, who 
we’re most concerned about today in making sure that there’s 
equity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister 
of Agriculture: are our forms ready today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’ll advise the Leader of the Opposition if 
our forms are ready today or not; I’ll provide that information to 
him later today. I expect that if they’re not ready today, they’ll 
be in the mail tomorrow or they’ll be in the mail Monday. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Industry 
representatives are anxious to see the BSE compensation 
package begin to reach those who need it so that there is some 
resumption of beef marketing as soon as possible. 
 
But the critical issue is still getting the US (United States) trade 
restrictions lifted. Unfortunately it appears that with Japan’s 
comments on future beef imports and the fact that the US say 
they will be using extreme caution in their decision as to what 
to do with trade action, it is looking more and more like the 
USDA (United States Department of Agriculture) will be 
sticking with its July 28 date after all. 
 
The compensation package as it exists to date cuts off the same 
day as US trade restrictions are lifted. And this is definitely a 
concern to the beef industry, especially anyone needing to move 
a large number of animals to market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister planning to do to address their 
concerns with this part of the program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we have said, Mr. 
Speaker, is that if in fact the borders get opened within the next 
day or two or within the next week or two, what will happen is 
that the ministers of Agriculture and the federal minister will 
come together immediately. And the reason for coming together 
immediately is to have the discussion about whether or not 
there is opportunity here to extend the compensation package in 
. . . after the opening of the border. 
 
The huge concern here, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that if you 
extend the compensation package you could be exposed to 
countervail or to anti-dumping. And that issue we need to have 
absolutely clear in our minds to see whether or not we can 
extend the compensation piece. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, what you should be doing is 
you should be having a conversation with the Canadian 
Alliance. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s that party that you support 
and that you work with closely. And what have they done, Mr. 
Speaker? They’ve adjourned and agreed to adjourn the national 
government House right in the middle of one of the biggest 
issues that’s facing Canada today. 
 
Why doesn’t the Leader of the Opposition get on the phone to 
his friend the Canadian Alliance leader and say to the Canadian 
Alliance leader, why aren’t we reconvening the House, Mr. 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

 

Speaker, in order to deal with this issue and deal with trade, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m appalled that the 
Minister of Agriculture’s criticizing the federal government 
when his own colleagues, Mr. Speaker, are asking for this 
House to adjourn. Where is this minister’s head? Where is he? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unbelievable. The 
president of the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association says that 
they are very concerned about a quick cut-off to the program. 
Neil Jahnke . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Order, 
members, order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know there are 
members on both sides that are involved with the royal visit 
that’s currently undergoing . . . being undertaken, but we have 
some questions on BSE that we want answered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the president of the Canadian Cattlemen’s 
Association says that they are very concerned about this quick 
cut-off to the program. Neil Jahnke says if the aid, if the aid 
package winds down once the US starts accepting some beef 
cuts, there could be some real chaos. 
 
The concern about the potential countervail action by the US 
should be alleviated by the NAFTA (North American Free 
Trade Agreement) agreement — and I want the minister to take 
note — which allows consideration for support payments for 
emergency situations. I would suggest that the Canadian 
government should be able to successfully argue how much of 
an emergency the BSE case has created for the beef industry in 
this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the industry wants some answers about this and 
believe that the threat of countervail action is very, very weak. 
Does the minister have any indication from the federal 
government that they are looking at ways to offer the industry 
some transition period from this program when the US does 
allow some beef imports? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when I answered 
this question to the critic from Watrous, I answered this 
question to the critic from Watrous, obviously the Leader of the 
Opposition didn’t hear it, Mr. Speaker, so I’m going to repeat it 
again to the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that we have this as a plan 
nationally for this issue, that if in fact the US border opens in 
the next couple of days — as we hope and anticipate that it will 
— we’ll call all of the Agriculture ministers together 
immediately to make a determination on the evidence, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s been provided by federal trade lawyers for us 
that say this: we have the option of doing one of two things, by 
extending the subsidy into a . . . into a period beyond, Mr. 

Speaker, or the damage beyond, Mr. Speaker, the opening of 
the border. 
 
If we do that, Mr. Speaker, the federal US government may in 
fact not open the border — may not open the border. And the 
issue is, Mr. Speaker, should we deal with that issue when in 
fact the US determines to open the border as opposed to dealing 
with it in advance and jeopardizing the opening of the border? 
The advice of the trade lawyers is not to proceed with the 
compensation until the border opens and then have that 
discussion at that point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lifting of United States Import Restrictions 
on Canadian Beef 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, for the first time in a long time I’m encouraged 
because the minister says he anticipates that the US will lift its 
trade import restrictions within the next two or three days. I ask 
the minister upon what basis he makes this prediction, and can 
he give the industry the positive information and more detail? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said to the member from 
Watrous a couple of days ago when she asked me the question 
and the Leader of the Opposition may not have heard it — and 
I’ll say it to the Leader of the Opposition again, Mr. Speaker — 
we sent a letter, the federal government sent a letter to the 
national government of the US last Thursday. They’re 
anticipating to have . . . or we’re anticipating to have some 
response this week from the national government out of the US. 
And they said, Mr. Speaker, that that may happen. The opening 
of the border may happen next week, within a few days; it may 
have happened on Friday of this week; or it may be delayed for 
a couple of more weeks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That decision, Mr. Speaker, is not being made by the Canadian 
government. That decision, Mr. Speaker, is going to be made by 
the US government. That’s who’s going to make that decision. 
And all of the pressure that we put on from this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, as Mr. Klein said the other day from Kelowna, won’t 
make a hill of difference. Because who will decide, Mr. 
Speaker, will be Veneman. Secretary Veneman and the US 
Congress will make this decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we anticipate that this will be an early opening. We hope 
it’s an early opening and we’re working through our federal 
government to make those kinds of conditions present so that 
we do have an early opening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grasshopper Control 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, many crop producers 
across Saskatchewan are fighting a real battle against 
grasshoppers which are causing serious crop damage. Chemical 
to control the insects costs from 4 to $8 per acre for each 
application, and some producers have already sprayed three 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

times, so the expenses are mounting. 
 
Earlier this month the Alberta government announced a 
grasshopper program that will provide $10.5 million to help 
their farmers control this pest. This is a program the province 
has offered in years past. Under the program, producers can 
qualify for $4 per acre to help cover the costs of chemical 
control. It is interesting that this year, Mr. Speaker, the federal 
government is sharing the cost of this program with the 
province of Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the grasshopper infestation is a serious situation in 
Saskatchewan, as it is in Alberta. Has the minister contacted the 
federal Minister of Agriculture about also offering a similar 
grasshopper program here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what we did in this province 
this year is that we took additional money and put it into the 
Crop Insurance Fund, Mr. Speaker. We added to our Crop 
Insurance Fund this year. And we put an additional $100 
million into our crop insurance program. The federal 
government topped up their share by an additional . . . they now 
have $150 million in that pool, and producers are contributing 
about $100 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our crop insurance pool went from about 225 million this year 
to well over 350 million. That pool of new crop insurance 
money, Mr. Speaker, is intended to cover off issues as they are 
with grasshoppers and wheat midge and flea beetles and 
drought or flood disaster. It’s anticipated to cover that bigger 
chunk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s interesting today, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 
Watrous stands in here, stands on her feet and says, you know 
what? That Alberta has signed an agreement with . . . Alberta’s 
signed an agreement with the federal government and that’s 
why they’re getting the cost share, when that member stood and 
gave a speech in this House and said, we should not be signing 
the implementation agreement, Mr. Speaker; we should be 
staying away from it. 
 
So what is it? Should we be signing the implementation 
agreement or should we moving off the implementation 
agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister doesn’t 
know it because obviously he didn’t know whether or not our 
. . . or the applications were out for BSE. But he should know 
— the producers know — that the Alberta crop insurance 
makes ours look sick in this province, and they have a 
grasshopper program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s department 
published a grasshopper report for this crop year last December, 
predicting significant increases in grasshopper population. And 
that report is right on the money. The crop damage report 
published by the department for June 15 indicates a majority of 

the RMs (rural municipality) in the province reported crop 
damage due to insects. And a good portion of that is directly 
related to grasshoppers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the producers are finding as many as 80 
grasshoppers per square metre when the economic threshold for 
cereal crops is only 12 grasshoppers per square metre. This is a 
serious and growing problem in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why isn’t the minister prepared to help 
Saskatchewan crop producers fighting the same war against 
grasshoppers as Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I may not know 
whether or not the application forms for the new program will 
go out tomorrow or the day after, but I know this, Mr. Speaker, 
for sure. I know that as the member for opposite has said on 
many occasions, that our crop insurance repayment program is 
not 8 or 9 years — it’s 15 years; and that’s what she said, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I said, Mr. Speaker, I know that our NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) program from the national government 
goes to producers and it doesn’t come to the province, Mr. 
Speaker. I know that and the member opposite should know 
that. 
 
And I know that, Mr. Speaker, that we should not, Mr. Speaker, 
we should not be cost sharing in trade injury as the member 
opposite, led by her leader, Mr. Speaker, who thinks that we 
should be participating in trade injury in a 60/40 . . . Why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because he doesn’t believe in subsidy programs for 
farmers today. 
 
And he’d toss money to Saskatchewan farmers on every 
occasion, I know that, Mr. Speaker, but we were there for 
producers when it came to herd retention programs; we were 
there for farmers when, Mr. Speaker, it came to hog programs; 
and we’ll be there for producers when it comes to deal with 
grasshoppers in this province as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Do you know what the producers in this 
province know, Mr. Speaker? The producers of this province 
knows that that minister’s going to be looking for a job as soon 
as the Premier has the courage to call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s quite interesting that the 
Alberta government and the federal Department of Agriculture 
would announce the cost sharing of this grasshopper control 
program the very same week that Alberta signs on to the new 
agriculture policy framework agreement. 
 
The new APF (agricultural policy framework) program falls far 
short of what farm groups in this province are looking for in 
safety net funding, yet the federal government wields a big stick 
and we know that they’ve used the BSE situation to leverage 
. . . as leverage to convince provinces they must sign on. 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

 

Our minister has indicated that he intends to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Members are 
just a little louder than the questioner, and I want to be able to 
hear the question. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And our minister 
has indicated he intends to sign on to the APF in July. If he is 
going to do this despite the concerns of Saskatchewan farm 
groups about the program’s deficiencies, will the minister at 
least commit to trying to leverage further assistance from the 
federal government for farmers battling grasshoppers, just like 
Alberta did, before he commits Saskatchewan to the new APF? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, not only am I going to be 
lobbying the federal government for additional resources for 
additional programming in specific areas, Mr. Speaker . . . And 
I don’t need to get my policies from the newspaper, Mr. 
Speaker, or from Alberta, as the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been four years in a mandate, Mr. Speaker, 
and I have yet to receive a letter or correspondence from the 
Saskatchewan Party that says anything about farm policy. And 
you have 25 or 26 men and women who sit there from rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and not one response in terms of 
public policy on agriculture — not one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And not only are we going to . . . Not only, Mr. Speaker, are we 
going to deal with specific issues as they relate to crop 
insurance programs, but we’re going to fight, Mr. Speaker, for 
improved trade money from the federal government in the 
future before we sign this agreement. 
 
I’m going to say that, Mr. Speaker, that the $600 million that’s 
going to disappear this year, we should get. We should see 
indexing, Mr. Speaker, to the program, to the APF agreement 
into the future. Because how do you build a five-year program 
without having indexing to it? 
 
Those are all the things that we’re going to be arguing for, Mr. 
Speaker, and the opposition has been mute on all of it, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s time to get off your duff and to provide some 
farm policy for Canadian and Saskatchewan producers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
year the Workers’ Compensation Board lost $93 million last 
year. Employer premiums are going up and workers that we 
hear from are having trouble receiving benefits. But that didn’t 
stop John Solomon from renovating the Workers’ Comp 
building at a cost of four and a quarter million dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s absolutely outrageous. How can the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) justify spending over $4 million on 

renovations when Workers’ Comp last year lost over $90 
million? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
get up and rerun some answers from yesterday’s estimates that 
we spent a great deal of time on. 
 
Yesterday I explained to the member that the WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) building has never been renovated since 
it was built in the early 1990s. The renovations were done to 
accommodate occupational health concerns for the workers in 
the workplace. They were also renovations done to 
accommodate the team-based case management system that has 
been initiated in the WCB. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this has done, it has allowed . . . This 
rearrangement and renovation is a yearly cost of $280,000 per 
year, which has been amortized over 15 years; but it has also 
allowed the WCB to end the lease on the 12th floor of this 
building, which saves them $250,000 a year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this is unbelievable. The NDP 
has no money to build safe houses to help children trapped in 
the sex trade, but they’ve got over four and a quarter million 
dollars to create primo office space for NDP defeated candidate 
John Solomon. And it’s ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I asked the minister yesterday, and she then repeated it 
again today, when was the building last renovated — only 10 
years ago. It was built less than 10 years ago and they’re putting 
over $4 million worth of renovations. That’s ridiculous, Mr. 
Minister. WCB has lost over $93 million last year and over $50 
million the year before, but that sure didn’t stop them from 
spending businesses’ money in renovating John Solomon’s 
office at a tune of $4.25 million. How can you justify that when 
business premiums are going up in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I explained to the member 
that this is a savings of $250,000 a year because of the change 
in the lease and the less requirement for space. The team-based 
case management team is doing great work across this province 
with employers and employees that are receiving WCB 
benefits. Mr. Speaker, to accommodate and change workplaces 
for new occupational health and safety is a benefit. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the member opposite, not 
only is this a saving but, Mr. Speaker, this falls under the costs 
of administration for the WCB. And administration costs have 
been reduced over the last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
absolutely amazing that the minister can try and justify the 
renovation at WCB by getting out of a lease. They’re moving 
people from one office space into the next office space. They’re 
not expanding their office space; they’re renovating at $4.25 
million, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, that comes right out of the pockets of business 
owners across this province. Mr. Speaker, it’s more than a little 
ironic that the newly hired John Solomon is the one that 
initiated this. WCB for the last two years has lost over $130 
million. John Solomon was hired at that time and now WCB 
needs a renovation of $4.25 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How can you go out and justify that to business owners across 
this province, to workers who aren’t getting their benefits paid 
properly, and you’re spending $4.25 million on a renovation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
have confirmed exactly what members on this side of the House 
have been saying. I sat in this legislature yesterday and listened 
to the minister explain that the savings in terms of the changes 
in terms of the workplace at the Workers’ Comp were actually 
saving the people of Saskatchewan money. 
 
He had that answer yesterday, but do you know what it is, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s recycle, regurgitate, repeat. He knew the answer 
because he got it just yesterday afternoon. But they stand in 
here wasting tens of thousands of taxpayers’ dollars recycling, 
regurgitating, repeating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a blue box question that the member answered 
. . . or asked. And I tell you the answer today is the same as the 
answer was yesterday. 
 
Why don’t they do the right thing — wrap up the session and go 
home? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please, members. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand and try to speak over the noise in the House, and 
table a response to written questions no. 751 and 752. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 751 and 752 have been 
submitted. 
 
Order. Order, members. Order. Order, members. Order. 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 
Vote 1 

 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister 

and ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, this morning with me is Mr. 
Gord Nystuen who’s to my right here, who is the deputy 
minister. Directly behind me is Mr. Hal Cushon, who’s the 
assistance deputy. Next to him is Karen Aulie, who’s the 
director of corporate services branch. And Mr. Russ Johnson, 
who’s next to Karen and he’s the managing operator of 
corporate services branch. 
 
And then, in the chairs in the back row, Mr. Speaker, we have 
Dr. Louise Greenberg, who’s the assistant deputy minister; 
Maryellen Carlson, who’s the assistant deputy minister; Doug 
Matthies, who’s the general manager of the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation; and Mr. Greg Haase, who is the director 
of lands branch; and Mr. David Boehm’s the director of 
financial services branch; and Laurier Donais, who’s the senior 
manager of services systems corporate services branch with the 
department. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. As the 
minister knows, a great deal of the crop was left unharvested 
last fall and some time ago already that crop would have either 
been harvested or worked under because it wasn’t economically 
viable to harvest it. Can the minister tell us if all of the 2002 
crop claims have been adjusted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, we’re nearly finished our work. 
There were about 9,000 claims that were left. The majority of 
them, Madam Member, are in the northeast part of the province. 
We’re completing those now, and there’s still some grading 
that’s being completed too on some of the grains. But my 
officials tell me that within the next couple of weeks, we’ll be 
finished all of the work. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. Was there any 
particular reason why there was a delay? It should have been 
harvested some time ago now. Was there any reason that there 
was a delay for adjusting the 2002 crops that were harvested in 
2003? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, some of the dilemma I expect 
here, or is, — not expect but is — is that when you have a 
spring as we had this year where farmers are having to combine 
first and remove the crop before they’re able to seed, what’s 
happened is that in many of these instances farmers also have to 
accompany the field inspectors to the sites. And, accordingly, 
what we’ve been asked by many of the farmers on several 
occasions that they should . . . if we could wait and hold off 
until they finished their seeding because they had to harvest; 
then they had to seed. And then they’ll be accompanying the 
inspectors now onto the field. 
 
And it’s partly to do with that rationale is that farmers wanted 
us to wait a bit until they were finished with a very, very busy 
spring, which as you know on many fronts in the northeast, has 
been both the combining and also the seeding. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — It’s obvious from the minister’s answers that 
the indemnities have not all been paid on the spring harvested 
2002 crop. 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

 

Are any of the payments, or will any of the payments that 
producers will have coming to them be applied to the 
producers’ 2003 crop insurance premium? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — No, Mr. Chair. The answer is no to that 
question. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer and I’m 
going to move into a different area. And this is, again it’s a 
specific case concerning Danny Showers who has a land lease, 
and David Shortt who I believe is at the North Battleford land 
office. And I’m just going to read into the record the letters that 
have gone between these two parties. The initial letter was from 
Danny Showers, and it says: 
 

Further to my letter of April 21, 2003, I have not yet 
received the Schedule “C”, indicating the number of 
livestock to be pastured this year. As you are no doubt 
aware, the north west area of Saskatchewan is still drier 
than normal. Although the pastures are starting to show 
some growth, they are in need of moisture. The one slough 
on this pasture was totally dry this spring, that is the first 
time that I have see this in the past 30 years. This, together 
with present uncertainty of the livestock industry due to the 
threat of the Mad Cow Disease, makes it very risky to 
purchase any livestock at this time. If the pastures continue 
to show improvement I would like to rent it to a neighbour 
who has already indicated that he will require additional 
pasture. If I am unable to rent the pasture to the neighbour, 
I plan on leaving the pasture empty (for) this year. Please 
advise . . . 

 
And the response that he received was, from Mr. David Shortt, 
was: 
 

Subleasing is not permitted this year. You must purchase 
some cattle in order to retain your lease. If you wish to 
purchase less than the number stated in your LUP, you 
must meet with me on site and come to an agreement on the 
number of cattle to be put in. Your LUP requires that you 
require a minimum of 35 cattle to be purchased and put on 
the . . . (land). 

 
The letter that I’ve received from Mr. Showers, and that Mr. 
Showers has also sent to Mr. Shortt, is basically saying . . . or 
asking for some flexibility in this decision; and he’s not very 
satisfied with the answer that he’s been given. 
 
Apparently Danny Showers has been leasing this parcel of land 
for approximately 10 years now and his father-in-law had been 
leasing it for an unstated . . . or not stated amount of time before 
that. And in many areas he is correct, that many areas where . . . 
that were faced with drought last year still don’t have an 
abundance of moisture. And if this land is in the Humboldt area, 
I can testify that we don’t have an abundance of moisture. So 
the land probably is somewhat depleted. 
 
There’s also the situation of the BSE. And as the minister has 
said, we’re on unchartered waters here. It’s extremely unusual 
circumstances. So I can understand where Mr. Showers perhaps 
doesn’t want to purchase or may not . . . I mean I’m not even 
too sure if there’s anyone selling at this point in time the 35 
required head that’s needed. 

So would the minister agree to look into this matter and take the 
drought situation and the BSE crisis into consideration when 
making his decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I want to say to the member 
that we’ll — and if she’ll accept this answer, I’d appreciate that 
we go this way — that we’ll continue to work closely with Mr. 
Showers, and also Mr. Shortt, through our department. I’m 
hesitant to get into the details on this case today given that there 
are circumstances here that I think we should both protect in 
terms of the individual, and I’m talking now about your 
constituent, or maybe not your constituent, but certainly in your 
area. 
 
What I would suggest here is that — if you’ll agree — that 
we’ll work confidentially on this matter through your office and 
my department officials so that we do not have to, sort of, 
disclose some of the, I think, unusual circumstances that might 
exist around this case. And we’d prefer to do it that way if it 
would be satisfactory to you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer and I’ll 
be looking forward to hearing from him further on that 
particular case. 
 
I have another specific land lease issue. I received a copy of a 
letter from the Canadian Federation of Independent Business 
that was sent to the deputy minister, dated June 5. And it was 
written on behalf of Brady Wobeser of Hi Gain Ranching, and 
it too expresses concerns about a land lease. 
 
But rather than, you know asking the minister to respond, 
because I do believe this probably is a fairly in-depth issue, I 
would like to take this opportunity to forward my copy to him 
so he can reference it with the original. And then if I could get 
an update on what’s happening with this particular one as well, 
I would greatly appreciate it. 
 
And with that, I’m going to turn the questions over to my 
colleague from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, earlier this 
morning my colleague from Watrous asked you whether you 
were going to be contacting the federal Minister of Agriculture 
to see if we can put a program together to help with the cost of 
controlling grasshoppers in our province. And your answer, as I 
listened carefully, was that you’ve taken . . . enhanced this 
year’s crop insurance program and that’s the emphasis that you 
were placing on this issue. 
 
Well, Minister, I don’t think that’s a good enough answer. I 
don’t know whether you realize it or not, and obviously by your 
answer I don’t think you do realize that parts of our province 
have a very, very serious grasshopper problem. In fact in the 
30-some years that I’ve been farming I haven’t seen such a high 
infestation of grasshoppers in parts of my constituency as we 
have right as we speak. 
 
I have constituents on the west side of my constituency who 
have re-seeded entire quarter sections because of grasshopper 
damage, and they are battling and trying to save the second 
crop. And, Minister, they’re losing it. They’re losing the battle. 
I have constituents who have sprayed their entire farms at least 



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

once — some fields up to three times — and they’re going to 
have to continue spraying. And each time that they spray the 
field they’re looking at an average cost of approximately $5 an 
acre, and that’s for the chemical costs alone, not including 
application costs. 
 
And we’re looking at a situation here where it’s kind of like the 
FRAM oil filter commercial, you pay me now or you pay me 
later, and I’m fearful that if these producers don’t receive some 
assistance in this battle that they’re waging against the 
grasshoppers that they’re going to walk away from some of 
these fields. And then crop insurance which already, your crop 
insurance program already has a half a billion dollar deficit; it’s 
going . . . you’re going to be looking at making some significant 
payouts in parts of this province. 
 
And this grasshopper infestation and this problem, the area is 
growing. If you look at a forecast map that Alberta Agriculture 
has on their Web site, you will see that the area of severe 
infestation is larger in Saskatchewan than it is in Alberta, and 
it’s growing on a daily basis. With weather like we had in the 
last couple of days this grasshopper problem is exploding in 
areas of our province, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I would urge you to look at this problem very seriously and 
pick up the phone and talk to the minister . . . federal Minister 
of Agriculture. 
 
In fact, last year Alberta had a program and they funded it 
entirely on their own. And I think maybe we need to do 
something like that in this province. I heard some of your 
colleagues chuckle when the question was asked in question 
period because they thought . . . they think it’s not a significant 
problem. Well I’m telling you it is a very significant problem. 
 
And in fact if I was the Minister of Finance, I’d be somewhat 
worried because he’s basing his projection on 6.8 per cent 
economic growth in this province for this year, based on a 
normal crop. Well with some of the things that are happening 
within the last few weeks as far as crop reduction in this 
province — and that area is growing, the grasshopper problem 
is growing in the province and it’s a serious problem, Minister 
— and I would ask you what are you prepared to do about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want first, Mr. Chair, to indicate to 
the member opposite that there is certainly no signal on this side 
of the House that this is a flippant question that you ask — 
either now doing estimates or was asked earlier today in 
question period. And no one should assume for a minute that I 
don’t understand what it is to have a grasshopper infestation in 
your area because we have had that in our part of the world in 
the past as well. 
 
I’m old enough to remind you that I too farmed through the late 
’60s. And in the late ’60s in our part of the province, we had a 
very serious, very serious grasshopper infestation that destroyed 
not only our crops but also destroyed our forage for our 
livestock. 
 
So we should not for a minute assume that on this side of the 
House I don’t have any familiarity with this piece because I 
understand it very well, in the same way that I understand that 
we have had in this part of the province . . . in parts of the 

province over the years, serious infestation of the wheat midge, 
which not only destroyed people’s crops, but also reduced the 
level of compensation that you get for the kernel when in fact 
it’s destroyed by wheat midge. And we have serious, serious 
infestations of wheat midge in various different parts of the 
province. 
 
Accordingly, we understand that from time to time, through the 
course of the province, we have a flea beetle infestation — 
particularly on canola crop, of which the flea beetle can do great 
damage to the leaf of the canola crop — that in fact causes 
producers to spray on more than one occasion in order to 
control them. 
 
And further the ascochyta that was in the chickpea a couple of 
years ago in the southwest part of the province where they had a 
tremendous problem with it, of which farmers were having to 
spray. 
 
So we have in Saskatchewan a whole host of issues on an 
ongoing basis annually that affect the way in which we produce 
crop here. And because of our climate conditions, we’ll get the 
kinds of things that you’re talking about today. And the 
grasshopper issue is a huge issue in various different parts of 
the province. And there is some compensation today that’s 
being provided in Alberta, as they have in the past. 
 
(11:15) 
 
We chose last year and again this year to load more money into 
our crop insurance program to pay producers to a larger degree 
than what we have in the past. Now is that compensation 
package sufficient today in the crop insurance program? It may 
not be. It may not be. And I am exploring, through my federal 
minister, ways and options that we might have available to 
ourselves now that we’re entering into a new agricultural policy 
framework agreement and soon needing to sign the 
implementation agreement. 
 
There are very strict positions which we can take and conditions 
of which we can enrol, particularly a compendium program, 
because the entire notion of the new APF implementation 
business risk model is to do away with the compendium 
programs. It’s to do away with them. 
 
Now is there a process or is there a method today in which we 
might be able to provide some kind of a assistance package for 
a particular sector or a particular insecticide . . . or insect in this 
particular case? That option, we’re pursuing. Is there ability for 
us to do that outside of a crop insurance program? I don’t know 
that for a fact today. But we haven’t abandoned the issue. 
We’ve not neglected dealing with it nor are we of the mind of 
understanding what it’s about. 
 
But be reminded that not only do we have grasshopper issues in 
Saskatchewan, we can take you through a list — as you know 
being a farmer in Saskatchewan and probably have experienced 
from time to time all of the issues of which I’ve explained to 
you a couple of minutes ago that many of us on our farms 
experience. And will we be there or should governments be 
there on every occasion, on a one-off, on a whole host of 
different difficulties that are faced on the farm? 
 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

 

And that’s why today we’re trying to build a comprehensive 
agricultural policy, business risk management policy, of which 
producers contribute to and federal and provincial governments 
contribute to, and try to deal with issues of this magnitude when 
in fact they occur. And so that’s what we’re trying to build here. 
But I’m not discounting for a minute the importance of this 
issue or the need for us to examine it in a more detailed fashion. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, farmers in 
this province are fully aware of the risks associated with the 
business and all the risks that you mentioned — whether it be 
wheat midge or ascochyta in chickpeas and various lentil 
diseases. And diseases and insects are part of the problems that 
farmers face on an annual basis, and they know that full well. 
 
But this is a situation this year with grasshoppers, is way 
beyond anything that farmers have experienced in the past and 
shouldn’t be expected to experience without some sort of a 
backstop. 
 
Farmers of our province are getting tired and looking to the 
west and seeing what’s being offered to their producers and 
seeing what’s not being offered to them. In fact generally it’s 
very minimal when we are facing these exceptional cases. All 
we have to do is look back to last year’s drought. Alberta put up 
$324 million of actual cash to their farmers. What did 
Saskatchewan do? A paltry $20 million. 
 
Farmers in Saskatchewan are prepared to and, I guess, have 
become to . . . have acknowledged that your government isn’t 
able to offer the backstops and support that the Alberta 
government is able to offer to their government. But they are 
saying, look, when we’re faced with these exceptional 
situations and our neighbours are given some aid in combating 
this serious situation and we’re left out on our own again, 
they’re just getting a little tired of it, Minister. 
 
We hear from you on a regular basis that a provincial 
government can’t compete with international subsidies on the 
income side of the equation. And frankly that’s true. A 
provincial government can’t compete with the US treasury or 
the European treasury. But a provincial government can do 
some things to help with the cost of production and this is one 
of these things that a provincial government can do. 
 
How is it that the Alberta government is able to negotiate a 
companion program over and above the APF and Saskatchewan 
is not? 
 
And, Minister, and as I said earlier, this is a situation where 
when farmers are looking at spraying four and five times, the 
costs are mounting on a dramatic basis and eventually they have 
no choice but to walk away from the problem. And what’ll 
happen is there’ll be yield loss; you’ll be paying a much higher 
payout in your crop insurance program then would be 
necessary. And not only that, if we don’t control the pests, we’ll 
have the same problem next year. 
 
So again, I would urge you to look very carefully at what 
Alberta has done and see if we can’t come up with something 
for our producers in Saskatchewan this year. And we need it 
now, Minister, because the problem . . . As that sun shines and 
the temperature goes to plus 30, that’s ideal grasshopper 

weather. And there’s literally, Minister, an explosion of 
grasshoppers out there. And so I urge you to address this 
problem today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I appreciate the member moving on a . . . 
(inaudible) . . . of what Alberta does versus what we do and 
what the rest of Canada does in comparison to what we do in 
agriculture, because that’s debate I am pleased to have with you 
and anybody else who wants to have it. 
 
By the national numbers alone, in contribution to agriculture — 
which I want you to hear and this House to understand — is that 
on per capita Saskatchewan leads the pack in contribution to 
agriculture by a country mile. We’re at $406 per capita for 
every man, woman, and child in this province that we 
contribute to agriculture. Alberta’s is $150 per capita that they 
contribute to agriculture. And PEI (Prince Edward Island) is 
larger than Alberta is in terms of per capita contributions to 
agriculture. We’re at $406. Our federal government, to the 
provincial . . . Our federal government, Mr. Member, is 
contributing $85 on average to the . . . $85 per average, or per 
capita, to agriculture in this country. 
 
And so for you to stand in your place and say that, per capita, 
we as a province are not making a significant contribution, 
simply is not true — simply is not true. We make a huge 
contribution to agriculture per capita today in terms of men and 
women. Now you could argue that we should be putting more 
money into that pool, and I argue on a regular basis with my 
treasury that we should be putting more money into agriculture 
as well. But when you have a fixed amount of dollars today to 
operate and manage a province, which you understand, I’m 
pleased to be able to say that we have this kind of a contribution 
to agriculture as it relates to everybody else across the country. 
 
And you shouldn’t say to the people who pay attention to this, 
to this debate today and any others that we have in the future, is 
that we haven’t been there for producers. I mean, remember 
what we had last year when we had a herd retention, where we 
had livestock people who were saying to us that they didn’t 
have enough feed and that they needed money to assist them 
with grazing programs. What did we do in this province last 
year? Well we provided a $25 million program for herd 
retention. 
 
Now you might stand in your place and say it’s not enough, 
some people who should have got it didn’t get it, and that the 
application wasn’t appropriate. But you know what? We were 
there for livestock producers last year on a herd retention 
program on our own, without any support from the federal 
government at all. Saskatchewan taxpayers paid for that 
program last year. 
 
In 1998 and again this year we had a problem with the price 
index with the hog industry. And what did we do? We put some 
additional loan guarantee for the hog industry in Saskatchewan 
today. That loan guarantee that we approved was around $25 
million. There’s a brand new loan guarantee today for the hog 
industry in Saskatchewan. We did it in 1998 when the hog 
prices were in difficulty and we did it again this year. 
 
And last year as much debate as there was in this House, where 
you said that the federal government put their share of the 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

money into crop insurance when in fact we demonstrated on 
many occasions that they had shortchanged the Saskatchewan 
government in its Crop Insurance Fund, we put in an additional 
$10 million last year to crop insurance.  
 
And we exceeded, we exceeded the 95 percentile of which we 
. . . or the $95 million on an annual basis by $10 million over 
that three-year period, of which you still don’t appreciate and 
won’t acknowledge in this House. So we go ahead and provide 
additional funding to the crop insurance pool when in fact they 
were underfunded or not matched by the federal government. 
And so a contribution that we made that wasn’t made by our 
partner from the . . . federally. 
 
And the changes that we made this year to the agricultural 
policy framework we should get some credit for on this side of 
the House. And that is that we negotiated this year the 
Fredericton agreement out, which gets for our producers 31 per 
cent of any trade money that we’re going to get here in the 
future. Last year we negotiated $183 million on a new formula 
for our Saskatchewan producers. This year we get $193 million 
of new money for our Saskatchewan producers. Why? Because 
we stood in front of the federal government on every occasion 
that we could and said we are affected in a major way by the 
trade injury in this province by a large tune, and that number 
should move from 32 . . . 22 per cent to 31 per cent, of which 
we’ve been able to achieve. 
 
And so, have we gotten more money for Saskatchewan farmers 
and provided more money for Saskatchewan farmers over the 
last couple of years? Absolutely we have. 
 
Now the new agricultural policy framework talks about farmers 
protecting themselves through programs that are in place today. 
We have today in the crop insurance enrolment, of somewhere 
in the neighbourhood of 74 per cent, about the same amount 
that we had in the program last year. 
 
And the members opposite say that we’re going to be here for a 
long time, and I don’t mind being here for a long time talking 
about agricultural policy because I like to talk about agricultural 
policy in Saskatchewan because we’re building agricultural 
policy in Saskatchewan, and we have been leading it across 
Canada. And so we don’t mind talking about it and we’re 
prepared to stay as long as we need to stay. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, we have an issue today with 
grasshoppers, we had an issue with drought last year, we’ll have 
an issue . . . we had an issue with hog prices, and on every one 
of those occasions we were there for Saskatchewan producers 
— alone in many instances. And I can say to the members 
opposite, Saskatchewan producers and Saskatchewan farmers 
know what we’ve done for them across the province in the last 
five years and they’re going to be supporting, and they support 
the positions that we’ve taken. Sometimes not enough, I can 
appreciate that, but at the end of the day Saskatchewan 
producers know what this government has been able to do for 
them in a major way. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, this current Minister of Agriculture 
uses the same foolish comparisons as the last two ministers of 
Agriculture used when it comes to this NDP’s government’s 
support for agriculture. He uses the term of dollars per capita 

which is meaningless, Mr. Chair, because Saskatchewan has 47 
per cent of the arable land in Canada and we only have a 
population of 1 million people. 
 
So if that minister wants to continue using that type of 
comparison, saying look what wonderful things we’ve done for 
agriculture, he will suffer the same fate as Eric Upshall and 
Dwain Lingenfelter. They’re no longer members of this 
Assembly and I predict if that minister continues to use that 
same foolish comparison that he will suffer the same fate after 
the next election. 
 
When we look at the real numbers, the total numbers, Alberta’s 
drought program last year was $324 million of actual cash 
payments to its producers. What was Saskatchewan’s — $20 
million plus a $200 million loan which needed to be repaid. 
That’s Saskatchewan’s answer, is a loan. Every time we turn 
around they look at a loan. 
 
We’re talking of a small program that will assist in the rising 
cost of controlling a problem that if it’s not controlled this year 
will be a problem next year. And if you don’t take some 
immediate action now, if you don’t pay me now, you’re going 
to pay — as the ad says — you’re going to pay big time in the 
fall when the yields aren’t there, Minister. 
 
And if you don’t understand that, as I said, you certainly will 
not be around here after the next election. Because the 
producers of this province are getting fed up with those feeble 
excuses from your government and those foolish comparisons 
that they see right through. Nobody believes that kind of a 
comparison . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. As members know we have 
different relaxed rules in committee and when work is being 
done, as to not going to the Chair and through the Chair. But if I 
do find — and I do find — that the attacks are beginning 
personal on both sides, that I will begin to enforce that rule and 
I’m doing that now. So I would ask the member, put comments 
to the Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Why is the member for Estevan on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to you and 
through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, I would like 
to introduce 25 grade 4 and 5 students from the Midale Central 
School. 
 
They are seated in the east gallery. They are accompanied by 
teachers Jana Epp and Gayle Prawdzik. And I notice that there’s 
several chaperones with them as well, and I do recognize one of 
the chaperones from here, and that’s Jan Sjostrand. 
 
And I would ask all members to join me in welcoming the 
students and adults from Midale School. And I look forward to 
meeting with them shortly. Thank you. 
 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, the minister 
talks about and says that he is putting more emphasis on this 
year’s crop insurance program and he’s enhanced it. And we all 
know that farmers are looking at significantly increased 
premium costs. And granted some of that is due to the higher 
coverage levels and so on, but if we do a comparison . . . And 
I’m somewhat reluctant but there comes a time, a point in time 
when you need to look at what’s happening around you, and I 
think we need to look at what’s happening to the west, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
The Alberta program, crop insurance program that was 
announced early in . . . or late January, has a number of 
interesting new components to it, for instance, the spring price 
endorsement. It says in their news release that this is a new crop 
insurance option available to their producers. Another new 
feature is a revenue insurance coverage, which is again a new 
component that is something that we do not have in our crop 
insurance program. They talk in terms of cushioned yields to 
deal with insurable perils and those sorts of things. An 
interesting feature is a variable price option — something that 
we had in the past and that minister saw fit to cut from the 
program — is now a part of the basic package of crop insurance 
in Alberta. 
 
And so when the minister says that his government is stepping 
up to the plate, he hasn’t even made it on to the ball diamond, 
Mr. Chair. He’s not even in the batter-on-deck circle, Mr. Chair. 
And I think this minister, he could step up to the plate and so 
something in a small way. Alberta has been able to come with 
ten and a half million dollars to address this immediate 
problem. And what does this minister say to the producers of 
this province? Well go ahead, you handle it; we’re not 
concerned about it, Mr. Chair. 
 
I will turn the questions over to my colleague from Spiritwood. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to respond briefly to the 
member because I heard him say a couple of things that are 
extremely important. 
 
One is that I heard the member say that we should not be 
concerned about fiscal capacity. Well I think we need to be 
concerned about fiscal capacity. I think that when we’re talking 
about an investment today by Saskatchewan people to the tune 
of $400 or $406 per capita by every man, woman, and child in 
investment in agriculture, why would we discount that 
investment, Mr. Chair — why would we discount that 
investment? And why wouldn’t we pay attention to fiscal 
capacity? 
 

You see it scares me, Mr. Speaker, when I hear people talk 
about — who are in politics, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, — and 
people who are . . . who have ambitions to be government, Mr. 
Speaker, when they stand up in their place and say they aren’t 
concerned about fiscal capacity. Because we’ve had a lesson in 
this province through the ’80s where we acquired in this 
province huge, huge fiscal debt, Mr. Chair — huge fiscal debt. 
 
And we dumped in tons of money into the agricultural file — 
and tons of money into an agricultural file — through programs 
that had absolutely no accountability for themselves. 
 
And the member opposite stands up and he says to me that 
Alberta drops in a whole bunch of money into their program for 
drought assistance last year — and yes, they did. And you know 
what? They paid producers last year who were not even in 
drought situations, who were not even in drought situations? 
And is that what the member opposite is advocating? That we 
should simply take a pool of money and we should provide that 
holus-bolus across the piece? 
 
Well I say to the member opposite, I am extremely concerned, 
Mr. Chair, about fiscal capacity, and I am extremely pleased 
that this government is able to contribute the $406 per every 
man, woman, and child to the agricultural pool. And we will 
continue to be there for agriculture into the future as we have 
been in the past, because that’s why we on this side of the 
House have a working relationship and good public policy on 
agriculture. And we’ve not seen much from the other side, Mr. 
Speaker, if anything at all. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister talks about the investment 
that other province have made in agriculture. He talks about the 
investment in agriculture in some of the Maritime provinces. 
Well my question to the minister is, how much do we on a per 
capita basis invest in fisheries? I mean we’re talking apples and 
oranges here. 
 
Agriculture, I think all members of this Assembly, and 
particularly your Minister of Finance agrees that it’s the 
primary industry in this province. And he talks about 400, $400 
per capita investment in agriculture and yet this government 
invested $100 per capita in a land titles system that doesn’t 
work. Now it seems to me there’s something out of sync here, 
Minister. 
 
And what type of a return on investment do we get out of the 
land titles system? We get delays, additional costs to the users, 
and they waste money in SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Would the member 
for . . . Would the member for Prince Albert Northcote and the 
member for Estevan please come to order. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, if this government was a little more 
frugal in their investments outside this province and within this 
province and stop investing in some of the foolish things that 
they’ve done, they may have some extra money, the $10 million 
to help with this grasshopper situation that we have. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, the minister’s comparisons and when he talks 
about a per capita investment, let’s total up the per capita losses 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

that this government has incurred in the last number of years 
and I would suspect that they probably are higher than what 
they’ve invested in agriculture, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Chair, at this time, I think I’ve concluded my comments 
and questions in this area and I would like to turn it over to the 
member from Shellbrook. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the member and I have an 
interesting debate going on in terms of fiscal capacity because if 
we could just have back, Mr. Chair, if we could just have back 
the $700 million that we pay every year in interest payments 
that were accumulated in this province by the previous 
Conservative government in Saskatchewan, we could pay for 
grasshoppers, Mr. Chair. 
 
We could put more money into health care. We could put more 
money into education. We could put more money into 
agriculture. But no. 
 
It’s exactly the same philosophy that I hear from the member 
from Thunder Creek . . . not Thunder Creek, sorry, from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood stand on his feet and say, don’t be 
worried about the fiscal capacity. Don’t be worried about that 
he says, because you know what? We’ll be able to look after 
that if we were in the chair. And we know how they looked 
after fiscal capacity in this province, Mr. Speaker — $15 billion 
worth of debt in capacity, Mr. Speaker, and it will grow. 
 
And we have to talk about the capacity of our province, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of what we can provide. And I wish we had 
the $700 million today that the member from Estevan would 
know something about and the member from Swift Current 
would know something about and the member from Moosomin 
would know something about. And I expect the member from 
Wood River would know something about too because he’s 
been a Conservative for a long time, Mr. Chair. And so there’s 
lots of people, lots of people over there who would know how 
we got the debt. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned about capacity. We’re 
concerned about capacity in this side of the House and good, 
wise public spending and building good, strong public 
agricultural policy, and we’ll continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, 
on a regular basis, to make sure. 
 
And the member from Wood River chirps from his chair that 
we should be ashamed of saying . . . The member from Wood 
River says we should be ashamed of ourselves because we’re 
talking about good, responsible fiscal policy. 
 
Of course he says that we should be ashamed of ourselves 
because he was on the team, Mr. Speaker, who ran this province 
into the kind of debt that we are going to be in. And he’s 
advocating as being a leader of the previous . . . of the current 
party, Mr. Speaker. He ran as the leader of the current party. 
And I hear him chirping from his chair that we shouldn’t be 
concerned about the fiscal capacity. That’s why at least the 
people on that side of the House had enough wisdom not to pick 
the member from Wood River as their leader. They picked 
somebody who had at least a bit more capacity about looking 
after the future of Saskatchewan. 
 

And I say to the members of . . . say from the member from 
Touchwood, we’re concerned . . . Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
Last Mountain-Touchwood. We’re saying to the member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood, we’re concerned about fiscal 
capacity and we’ll continue to make investments into the 
agricultural file in the way in which we have in the past and will 
continue to do. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. Mr. 
Minister, welcome to your officials here this afternoon. I have a 
few questions. Basically the questions are some clarifications. 
 
And the route I want to go down is dealing with Sask Ag and 
Food land in representation of the answers given by your 
colleague, the minister from SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management), on Tuesday night. 
And at that present time, Mr. Minister, I was asking questions 
regarding TLE (treaty land entitlement) process on critical 
habitat wildlife land. 
 
Now there is a section of critical habitat wildlife land in the RM 
of Meeting Lake and there . . . or may not be a TLE on it. And it 
also attends regarding the licensing of an outfitter licence. And I 
would like to read a quote from the statement from the Minister 
of SERM that night. And I quote: 
 

Again as I mentioned . . . 
 
This is from the Minister of Environment, Mr. Belanger: 
 

Again as I mentioned, we wouldn’t have jurisdiction to 
issue an outfitting licence on this . . . (agricultural) leased 
land . . . (The) Agriculture would be the ones that would 
issue . . . (this) licence. Where we would have influence is 
on the sustainability argument in reference to how many 
animals . . . (in) particular (the) outfitter could harvest. 

 
He also goes on to state: 
 

The licence . . . (is) a layered approach. The licence would 
be issued by (Sask) Ag and Food . . . 

 
To the minister: is it your jurisdiction as Ag minister to issue 
outfitting licences on Crown land that is deemed critical habitat 
wildlife land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what I’d want the member to 
clarify for me, would this be on occupied land or on vacant 
land? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This land is 
occupied land. There was a landowner that owned the lease on 
that, and I don’t know what the terms are of it — was it a 
33-year lease or a 50-year lease or whatever — but it was 
occupied land. But the map from the RM of Meeting Lake 
states on that land that it is Sask Ag and Food land. In fact, the 
new map that just was distributed that I got a hold of also still 
states that this land is still Crown land — Sask Ag and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’ll answer the first part of the question 
first and then have the member ask me again, if he says it 
relates to the licensure. 
 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

 

We provide the letters of authorization, my officials tell me, for 
access. So we actually do provide the letters of authorization for 
access on to the land. That would be the role of Sask Ag and 
Food here initially. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, I understand and I know 
you’re correct that you give access to the land. My question is, 
because you give access to the land, do you allow and give out 
outfitting licences on that land? Is that part of your jurisdiction 
from your department or is that from the SERM department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the actual licensing that is 
required to be given out is — for outfitters — is really provided 
by SERM as opposed to being provided by the Department of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Thank 
you for that answer. I know you know, and I know I know that 
that is a correct process and procedure in regarding outfitting 
licenses; it has to come from SERM. 
 
I just want to mention to you, Mr. Minister, that somewhere 
along the line there’s been some misleading for the simple 
reason the minister from SERM has stated that it comes from 
Sask Ag and Food. It does not come from Sask Ag and Food as 
you’ve mentioned, it comes from the department of SERM. 
 
Is there any regulations that you, Mr. Minister, have in regards 
to this land being Sask Ag and Food that would adhere to the 
regulations of an outfitting licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, the 
member would understand that because he’s very . . . The 
member’s familiar with the relationship as it exists between 
Crown land and leased land and outfitters, given that you have 
all of these responsibilities in your riding, so you would have a 
good understanding of this piece. 
 
And from time to time what we do have here is an overlap of 
responsibility between Agriculture and Food and SERM, and 
from time to time it’s difficult to have, in my view, all of the 
details at your exposure. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite that we should not be 
assuming here for a minute that on all occasions we would have 
all of the detail at our exposure, particularly doing an exchange 
in debate, doing question period. But what is important here to 
realize is that Ag and Food does have in regulation the 
responsibility to authorize use, and so we would be providing 
some information, detail, recommendation to SERM if and 
when they’re making a . . . they’re making a decision about 
what it is that land would be used for. 
 
So there is a very close working relationship on this front, and 
from time to time the areas get a bit fuzzy and grey. And when 
you go make decisions about how land is going to be used or 
purposes it’s used for, it does have some overlap that from time 
to time causes consternation both in you asking the question 
and those who are making application for its use. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. 

Minister. Thank you for those answers. I know it was just a 
clarification but I needed for you and your department to state 
that for the simple reason we both know that the outfitting 
licensing on Sask Ag and Food land is a total, the total 
responsibility of SERM. And therefore I will be asking the 
SERM minister later in regarding the licensing of that said land 
and does the Mosquito Band have jurisdiction as to an outfitting 
licence on that land? Do they operate it under the agreement of 
a outfitting licence and does that licence come from the 
provincial government through SERM or does it come through 
the federal government? 
 
And thank you once again, Mr. Minister, for your clarification 
and your answers. I’ll turn it back over to the critic for Ag. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The questions that I 
would like to turn to right now are dealing with the bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy and the trickle-down effect of the 
one reported case of BSE and the subsequent border closure has 
no doubt began and before too long it will be more adequately 
described as a flood. 
 
The Canadian Renderers Association lobbied the federal 
government for assistance and not surprisingly, considering 
how inadequate the federal government has responded to this 
whole entire issue, their proposal was rejected on June 10. 
 
As a result the Saskatoon Processing Company has found it 
necessary to inform its customers that it has no other alternative 
but to introduce a charging system for picking up any fat bone 
and mixed ruminants. This is a service, Mr. Chair, that they 
have offered for free for the past 40 years now and they made 
their profit from selling the rendered product. This is going to 
affect a lot more than just the beef industry. 
 
Mitchell’s in Saskatoon, I was told, is one supplier that 
Saskatoon Processing Company paid for the waste products and 
if my information is correct, they won’t be charging them for 
pick up, but they won’t be paying for the product either. So it 
still affects Mitchell’s . . . or it affects their business economy. 
 
But in the other businesses, for example, the cost to Drake 
Meats for the pick-up service will be $70 per bin which will add 
up to approximately $75,000 of added expense per year. And 
I’m told — I have not confirmed this — but I have been told 
that Big Sky will be charged $100 per bin and they have an 
average of about 53 bins per week. So that calculates to 
approximately $5,300 a week or $21,000 a month. 
 
So with this, all the livestock sectors will be affected, along 
with the beef industry. 
 
Has the minister had any discussions with his provincial 
counterparts, the federal government, and/or the industry in 
ways that this particular difficulty can be addressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, the 
answer is we have had a considerable amount of discussion 
about the issue as it relates to renderers . We understand the 
kinds of pressures that renderers are going to be experiencing 
and are experiencing across the country. And in Western 
Canada the issue was on the table when the Western premiers 
made their request through the industry for the compensation 



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

package that was initially highlighted. We had renderers as part 
of that discussion. 
 
In the consultations over the last week, renderers have been set 
aside as an area that we are going to continue to talk about 
because it’s not only a Saskatchewan issue, but for sure an 
Alberta issue and a very large issue in Ontario. 
 
And so collectively what we’ve been working with . . . And we 
have a working committee that’s federally-provincially in place 
right now trying to find some solution to this very issue that the 
member raises. 
 
So we know that as the system begins to untie itself from the 
way in which it’s been stricken by the initial closure of the 
border and now with the compensation package being provided, 
we know that we need to deal with the renderers in a fashion 
that would be supportive to ensure that we can keep the system 
moving. Because without any doubt, the renderers could in fact 
clog, get clogged, or clog up the movement of livestock in the 
country. 
 
And so our task force is in place, industry is tied to it, and our 
work is continuing. So our hope is we’ll have some solution, a 
recommendation to this, in the next while. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. 
Presently to my knowledge, the rendering plants aren’t 
rendering or if they are, they can’t move the product. So what 
are they doing right now with that product? What’s happening 
to the remnants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, they are 
rendering. The rendering plants are currently rendering. Now 
the fact is, is that they have lots of product to render but they 
are working. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Does the minister know what they are doing 
with the rendered product, because to my knowledge they can’t 
market it right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Currently what’s happening with the 
ruminant in Saskatchewan it’s simply being stored, given that 
we are not sure what we’ll do with it into the future. And we’re 
looking also, Mr. Chair, for alternate market currently for the 
ruminant, not only from Saskatchewan but across Canada. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The Saskatoon Processing Company has 
expressed concerns that there will be a total ban on the use of 
meat, and bone meal, and all non-ruminant animal feed, and in 
particular that this may be a condition in getting the border 
opened. Has there been any indication that this will be a 
condition of the border’s opening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there’s not yet been a 
recommendation from the US that this would be a condition. 
But it’s one that has been on our page now for a couple of 
weeks, recognizing that it might be one of the conditions that 
the US might make of us in opening the border. But it, to date, 
has not been. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — If it was a condition that the US could give 
us to open the border, can the minister tell me if then the US 

also has to ban the use of ruminant in their country as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, that’s a very important point 
because the US continue to use the ruminant in their system and 
so in order for us to ban it here in Canada, it would be an 
interesting scenario for them to find themselves in. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. Inevitably what could 
happen here . . . And I know the larger processing plants and 
butcherers and livestock operations will pay for this service, but 
the concern of course comes with the smaller operations where 
it isn’t economically viable to pay large dollars to have their 
waste products picked up. 
 
So there is a concern out there that this waste product will be 
dumped and we’re going to be faced with all other kinds of 
health issues and of course rodents, flies, and you name it. So in 
the discussions that the minister has had with the industry and 
with other, you know, with other counterparts in other 
provinces, is there a long-term plan that they’re trying to put 
together that will deal with that particular issue? 
 
Because if it does become too costly, your smaller abattoirs and 
your smaller farming operations may dispose of it in a less than 
desirable manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The Agriculture ministers are meeting at 
the end of June . . . early in July, sorry — and on the agenda for 
Agriculture ministers is this very issue with the federal minister. 
 
Clearly our hope is that we aren’t going to find ourselves in a 
situation where you paint the picture in the way in which you 
have because it will be a very difficult area for us to try to sort 
out in terms of what you do with animal ruminant and how that 
affects then the US use of animal ruminant. 
 
But it is on our agenda. We have a working committee right 
now that are working away at it and my hope, at the end of the 
day, is that it will not be a condition as part of the opening of 
the border. 
 
Now will we need to be more cognizant about how we deal 
with animal ruminant, to whom does it make its way in the 
future? I think the answer to that is that it will be the case. But 
at this point in time it’s a process under extreme review and 
discussion. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Good afternoon to 
the minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a couple of questions for you in reference 
to the herd retention program that was in place due to the 
drought for the last couple of years. And there was an 
announcement of $220 million for producers in 
drought-stricken areas. I was wondering, Mr. Minister, was the 
money that was targeted for that herd retention program all used 
up? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Watrous on her feet? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m very honoured to 
have the opportunity to introduce 16 grade 6 students from 
Muenster School seated in the east gallery. And they’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Peter Penrose . So I want to 
welcome them all to the Assembly this afternoon and I hope 
they enjoy the proceedings and I will be meeting with you 
shortly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member, we 
budgeted 17.2 million and we expended 13.6 million. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. I was just wondering if you could tell me, Mr. 
Minister, in reference to applications from farmers for some of 
that money, how many late applications were received by your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there were about 180 that were 
late applications. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how many 
known lost applications were there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the member is asking the question 
about how many applications came in late that people said were 
lost, and I think there were five or six that fall under that 
category. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. There may be a bit 
of a differentiation between lost and late. I mean sometimes 
people just apply after the deadline, which was, I believe, 
December 31. And I think those would be dealt with in a 
different manner than people that are claiming that their 
application . . . or claiming to your department their application 
they believed that was received by your department just was not 
received. According to your department officials, some of them 
were lost. 
 
And so I just need to know how many . . . that your department 
claimed two applicants were lost. And the applicants got back 
to your office because they didn’t receive their money and they 
were told that they never received . . . the department did not 
receive their application; and therefore it was deducted by your 
department that the application must have been lost. 
 
And so that’s why I’m asking you how many of those type of 
applications were dealt with. And in regards to that, if your 
department deemed that obviously some were lost because the 
applicants didn’t get their payment, I’d like to know how many 
reapplications there were in the event that an application was 
lost. Because that would most likely mean that people would 

have an opportunity to apply again and to have another 
opportunity to access some of this funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what’s important, Mr. Chair, to 
clarify here, for me anyway, is that my officials tell me that 
there were actually about five or six applications of which 
people, when they called back, said these applications were lost 
somewhere in the system. So it was not the department saying 
that we lost them; it was the individuals who were making the 
application that would say that they were lost. 
 
Because I mean if they were lost we wouldn’t know where they 
are, clearly. And the best way that we would only know that is 
if the individual would tell us that they in fact were lost. 
 
So of those five or six applications we simply advised the 
people to reapply and that what we would do is take those 
applications and forward them on to the appeals panel, and the 
appeals panel would attempt to determine whether or not they 
were actually lost or whether or not they were late. But we dealt 
with them as being applications that in fact were lost and never 
made their way to us, and accordingly people were asked then 
to reapply. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, 
we’ll just get to the crux of the matter. There is definitely a 
situation with one of my constituents that we’re dealing with 
this whole process. 
 
The application for the herd retention funding was sent in by a 
gentleman in his mother’s name and the process went as such: 
he sent the application last December; in the beginning of 
March he called asking when the cheque for the herd retention 
program would be coming, and he was told that his mother’s 
name wasn’t in the computer. He was told that they did not 
have a record of receiving her application. And so they were 
sent out another application and they reapplied again. At the 
time this gentleman did attach a note explaining that he was 
reapplying because his application was lost. 
 
Now he has called the minister’s office often but he’s not 
getting much satisfaction. He seems to be getting the runaround 
on this issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the application that this gentleman re-sent, 
he sent by registered mail. So there’s no doubt that the 
department would get that letter. 
 
It was received in Regina and this gentleman talked to someone 
from your office, from the minister’s office, who told him that 
his application would go to the review committee. And so again 
there was no call back to this gentleman after the review 
committee met — or possibly they didn’t meet. 
 
So the applicant’s son, who was doing most of the work trying 
to get this process initiated, he called after he knew that the 
review committee had met. And he was told again by someone 
from your office that he had to explain why their application 
was late. So the gentleman told the person in your office that 
the explanation was attached to the reapplication. And a person 
from your office admitted that there was an oversight and that 
this gentleman’s mother . . . the reapplication was not given to 
the review committee. So there seems to be a bunch of mixed 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

messages going on here, Mr. Minister. 
 
But anyway, following the review the committee did meet by 
conference call and the reapplication was denied because the 
reason was it was late. You know, it seems in view of the fact, 
Mr. Minister, that the very fact that this application was late 
was obvious. It was late possibly because it was lost in the first 
place and a reapplication was necessary. This is what my 
constituent was told he should do, was to reapply — reapply. So 
naturally it would be late. 
 
So the very fact that the response from your department 
officials that it was late and that was why it was denied was . . . 
It doesn’t seem to be to me a very good explanation. So I 
wonder if you can respond to this, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — When we set the program up, we also 
established a panel of people who would be the appeals 
committee. And it is their judgment that we’ve been using to 
deal with the appeals. 
 
It sounds to me that, in this particular case you’re talking about, 
that there was a recognition by the department that there should 
be a reapplication. And there was a reapplication because they 
assumed because they had no record of it, the application had 
clearly not arrived there because it had not been registered like 
the several other thousand application forms that we dealt with 
and actually got money to people. So the . . . At the end of the 
day, they got her a new application form. 
 
It sounds to me like the new application form was returned back 
to the department, went to the appeal committee; the appeal 
committee examined this and said that the individual doesn’t 
qualify — not the department and not the minister’s office, but 
the appeals body. And so it is their wisdom of which we’re 
using the response to the individual of whom we are talking 
with, or about. 
 
And so it can be said, I think, that there has been some time 
here that’s expired, or transpired from the time in which the 
people say they initially applied to when they actually got a 
final answer on this issue; there’s been some time here. And 
there can be certainly said that there’s some concern about what 
happened here with the file. But at the end of the day, the 
decision made by the appeal committee of whom we’ve been 
using has been the decision that this individual’s received. 
 
Now I’ve asked my department whether or not there have been 
other appeals of which this kind of nature is applied. And the 
answer is that there is and that there have been decisions that 
have both worked in the affirmative and to the negative on a 
reapplication. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
official in your office that was dealing with this was Mark Folk. 
Mark admitted that there was an oversight and that this 
woman’s application was not given to the review committee. 
 
So then there was obviously a review by the committee. They 
met by conference call. The result of the committee’s 
deliberations was that this woman’s application was denied 
because it was late. This seems like a really . . . To me . . . I 
don’t know. I mean, I may not know the ins and outs other than 

the information that I’ve been given, but it seems to me to be 
very . . . like a very weak response. It was late but it was still 
valid because of the fact that this woman was told that she had 
the right to reapply. So if the minister would respond I’d 
appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well my officials tell me that the 
individual whom you’re speaking of, Mr. Folk, actually does 
work in the department. And when the application arrived the 
first time to the committee it did not have sent with it the letter. 
And so what happened is when they received the letter, the 
letter was then attached again to the reapplication and went 
back to the appeals committee for yet a second occasion for the 
appeals committee to look at. And on the second review of the 
file by the appeals committee, they denied it yet one more time. 
 
And so as I said earlier, I think that it’s unfortunate that there’s 
been this much time that that’s transpired on this particular file, 
and that there has been I would say some confusion about, you 
know, who’s been dealing with it and whether or not it’s been 
. . . was most expediently dealt with. But at the end of the day 
the appeals committee has examined it on two occasions, once 
with the letter of explanation . . . or without the letter of 
explanation, the second time with the letter of explanation. And 
on conclusion of the appeals committee, they still make the 
same recommendation of this, of this qualification. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, and officials. One of the initiatives that took place I 
believe with the Department of Agriculture last year was to 
change the way that the Department of Agriculture was 
operating its IT system internally. And I believe that the 
Department of Agriculture sat down with the Department of 
Highways to get together to work on a project to coordinate 
perhaps their hardware, their software, I’m not exactly sure. 
 
I wonder if you could explain what was happening in that area 
and what you had envisioned for the future in that area, what 
your goals were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials tell me that it was 
our . . . our own IT was requiring some update of course and 
enhancement. What we did within the Department of 
Agriculture is recognized the significant . . . or the significant 
improvements or enhancements that were made in the 
Department of Highways IT area and felt that because of the 
expenditures that they’ve made to upgrade their hardware 
system, that in fact we would just simply become a user of their 
system. And so that’s what we did. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you’re 
talking about using their system, are you talking about using 
software systems that they’re using; are you talking about using 
hardware systems that they’re using; are you talking about the 
servers that you would normally have for coordinating within 
Agriculture; are you now using the servers that Highways 
department has? When you say using their system, what do you 
mean? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what my officials have 
attempted to do here is to make it simple for me, and so I’ll try 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

 

and make it simple for you because I’m not as hardware and 
software illiterate here as I’d like to be. And so what’s 
happened here is my officials tell me that we’ve moved the 
software onto the Highways hardware. So this is what’s been 
accomplished here. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are you using 
then the servers that Highways department has and provides? 
Are you using CommunityNet to connect to the Highways 
department servers and so Agriculture no longer utilizes their 
own servers but rather uses the Highways department servers 
and you’re using CommunityNet to make those secure 
connections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — This is a very simple answer, Mr. Chair. 
The answer is yes. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
in transferring your IT services, or coordinating with the 
Highways department, just what kind of service are you merged 
with the Highways department? Are you simply utilizing their 
servers or are you utilizing their purchasing procedures as well, 
that the Highways department, you give them an order that you 
need 25 desktop units or terminals and they purchase it so that 
you get a better bulk buy? 
 
Do they also determine what software you’re going to be using 
so that it integrates with what their servers are using and that it 
integrates with the Highways department program so that you 
can have an exchange of information back and forth so that 
you’re not using different databases, so that the databases talk 
to each other, so that the . . . your word processors talk to each 
other, etc., etc. Even though you may be keeping your 
information separate, within government at times there is a need 
to have a coordination of information that you can 
cross-reference and be able to talk to each other. Is this kind of 
service also being provided? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The member asked about the issue of 
common purchasing and the answer is that we are doing 
common purchasing. We’re also doing common software 
development for integration of the information but we are not 
using a common database. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What was the 
purpose of this merger? Was it an attempt to coordinate 
government services in IT or were there some cost savings to be 
realized by going in this direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — So it would be, Mr. Chair, on the two 
issues, that . . . or the two concepts that the member outlines, 
that there would be some cost savings here and that we would 
have a higher quality of development and really service as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What kind of cost savings was the 
department projecting for this merger of IT services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Last year the cost savings were 150,000. 
This year they’re about 450,000. It’s really been redirected to 
improve on some of our own software development. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So you’re 
saying that actually the IT budget didn’t change, you just 

redirected the monies that you had saved in say a purchase of a 
hardware package, you’ve now redirected to some other area 
within the IT such as software or connectivity. 
 
Mr. Minister, does your department do a projection of what 
your IT costs for both hardware, software, and services are on a 
long-term basis so that you have an idea that in year one, it’s 
going to be this much; two, three, four, five years down the road 
you have an ongoing stream so that you have built into the 
system an understanding of what your replacement costs are, 
what your service costs are going to be as they either grow or 
shrink as the case may be? If so, what are your projections on 
an annual long-term basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the IT piece is 
really broken down, my officials tell me, into three baskets. 
They would be into software development, hardware 
replacement, and operating costs. And over a period of four 
years, that budget will be about $3 million. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not 
sure Hansard got it but the minister stated that it would be $3 
million per year for the IT package of software, hardware, and 
operations. 
 
Mr. Minister, on an ongoing basis is this an increase or a 
decrease in spending, a projection of $3 million a year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chairman, my officials tell me it’s, 
that’s really the status quo. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So prior to the 
merger with Highways for IT services, was your IT expense 
higher or lower then, than the projected $3 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, when I said it was a 
status quo, what I’d like to explain this on, from this 
perspective, is that because we had old technology and we 
needed to do replacement of old technology, this is where most 
of our spending in the future would have been directed to. And 
we couldn’t do the kinds of program development that will be 
important in order to stay current with the kinds of work that’s 
happening in agriculture across the piece. 
 
So within that tent of money, it’s simply been redirected so that 
we can get better utilization. Instead of putting new, good 
money into old technology, we could use that money to then do 
better program replacement or better program update and 
development. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So you’re 
saying, Mr. Minister, that previous to the merger you had a 
budget of roughly $3 million going into IT. Post-merger you 
have a budget of approximately $3 million going into IT. 
 
It’s a question then within that $3 million budget how it’s been 
allocated between software, hardware, and services. And that 
changes from hardware to what? To services or to software, or 
where is the change going from and to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: —The member describes it accurately where, 
Mr. Chair, it really is into software development and the sort of 
renewal of program efficiency within the software net. 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Within the 
CommunityNet program, who administers the needs of the 
Department of Agriculture? Is it the Department of Agriculture 
who is the systems operator? Is it the Department of Highways? 
Or does some other entity deal with the needs and the 
administration of the Department of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, SaskTel delivers the package 
and ITO (Information Technology Office) really manages it on 
our behalf. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So, Mr. Minister, if SaskTel provides 
the system and ITO manages it for you, how do you establish, 
for the Department of Agriculture, your secure needs? 
 
How do you ensure that crop insurance information is not 
available to some other entity within government or outside of 
government? How do you ensure that your loan portfolios, 
through ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) or the financing arm of Agriculture remain in 
place? How do you ensure that the agriculture research being 
carried out for Agriculture remains secure? And how do you 
ensure that individuals within the Department of Agriculture are 
not accessing information that is not required for their duties? 
 
(12:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The security envelope that the member 
talks about is really in the Highways hardware. We have a 
firewall system obviously that would protect the system or the 
information. And then you would have a password access 
which people in Agriculture then would have the password to 
get the access of the information as required. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think it’s a 
little more complicated than that, but I’ll let that particular item 
go there. 
 
Mr. Minister, what was the actual cost of the merger between 
Agriculture and the Department of Highways, not necessary the 
purchase of new equipment for the Department of Agriculture, 
but the cost of merging the systems together? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — So within the, Mr. Chair, within the actual 
cost of the $3 million, there would have been the merging of the 
system. There would be the costs then of operating the system 
and there would be also then the cost of the new software 
development. So it would be all of those areas of which the $3 
million would cover it off. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are you 
saying then that the cost of the merger was $3 million or the 
total cost for IT within the Department of Agriculture was $3 
million, or are they the same number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, all of this work that I described 
earlier, which is the merger and the running of the system and 
the new software development, are all within that $3 million 
package. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. But do 
you have a breakdown of what the actual merger cost was for 
the project between Agriculture and Highways? What would 

the cost have been had you not merged then? Was there any 
additional costs related to the merger, or were funds reallocated 
within the department to accomplish the merger? So what was 
. . . I’m interested in what the cost for the merger was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What I think I said in my earlier response 
to the member is that the $3 million did a number of things. It 
did software development; it did software replacement, or . . . 
yes, software replacement; and it did . . . and there were 
operational costs involved in that. All of that was accomplished 
within the $3 million. What we don’t have with us immediately 
here is the cost of specifically what each of those areas, if that’s 
what the member is asking for us to define. 
 
But when we did the merger, we also changed the technology. 
And so when you change the technology, and the reason for 
doing the association with the Department of Highways is to 
allow us to improve our capacity to enhance the technology, 
and so that was all accomplished within that $3 million 
envelope. 
 
Now if the member is asking specifically for each of those 
financial associations, we could get them over time. We don’t 
have them with us today. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think it’s 
important to understand how the merger changed the structure 
with Agriculture and Highways and how that impacted the 
costs. If there had been no merger in place, how the department 
would have dealt with its IT services — you know, the purchase 
of hardware, the purchase and development of software, and the 
services required to operate and maintain that system — 
compare that to the program that’s in place now, the project of 
the merger, what the costs are associated with that and how that 
cost structure has changed; where the savings may have 
occurred; where the savings are being eaten up because you say 
the cost is the same, it’s $3 million. 
 
So you need to be able to break those costs down to determine 
whether or not the merger actually has any value to the 
department — to both departments, to Highways and to 
Agriculture — and whether it has a larger application across 
government in general. 
 
We saw the government try to proceed with a program with 
EDS (Electronic Data Systems) to provide an overall umbrella 
of government services to . . . and the government program 
between Agriculture and Highways seemed to be a precursor to 
that and perhaps gave some idea as to what the government 
wanted to do in the IT field. 
 
So to understand whether or not there’s any value in it, you 
need to be able to determine where the cost savings were, what 
those cost savings implications were, and where you needed to 
spend more money. Because you haven’t saved any money. 
You’ve reallocated money but you haven’t saved any money. 
And so what’s the value? Is there a value to the merger? Is there 
not a value to the merger? Does it provide you with better 
service for the same cost? Or are you simply spending the same 
amount of money in a different manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the member, I recognize now, has a 
huge passion to understand exactly how the IT works within the 



June 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

 

Department of Agriculture and whether or not it is in fact 
working. And I want to say to the member opposite he’s 
exceeded my expertise in this front by a substantive amount 
because I have not the same kind of passion to understand the 
detail of the equipment that’s in the Department of Agriculture 
to collect information and to provide data. 
 
But in a simplistic fashion it would . . . it’s been explained to 
me this way. If in fact I have the option of needing to buy a new 
combine, which you’d understand and I understand, and I 
require a great deal of finances to repair my old combine, and 
the pot of money is this much, the combine’s only worth about 
$5,000 and I need to put 10 into it, I’m apt not to do that. I’m 
apt to then go to somebody else and say to him, why don’t I just 
take a share in your combine and over the years what we’ll do is 
we’ll figure out how it is that we’ll pay for it. 
 
And that’s what we did here. What we did is we simply went to 
the Department of Highways and said, you know, you have a 
new system, we kind of like your new system, what we’ll do is 
we’re going to join your system. And instead of spending an 
additional $2 million a year to try to old . . . to run this old 
system here, we’re going to take that money and put it into 
making sure that we get a better quality product, which is, in 
this case, software and program development which are words 
that I don’t often use on the farm. 
 
But the reality is, is that this is what’s happened here. We’ve 
avoided spending $2 million additional dollars on an old 
system, stayed with the status quo of the $3 million. Took that 
$3 million and redirected it or restructured it within the IT 
sector to make sure that we got better . . . a better system today 
and better access to information and better programs today that 
the Department of Agriculture is able to offer to our agricultural 
constituents across the province. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
thank you to the members for allowing me to introduce guests. 
 
In the east gallery we have 13 students from the Lafleche 
Central High School that I would like to welcome here this 
afternoon. And accompanying them is teacher, Ray Morissette, 
who happens to be a relative of mine, and chaperones, Aline 
Dumont and Clayton Lethbridge. 
 
And what we’re doing here now is considerations of estimates 
for Agriculture where we’re asking the Minister of Agriculture 
questions back and forth and he’s providing answers . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Sometimes. I’ll get to explain that to 
you afterwards. I’ll be meeting with you as soon as you’re 
ready to leave the gallery and we’ll have a little further talk 
about it. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome the group from Lafleche 
here to the Assembly this afternoon. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, actually software and program development are 
becoming very common words on the farm these days as 
they’re in . . . more and more management is needed. And I 
think it’s important that agriculture do be in contact with the 
world and CommunityNet is one of the ways in which they are 
accessing and utilizing that. 
 
Mr. Minister, though, when I take your example, and it has 
some value, but you need to take a look at your $5,000 combine 
and determine whether or not to spend the $10,000 on it. But if 
you’re going to spend $7,500 a year renting your neighbour’s 
— or as my colleague says in your particular case you’d 
probably just borrow it — you need to determine whether or not 
the $7,500 per year is going to give you value over the long 
term. 
 
And so I guess that’s the real question with the merger. Is it 
going to give you value over the long term versus having an 
in-house system that the Department of Agriculture would 
have? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, perhaps you could also ask the question as 
to how the merger was accomplished, in the sense was it done 
all in-house by Department of Agriculture and Department of 
Highways personnel, or were you assisted from outside sources 
to develop the merger project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The upgrade that was made really did 
improve the new technology, as the member has asked, and 
gave us better security — is what my officials tell me — under 
the new system. 
 
And to your second question about whether in fact . . . how the 
work was accomplished, it was accomplished through one 
contract person who came to do the work and the rest of the 
work was all done in-house. So we just had one contract 
program manager. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. Will you 
now be taking your merged efforts, your merged project, and 
expanding that throughout the rest of government or bringing 
other departments into it as well or is this simply going to be a 
project between Agriculture and Highways? Are you bringing 
other departments into that or are other departments, let’s say 
Social Services and Health, working to merge their IT services? 
 
And are we going to go from a large piecemeal package within 
government, where each department is an individual silo to 
fewer silos, but still not being able to readily and easily 
communicate back and forth and share the necessary 
information that they need to be able to share back and forth? 
 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think it would be fair to say that in the 
world of IT you will have governments, as you have private 
sector people, always examining how you can find the most 
efficient ways of doing work. And it would be prudent for me to 
say that within government — where we operate too in a very 
prudent, cost-effective fashion — that other departments are 
always examining on an ongoing basis how it is that they can 
continue to provide IT services within the government’s scope. 
 
And we have the Department of Information Technology. It is 
through that process of which the government’s IT is 
coordinated and collectively would be working on looking at 
ways in which we can enhance both efficiency, also 
performance, upgrading on a regular basis to make sure that 
you’re current with technology and where there are cost 
savings, you can capture them as well. 
 
(12:45) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have just a 
couple of questions on the APF that I didn’t have an 
opportunity to ask the last time we had Agriculture estimates. 
 
The minister stated that he was probably or going to be 
considering signing the APF in July. Can he tell me who will 
administer the risk management program in the APF? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Under the APF agreement, NISA will 
continue to be administered by the federal government. And 
crop insurance will continue to be administered by the province. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:48. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1821 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1821 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1821 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1821 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1821 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1821 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1821 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1822 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1822 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1822 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1822 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1822 
  Harpauer .......................................................................................................................................................................1822, 1839 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1822 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1834 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1843 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Aboriginal Day 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
 Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Centre 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1824 
 Moose Jaw Beef Sale 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1824 
 Radville Benefactor — Frank Rak 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1824 
 Saskatoon’s Broadway Theatre 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1825 
 Order of Military Merit Awards 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1825 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Compensation Program for Beef Industry 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1825 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1825 
 Lifting of United States Import Restrictions on Canadian Beef 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1827 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1827 
 Grasshopper Control 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1827 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1828 
 Workers’ Compensation Board 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1829 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1829 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1830 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1830 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1830 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1830 
  Harpauer .............................................................................................................................................................1830, 1837, 1844 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1831 



 

 

  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1836 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1838 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1840 
 


	Lifting of United States Import Restrictions
	on Canadian Beef
	Lifting of United States Import Restrictions on Canadian Beef

