















































Hansard: June 11, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1587 
 June 11, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people in my area concerned about 
Highway No. 49. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and the 
surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Saskatoon, 
Chelan, Nut Mountain, and Kelvington. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again today 
I rise on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and district concerned 
about the lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit in their community. 

 
The signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition signed by Saskatchewan citizens who are concerned 
that deregulation and privatization in the electrical industry is 
causing electrical rates to increase dramatically in other 
jurisdictions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from the 
communities of Saskatoon and Estevan. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 
petition on behalf of the constituents of Cypress Hills. And it 
concerns the increase in crop insurance premiums for this 
particular year. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition come from the community of 
Mendham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
signed by Saskatchewan people who are concerned about 
deregulation and privatization in the electrical industry that is 
causing electrical rates to rise dramatically in other 
jurisdictions. And the prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 

 
And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folks from 
Regina and Silton, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Regina, Gravelbourg, Neville, Saskatoon, and 
Zenon Park, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens concerned about the 
appallingly dangerous condition of Highway No. 20. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 
address safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth 
in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Bulyea, Govan, Strasbourg, Duval, Silton, and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people who are 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

very concerned about the condition of Highway 47, especially 
between Estevan and the Boundary dam resort. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan and 
Torquay. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise on behalf 
of people from my hometown who are proposing a constructive 
alternative to acquire a new CT (computerized tomography) 
scanner for the hospital in Swift Current. The prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to consider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner in Swift Current and instead provide a new CT 
scanner for the Southwest. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these petitioners all hail from the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’m 
pleased to rise with a petition from citizens who are extremely 
concerned about the vital Highway No. 43 and the terrible state 
that it’s in. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Vanguard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of the citizens of west central Saskatchewan concerned 
with the state of health care in the area. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 

 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley, Flaxcombe, and Alsask. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the fairness of Crown leases. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and Borden. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
presenting a petition of the concerned citizens for Highway 14. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair the highway in order to address 
safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by people from the town of Wilkie and 
the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens who 
are very concerned about the government’s inaction in dealing 
with the water level in the Qu’Appelle Valley river system. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level in the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Pasqua Lake and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Saskatchewan crop insurance 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

 

premiums. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Whitkow, 
Spiritwood, and Mayfair. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the deregulation and privatization of 
the electrical industry in Saskatchewan; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 13, 18, 27, 36, 41, 116, 119, 120, and no. 124. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 61 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Executive Council: what are the names 
of all the persons employed by Executive Council; and for 
each person, what is their title and what is their current 
salary? 

 
And further, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what is the number of personal 
income tax returns filed in Saskatchewan for tax year 2000 
with total incomes in excess of $500,00; second, what was 
the combined total income assessed for this group? 

 
And there are similar questions for the years 2001, 2002, 1998, 
and 1999. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 61 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: for the academic year 
2002-2003, how many students who were otherwise 
qualified had their applications rejected from all programs 
offered at the University of Saskatchewan, the University 
of Regina, and all of the province’s SIAST campuses? 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 61 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the CIC minister: what is the current status of the 
Prud’homme joint venture between TransGas Limited and 
MLTC incorporated; and further to that, what is the next 

anniversary following the effective date of the agreement 
whereby both parties will have various options? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce Mr. David Karwacki, Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party, and his assistant, Ian Burgess. 
 
Now he’s fresh from campaigning in the by-election at Carrot 
River. As you know, Mr. Speaker, Liberal support has been 
surging in provincial elections across the country — in Quebec 
and in New Brunswick and of course in Manitoba where 
Liberal support recently doubled. So we’re expecting that these 
results will continue in Carrot River Valley. 
 
And I ask all members to please join me in welcoming Mr. 
Karwacki. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 36 students from Lakeview School. The students are 
in grade 4. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Marian 
Ready. They’re sitting in the west gallery. 
 
The also have chaperones with them — Mr. Hillier, Ms. 
Willis-Camp, Mrs. Lyons, Mrs. Savage, and Ms. Stephanson. 
 
And one of the students in this class, Nicki Murray, is a cousin 
of the Lieutenant Governor, Dr. Lynda Haverstock. And also 
Dr. Haverstock’s aunt, Mrs. June Savage, is one of the 
chaperones today. So we have somebody who has . . . many 
kids who have a good connection with this institution but 
especially those children. 
 
I’d like all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great, great 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
this Hon. Assembly, 26 grade 10 to 12 students from Mossbank 
School seated in your east gallery, Mr. Speaker. The students 
are accompanied by teacher, Arnelda Lawrence, and chaperone, 
Susan Howe. 
 
I hope you have an informative and interesting afternoon here at 
your Legislative Assembly and in your Legislative Building, 
and I look forward to meeting with you later and I hope that all 
members will extend a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the hon. members in this 
Assembly two guests that are seated in your gallery. One is 
Angie Roe; she’s the Saskatchewan Party candidate in Regina 
Elphinstone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

Mr. Wall: — The other is Chandra Carruthers. She is actually 
originally from Swift Current. She’s currently a political studies 
student and she’s very interested in politics and she is doing 
whatever she can to help ensure that Angie becomes the next 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome them to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

MacLean’s Health Report 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
June 16 edition of Maclean’s magazine contains its fifth annual 
health report which provides a ranking of 57 Canadian health 
regions with populations of more than 125,000 people based on 
a series of selected health care indicators. 
 
We’re extremely pleased to report that in this report the 
Saskatoon Health Region ranked fourth overall and that the 
Regina Health Region ranked 16th. Saskatoon is ranked ahead 
of larger centres such as Calgary, Toronto, Montreal, and 
Ottawa, while Regina outranks Vancouver. 
 
Both of our regions scored particularly well on stroke survival 
— a critical indicator of in-hospital stroke treatment — in hip 
replacements, and in obstetrical care. As the Saskatchewan 
Health Quality Council said, this annual survey is, quote: 
 

recognition of the . . . job both [regions] are doing in 
delivering health services. This is a good news story that 
recognizes the many things that we are doing right in 
organizing and delivering care here in our province. 

 
(13:45) 
 
The Maclean’s report is an indication that we should be proud 
of but not complacent about health care in our province. We’re 
doing well, but we can do better. 
 
I know all members will join me in congratulating and thanking 
the excellent teams of women and men who work in each of the 
health regions to bring us the best quality health care possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Teacher Assistant Certificate Program 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Saturday I had the privilege of attending the first teacher 
assistance certificate program hosted by the Southeast Regional 
College. The significance of this program, Mr. Speaker, is the 
fact that the Kelsey SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) institute has put together a program 
that can be offered in rural Saskatchewan so that young men 
and women have the opportunity of enhancing their education 
and their work opportunities. 
 
At this graduation we had 10 young women taking the course 

and I was informed by instructor, Mr. Gerry Joynt, that this 
course is not a Mickey Mouse course, that it takes a lot of work, 
a lot of dedication. And I was also informed that one of the 
graduates is actually passing with a 97 per cent grade in the 
course. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the graduates for their hard 
work, their dedication. A special thank you to the Southeast 
Regional College and the staff for hosting this program and I 
wish them well in their future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

16th Annual Regina Children’s Festival 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
16th annual Regina Children’s Festival begins tomorrow and 
runs through until Saturday. The festival is being held at Regina 
Exhibition Park which will now be the permanent location for 
the event as it provides lots of space, good facilities, and not the 
least important, makes the festival less susceptible to the 
vagaries of weather. 
 
International headline entertainers Aché Brasil will perform on 
Thursday and Friday with their high-energy acrobatics, martial 
arts, and Afro-Brazilian dances. And the Saskatoon-based a 
cappella group HOJA will perform on Saturday. Other 
entertainers, Mr. Speaker, include CLaroL the Clown; one-man 
variety show, Clark Robertson; Les Bûcherons, a duo who 
perform folk songs using a variety of traditional and unusual 
instruments; and Winston and Ed who perform in Cree, English, 
and French. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, I do not see on the list of performers our hon. 
member from North Battleford, but perhaps they could get 
lucky next year. 
 
There will also be a craft tent, a sound tent, and an interactive 
work stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Festival is fun and educational, 
providing kids with opportunities to experience live 
entertainment and a wide range of cultural activities that would 
otherwise be unavailable to them. I’m sure all members of the 
Assembly will join me in wishing success to everyone involved 
in this year’s festival. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rolling Stones Concert 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week it was 
announced that the Rolling Stones will be giving a concert in 
Toronto. The concert was planned as a means of stimulating 
Toronto’s sagging tourist industry in the wake of the SARS 
(severe acute respiratory syndrome) outbreak. The Government 
of Canada has agreed to contribute 3.5 million and the 
Government of Ontario, 2 million. 
 
Those who have been laid off work or have cattle they can’t 
market due to the outbreak of BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) must be scratching their heads at the news that 
the federal and Ontario governments have together committed 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

 

over $5 million for a rock concert. 
 
I agree that the SARS outbreak demands serious action. The 
collapse of the Ontario tourist industry would not benefit us. 
Nonetheless, the refusal of the federal government to waive the 
two-week waiting period for EI (employment insurance) for 
laid-off workers in the beef industry must be seen as 
cold-hearted. 
 
Jane Stewart and her colleagues will remember . . . must 
remember that their responsibilities are to the whole of the 
country and to all Canadians — not just those who live in the 
Golden Horseshoe. 
 
Likewise, Western provincial governments will have to 
recognize that both the federal and Ontario governments have 
been working together to limit the damage to Toronto’s 
economy. Ontario has not taken the position that the whole 
problem is for Ottawa alone. 
 
The Prime Minister has promised to study the request for a 
special $400 million aid package to the Western beef industry. I 
hope he does, otherwise there will be many questioning 
Ottawa’s priorities in funding a concert in Toronto by some 
aging rockers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

SIAST Graduates 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, this year 3,000 SIAST students will 
be graduating from more than 200 programs in business, 
agriculture, health and science, technology, industrial training, 
hospitality services, community services, and basic education. 
 
This is good news because past history tell us that more than 90 
per cent of SIAST graduates available for work will be 
employed; more significantly, 92 per cent of those graduates 
will be working in Saskatchewan. 
 
Just for the record, Mr. Speaker, 97 per cent of these students 
rated their SIAST program as good to excellent. Mr. Speaker, 
SIAST provides an invaluable post-secondary education for its 
students. This is good new for our economy. 
 
I know all members will join me in congratulating the Kelsey, 
Palliser, Wascana, and Woodlands SIAST students as they 
move successfully from the classroom to the workplace. 
 
Finally, on a personal note, I want to congratulate my good 
friend and former neighbour, Penny Hodgson. Not only is she 
this year’s outstanding graduate in SIAST’s vet tech course, she 
has accepted employment at a local Saskatoon veterinarian 
clinic — proof positive of the value of SIAST and its solid track 
record of training Saskatchewan people for Saskatchewan jobs. 
For SIAST students, Mr. Speaker, the future is wide open in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Montmartre School Becomes Environmental Earth School 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
recognize a school in my constituency and the students of that 
school. 

The students of Montmartre School celebrated reaching the 
level of an Environmental Earth School, which is a project 
through the SEEDS (Society, Environment & Energy 
Development Studies) program that the school has taken part of 
for the last number of years. 
 
To reach the level of Earth School, students must complete 
1,000 or more environmental projects. They have ongoing 
projects which include recycling cans, bottles, papers, and 
campground cleanup. They have also taken part in some special 
ongoing programs like creating terrariums in different biomes, 
visiting burrowing owls, and doing reports on endangered 
species. 
 
This is a tremendous achievement for both students of 
Montmartre and the community as a whole. The Hon. Lynda 
Haverstock was on hand to congratulate the students, and at this 
time I would also like to add my congratulations to the students 
and staff of the Montmartre School for reaching Earth School 
status. 
 
Your commitment to this project is an example for us all. Please 
join me in congratulating the students of Montmartre School. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shackleton Project 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last Friday people from communities throughout southwest 
Saskatchewan gathered in Cabri to mark the one-year 
anniversary of the Shackleton Project and this incredible 
Saskatchewan success story. 
 
As all members will know, Mr. Speaker, the success of this 
partnership between TransGas, the pipeline transmission 
company of SaskEnergy, and Calgary-based companies Profico 
Energy Management, Husky Energy, and Cavell Energy has 
exceeded even the most optimistic of industry expectations. The 
region is now responsible for more than 12 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s daily natural gas production. 
 
Our government’s initial investment in this project — $9 
million by TransGas to extend its pipeline network into this 
area — has allowed access by producers and helped to spur 
record gas well drilling throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party members should listen to what 
Alberta-based companies are saying about Saskatchewan. 
Companies like Profico and Cavell are investing here because 
of what they call the Saskatchewan advantage. Our improved 
royalty structure, our abundant resources, and our 
business-friendly investment climate are bringing jobs and 
revenue to this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our future is truly wide open. The people who 
were in Cabri know it, the energy companies in Calgary know 
it, and the people of this great province know it too. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Athabasca on his feet? 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce guests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to welcome a group of very special people that 
travelled many, many miles to be here today. In the west 
gallery, we have 17 grade 8 students from my hometown of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. They are accompanied by Mr. Morin, Mrs. 
April Morin, Mr. Howard Morin, and Ms. Pam Favel. 
 
And certainly I want to give a very special welcome to all the 
young kids for travelling that long journey to come to see their 
MLA and their local hockey hero at work here in the Assembly. 
I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that we did play hockey 
against their chaperone, Mr. Morin, R.J. Morin, and Roger 
wasn’t as fast and shifty as me but he certainly was on my line 
at one time. 
 
And I want to thank the chaperones and all the kids for 
travelling many, many miles to be here today. And I would ask 
all members of the Assembly to welcome this very special 
group of grade 8 students travelling all the way from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cumberland on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, as the member of Cumberland, I 
too would like to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Is leave granted to the member of 
Cumberland. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure for me to join 
the member from Athabasca to welcome the students from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, from sakitawahk and also to say to them in 
Cree, Ta wow. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree). 
 
I am telling them, Mr. Speaker, that it is a pleasure for them to 
be here and that indeed to watch the proceedings as usual. And 
I’d like the guests again to . . . welcome, give them a special 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform 
Encephalopathy 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. It’s encouraging to hear that the Western 
premiers and representatives from the beef industry developed a 

workable emergency compensation package designed to address 
the short-term difficulties facing the industry as a result of the 
BSE case discovered a few weeks ago in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would assume that the Premier’s prepared a 
written proposal for the federal government detailing the 
compensation package. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker: would the Premier confirm this as 
the case and table a copy of the document for the benefit of all 
Saskatchewan legislators? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in concert with the industry 
and with the other Western provinces and territories the 
package was put together and has been presented to the federal 
government. We have no difficulty in sharing that proposal with 
this legislature. 
 
Although it has been proposed, it’s not a Saskatchewan 
proposal or an Alberta proposal or a British Columbia proposal 
or a Manitoba proposal or a territorial — it is a proposal from 
the Western premiers and we’re very happy to provide that. 
 
If I may say, Mr. Speaker, that is the power of the proposal, is 
that it is not from one jurisdiction. It is the united voice of every 
Western Canadian province and territory, the united voice 
calling upon the national government to participate with us in 
bringing some relief, some relief to this very beleaguered 
industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m pleased 
to hear the Premier say that this proposal is a broadly supported 
proposal and I’m pleased that he will be tabling it so we can add 
our support to the proposal that is being delivered to Ottawa. 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that there is an emergency compensation 
package being presented by the Western provinces in the beef 
industry is encouraging. 
 
But nevertheless the federal government has not categorically 
said that it is prepared to offer any more assistance other than 
what is already planned under the agricultural policy framework 
program or a loan guarantee program. Although the federal 
government has agreed to a meeting of Agriculture ministers 
this Friday, there has been no other public expression of support 
for the emergency assistance package from them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is indicating in the press that this is 
pretty much a done deal. What indication has he received from 
the federal government that they will in fact support and finance 
this BSE compensation package, that this will be more than just 
a meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I desperately wish I could 
report to the Leader of the Opposition in this House today that 
this was a done deal. It is not a done deal. But it seems to me, 
Mr. Speaker, that no national government in Canada could look 
at the circumstance that’s facing the livestock industry in this 
country and not respond, Mr. Speaker — and not respond. 
 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

 

We have laid on the table what we think is a very responsible, 
workable, temporary relief package. It is almost without 
question that a national government would respond in a positive 
way. 
 
With the Leader of the Opposition, and let me state the position 
of this government very clearly, this must be more than the 
reliance on existing programs. It must be much more than, it 
must be much more than support for those who have seen their 
herds slaughtered, although the compensation must be there for 
them. It must be much more than some process of loan 
guarantees. It must be a response from Canadians to support — 
temporarily support — this essential industry not only to our 
food supply but to our balance of payments and exports and to 
our economy across Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we agree 
100 per cent with the Premier that it must be more than all of 
the things he indicated. And that’s why we’re pleased that he’s 
prepared to table that agreement so that we can also lend our 
support and reinforce the message that Ottawa must come forth 
with a new, comprehensive package soon. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, whatever form that compensation might take on a 
Friday, it needs to take place this Friday because the news of 
yet another meeting and further work on a compensation 
package into the future will not pay the bills that are due today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Friday’s meeting with the federal minister goes 
well and if the federal government comes to the table prepared 
to finance a program, it will be important that the wheels are 
then put in motion very quickly. Even then for some people, the 
aid may already be too late. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if all goes well, will the Premier explain when the 
intended recipients of the money from this emergency 
compensation package might actually see the money that can 
save their industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well given — given, Mr. Speaker — 
that we are anticipating that the federal Minister of Agriculture 
will be coming to the meeting on Friday with a positive 
response, in that circumstance I think it should only take a 
matter of days to begin the process that we’ve engaged the 
industry in. 
 
The industry has agreed to a proposal which would take the fed 
cattle and begin to move them to slaughter and market, selected 
by the industry — not by government but selected by the 
industry — to ensure an orderly process of return to market. It 
would take, I assume, some time for the industry to begin that 
process. 
 
But for the public dollars to flow in to support the price 
difference, the loss that the fed cattle has shown since May to 
now, should take but a very, very short period of time. There 
may be some period of time that the process would have to be 
put together by the industry, and we would understand that, as 

I’m sure all would. But essentially with a good response from 
Ottawa on Friday, this program should be underway very, very 
quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well with the 
Premier, we’re looking forward to a bankable program that will 
be announced this Friday. 
 
But while an emergency compensation package might help 
some of the industry survive — and we hope that it will — 
nothing would be more beneficial than to have the border to the 
United States reopened so that Canadian beef can again cross 
the border. 
 
The CFIA (Canadian Food Inspection Agency) is expected to 
have their final report completed this week. The international 
panel of scientists has been asked to speed up the presentation 
of their written review of the BSE investigation. 
 
But there is still yet no indication from the United States when 
we might see trade resume. Yet the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, continues to say that he is optimistic that this trade 
will resume soon. And we want to know, Mr. Speaker, what 
date is soon? 
 
Will the Premier tell us what indication he has had from the 
United States that they are going to lift the ban, even partially, 
and how soon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think we all want to 
remain optimistic about the lift on the border ban. That is, that 
is the key and the only long-term solution to the crisis that faces 
our industry. 
 
There is no amount of compensation that can sustain the 
industry in the long term. Only trade and export of our great 
Canadian beef and our great Saskatchewan beef will suffice to 
support and see the industry prosper and expand. 
 
We all wish and we all have optimism and would want to share 
optimism that the border will open soon. But I think the fact of 
the matter is, indications over the last 24 hours, some of us were 
. . . It’s been reported to me that the Secretary of Agriculture of 
the United States was speaking publicly last evening and not 
indicating that this is going to happen very soon. 
 
I listened carefully to one of the senators from North Dakota in 
our own rotunda yesterday who, while I was watching from 
Kelowna, did not give me a lot of encouragement that there will 
be quick movement on that American border. 
 
We have the science in place. We have the science in place. 
We’ll have that official work done that can be turned over, and 
we’re going to have to I think use every mechanism possible to 
us to ensure that that science influences the decision makers 
across the 49th parallel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister of 
Liquor and Gaming. In a story in today’s StarPhoenix, FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) vice-chief, Guy 
Lonechild, is saying the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government was largely responsible for SIGA’s (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority) scandal involving $800,000 of 
misspending by Dutch Lerat. Chief Lonechild said, and I quote: 
 

The province was regulating SIGA and they approved all 
the expenses. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is a very serious allegation. If government 
officials approved the expenses, that means the NDP was 
complicit in misspending of 800,000 taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many senior officials at SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) knew about 
Dutch Lerat’s trips on the Concorde and his outrageous 
expenditures, and why did they approve these expenditures? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
respond to the question, Mr. Speaker. And Vice-Chief 
Lonechild’s comments that have been reported into the 
newspapers this morning are disappointing and somewhat 
concerning. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, let me point out that I want to 
reiterate to the member opposite, to the people of the province, 
all the benefits that SIGA has provided for First Nations and our 
communities. 
 
The financial mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, that occurred at 
SIGA prior to June 2000 has been very well documented. The 
Provincial Auditor identified the issues, Mr. Speaker. Problems 
were documented through an independent audit of the entire 
process. The Provincial Auditor issued a report making detailed 
recommendations to address the problems at SIGA. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to once again point out and underline 
for all the people of this province, SIGA and SLGA adopted all 
the recommendations of the Provincial Auditor and have been 
working together to implement those changes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Guy Lonechild of the FSIN says not only did 
the government know about Dutch Lerat’s outrageous expenses, 
they approved them. Chief Lonechild says, and I quote: 
 

The province was regulating SIGA and they approved all 
the expenses. 

 
They approved all the expenses, Mr. Speaker. That means the 
government approved the misspending of $800,000 by Dutch 
Lerat on sports cars and trips around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that his NDP government 
knew and approved of these outrageous expenses and if so, why 
was nothing done to stop them? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as we all know, 
and people that do listen to news reports, they have recognized 
that there are conflicting statements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to just reiterate once again for the benefit of that member 
and for the people of this province the significant changes that 
have been made at SIGA. 
 
And specifically and for the benefit of that member, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to outline all the documented changes and 
benefits that have accrued in order that everything at SIGA has 
been changed: the adoption of a new board; new composition 
structure, Mr. Speaker; new CEO (chief executive officer) and 
chief financial officer which, by the way, has been applauded as 
one of the leading CEOs in the gaming industry who reduced all 
the expenditures at SIGA and virtually doubled the . . . 33 per 
cent of profits increased as a result of all those changes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Saskatchewan Justice, Saskatchewan Justice 
decided not to charge Dutch Lerat because neither Lerat nor any 
other SIGA official tried to hide anything. That means that 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming must have known what was 
going on. They must have known about the expensive sports 
cars and the trips on the Concorde and they chose, Mr. Speaker, 
they chose to do nothing. And now that’s exactly why Chief 
Lonechild is saying, he said the province was regulating SIGA 
and they approved all the expenses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an extremely serious allegation but it seems 
to be consistent with what the Department of Justice is saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, which government officials knew about these 
improper expenditures? Did the minister know? Did senior 
officials know? And who knew and why did they choose to do 
nothing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that 
member and I hope she’s listening — SLGA did not approve 
Mr. Dutch Lerat’s expenses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let me once again reiterate what took place when there 
were discrepancies discovered. SLGA ordered a special audit 
which comprehensively reviewed issues at SIGA. The 
Provincial Auditor has conducted his audit on this file and duly 
reported in November of . . . The RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police), Mr. Speaker, the national police force, the 
police force that polices this province and investigates 
commercial crime frauds and on and on, investigated this file. 
The Justice department also reviewed this file and made its 
decision. 
 
Are the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and particularly the 
member from Big Muddy, questioning the process of the 
Provincial Auditor, the RCMP investigation, and our Justice 
department? Certainly seems like that. 
 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — As recent as the fall of last year, the Provincial 
Auditor was still maintaining that there was inappropriate 
spending of public funds by SIGA. This is not from 2000; this 
is from 2002. And we seem to be getting two different stories 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP has maintained they knew nothing about Dutch 
Lerat’s misspending until it was revealed by the Provincial 
Auditor. However Guy Lonechild said the province was 
regulating SIGA and they approved all the expenses. And the 
Justice department seems to be saying the same thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who is telling the truth? Can the minister say with 
absolute certainty that no one in his NDP government knew 
about Dutch Lerat’s improper expenses before they came out in 
the auditor’s report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate that when 
there were some discrepancies discovered, SLGA initiated an 
audit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that the member from Thunder Creek is asking for 
the question to be answered and I will answer the question. And 
he knows full well as do all, I think, that there had been some 
conflicting reports, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think they can deny 
that. 
 
You know, I just want to point out I’m a little bit taken aback 
by the attack once again from the opposition, from the 
Saskatchewan Party, on SIGA, when they know full well that 
SIGA casinos create significant economic spinoffs for a number 
of communities, Mr. Speaker, and their profits that go to 
support charities throughout this province. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition is hollering from his chair. 
Well he’s the guy that said, and I want to quote, Mr. Hermanson 
delivered to the FSIN a speech in February 2002, saying: 
 

Hermanson praised the FSIN for running a successful 
gaming business and complimented it for addressing 
“governance challenges” at SIGA . . .” 

 
Do they not speak to one another, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — That is exactly the point that we have been 
making for three years is that it is the responsibility of this 
government and Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming to ensure 
that the dollars generated from Liquor and Gaming flow to the 
First Nations people because they are dependent on these 
dollars. And this government has been negligent in making sure 
that that happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did not hear a clear answer from the minister. 
Can the minister say with absolute certainty that no government 
official knew about Dutch Lerat’s outrageous expenditures and 
that no one in the NDP government knew before it came out in 
the auditor’s report? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well I’ve already said, Mr. Speaker — I 
don’t know how much more clearly or in what language I 
should say it — that SLGA did not approve Dutch Lerat’s 
expenses, Mr. Speaker. I’ve already reiterated — maybe I 
should do it again — the four major, major steps that were 
taken. SLGA ordered the special audit which comprehensively 
reviewed all the issues at SIGA, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t think I need to repeat it again, but I do want to repeat 
one more comment from the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
who obviously does not have his members pay any attention to 
what he thinks or what he says. And I’m going to just quote: 
 

(Mr. Hermanson said, he believes) . . . the financial success 
of . . . (SIGA) is one of the great and largely untold 
business success stories in Saskatchewan. 
 
. . . I am impressed with the direct and business-like 
approach both SIGA and FSIN have taken in addressing the 
governance challenges . . . 

 
That from the Leader of the Opposition, whose member 
obviously doesn’t believe him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister of Gaming refuses to 
give a clear answer. And what is the minister saying? Is he 
accusing the FSIN of not telling the truth about what went on in 
this situation? Is that what the minister is saying? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Justice department made its decision in March 
not to charge Dutch Lerat because they said no one was hiding 
these expenses. That clearly suggests that government officials 
must have known it. 
 
Now Guy Lonechild is saying not only did the government 
know about these expenses, they approved of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what steps is the minister taking to find out which 
government official knew about Dutch Lerat’s outrageous 
expenditures and who approved them? Did the minister of 
Liquor and Gaming approve these expenditures? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how 
much more clearly and precisely I can explain all the 
investigative processes that were followed in determining what 
the problems were at SIGA about misspending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what that member is saying — no confidence in 
the justice system. But that’s quite understandable. No 
confidence in FSIN or in SIGA, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
understand it when her leader, the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party, the member for Rosetown-Biggar applauds the sincere 
efforts of SIGA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re proud of our agreement we signed with 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

First Nations. We work together; we’re going to improve the 
lots of all the people in this province by working together in a 
partnership, not continually questioning and attacking the 
efforts of people to try and make life better for all the 
communities in this great province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Revenue-Sharing Grants 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s also for the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Last week the Minister of Highways, the NDP member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley distributed a brochure accusing the 
city of Regina of not telling the truth about revenue-sharing 
grants. And the NDP member then did what he does best — he 
provided totally inaccurate information about the NDP’s broken 
municipal revenue-sharing promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP claims the city of Regina will receive 
about $13 million in revenue-sharing grants this year. But 
Mayor Pat Fiacco says the city’s revenue-sharing grant will be 
just 7.9 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: who’s lying and who’s telling the 
truth? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. I would ask the member to just rephrase his last 
question omitting the offensive word. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll rephrase my 
question. And once again, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: who are 
we to believe, Mr. Speaker? How much is the urban 
revenue-sharing grant for the city of Regina this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess if there’s being 
. . . we’re being questioned of not providing the proper answers, 
we should also be asking the opposition and questioning what 
they base their facts on and whether those facts are factual. 
Because in most cases they’re not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Urban revenue sharing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, urban revenue sharing was 
increased to $36.714 million in 2003-2004. This means an 
increase of 1.2 million in Regina’s unconditional 
revenue-sharing grant — unconditional. 
 
In 2003-04, Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs will 
provide 13.255 million in total transfer payments to Regina — 
in total. That’s $13,255,980. That’s in total, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s capital funding, centenary funding. Federal funding will 
also be provided through the Regina . . . through CSIP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) programs. 
Unconditional finding as well . . . funding, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a very straightforward question. All the minister 
has to do is open his briefing book and it’ll show him that it’s 
$7.9 million. That’s what the mayor of Regina is saying. 
Revenue sharing is $7.9 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who are we to believe once again — the council of 
Regina, the aldermen of Regina, the mayor of Regina, or that 
member from Qu’Appelle Valley, or the minister? If I had my 
choice, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll take the mayor of Regina and 
the aldermen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to 
the public of Saskatchewan then, and to the people of Regina, 
why is Mayor Pat Fiacco saying it’s only $7.9 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if there’s a question of 
integrity, I think that some people across the floor should look 
in the mirror, because they’re only looking at one portion of the 
total amounts. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to send the member the 
document showing an accounting for all the money, all the 
money that goes to municipalities, and to the city of Regina, 
and to the city of Saskatoon, and North Battleford, and Yorkton, 
and Melville, and Saltcoats, and everywhere else, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m not at all behind the door to do that. That will not even 
include what we’re talking about, the 5 per cent surcharge on 
some utilities that the cities pick up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to send . . . to get the information 
to the member. I’ll be happy to do that, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got 
nothing to hide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government Deputy House 
Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to request leave to introduce 
a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the willingness 
of the House to provide a moment to introduce a guest who’s, I 
just noticed, is seated in your gallery, who is a good friend of 
this Assembly and good friend of parliamentary democracy 
both in our province and our nation. 
 
I see in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Gordon Barnhart, who many 
of us will know is a former Clerk of the Saskatchewan House 
who left Saskatchewan to proceed to the Senate in . . . here in 
Canada to serve the Clerk’s table there, and now serves as 
secretary at the University of Saskatchewan. I think it’s also in 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

 

his capacity in the academic world now that I suspect brings 
him here today in his relationship with the internship program. 
 
We will also know him as an author of some acclaim and 
growing acclaim here in our Saskatchewan. He authored a book 
— if I remember correctly the title was Peace, Progress and 
Prosperity — about the first premier of Saskatchewan, Walter 
Scott. And I have located on my table in my office these days a 
new book entitled, I think the correct title is Building for the 
Future, about the history of the building of this great building in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all hon. members welcome a great 
friend of the legislature of Saskatchewan, Gordon Barnhart. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave to 
also introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming Gordon Barnhart and guest to 
the Assembly today. 
 
As the minister was saying, Gordon Barnhart is a good friend of 
this legislature and democracy, and helped institute the 
internship program that we now have in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. An internship program which brings to this legislature 
good, dedicated, impartial, very — and this was a concern we 
had — very attuned to the confidentiality necessities of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Just as the rest of the Legislative 
Assembly staff are, Mr. Speaker, including the Pages. They take 
their duties very professionally and they are very much 
sensitive to the impartial needs of all of the members of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And we’d like to welcome Mr. 
Barnhart to the Assembly again today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan School Improvements 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to inform you and all hon. members of 56 new school 
improvements which will take place across Saskatchewan this 
year. 
 
Yesterday, the Department of Learning issued this year’s first 
release of block capital approvals. In total, this list represents 
more than 6 million in department contributions. 
 
Block capital projects are those capital improvements valued 
under $500,000. They are essential upgrades responding to 
demands for roof repair, structural upgrades, electrical and 
mechanical projects, safety improvements, and increased space. 
And we know that these projects are of very significant value to 
the schools and school divisions involved. They’re designed to 
keep our schools safe and healthy for our students, while 
ensuring they have the best possible space to learn. 
 

One significant project is in Balgonie where funding will go 
toward classroom renovation, a new science lab, staff area, and 
resource centre. Mr. Speaker, the sights and sounds of 
construction will be taking place across Saskatchewan this year 
— from North Battleford to Rose Valley to Lampman. 
 
In my hometown of Saskatoon, six schools will see either 
renovations or additions. These upgrades include a new gym at 
Montgomery School, a new multi-purpose room at Lakeridge 
School, and the addition of portables to Mother Teresa School. 
 
I had the pleasure of opening Montgomery School and I know 
what a difference these improvements will make in the lives of 
students. At Montgomery, the projects will include not only a 
new gym but new classrooms, a new work area for teachers, 
and an improved library. 
 
In Regina, three schools will see improvements at a cost of 
$410,000. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. I 
just want to wait for things to calm down so I can properly hear 
the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Regina, three 
schools will see improvements at a cost of $410,000. These 
improvements include a new portable classroom at Dr. Martin 
LeBoldus High School, foundation upgrades at Campbell 
Collegiate, and a project to provide wheelchair accessibility at 
Thom Collegiate. 
 
In Swift Current, improvements include the addition of two 
portable classrooms, a new conference area, and new 
washrooms at St. Patrick Elementary School. 
 
Gull Lake, Yorkton, and Churchbridge schools will all see 
renovations this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In total, 56 projects were announced with yesterday’s release, 
and we expect to approve an additional 70 to 80 projects during 
the year. 
 
And while I can’t list every approved project today, rest assured 
that we recognize the value of and the need for all of these 
improvements. These projects are to be cost shared with the 
local school divisions. Working with our partners in the school 
divisions, we are building for the future of the province by 
providing our students with the educational facilities that they 
need. 
 
I want to thank our partners in the education sector for their 
continued work on behalf of the children and learners of our 
province. I want to recognize the hard work of the Department 
of Learning in providing excellent service to school divisions 
and all education stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are building for the future by laying the 
foundation of a good education and strong education capital. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, and to the minister, to respond to 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

the ministerial statement by the Minister of Learning. 
 
I’d like to thank the minister, firstly, for the advance copy of 
this statement. And on behalf of all the schools and trustees and 
students that are involved in the announcement, are able to get 
some funding now for these schools, and I’d like to thank on 
their behalf as well; not only for the money but for taking the 
anxiety out of waiting to learn when their project is going to be 
approved again. 
 
I know the minister is well aware that trustees and teachers and 
parents do an incredible job in educating our children, and they 
have a lot of obstacles, and most of them are to do with money 
and the fact that funding hasn’t usually kept up with the cost. 
 
It’s also a concern around timing. Cash-strapped boards who 
are trying to make . . . trying to do maintenance and renovations 
have to wait for months to learn the fate of their proposals. 
 
In the past the Minister of Learning have often used these 
opportunity to hand out money to school divisions by going out 
to the schools and to get a formal thank you. That’s basically 
fine but it takes time, and school boards really would have more 
of an opportunity to do their tendering and to do some forward 
planning if they knew well in advance. 
 
Really what we need is a two- or three-year rolling budget so 
we know what’s happening well in advance and the boards can 
make a payment, their decisions, and their plans a lot better; it 
would save them money. 
 
So on behalf of the people that have received the money today, 
we do thank you, but we do encourage the minister to take 
further steps to find out what ways they can be helping the 
boards with the few dollars they do have and to let the boards 
know well in advance when they’re going to have an approval. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 43, The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(14:30) 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a response 
to written question no. 717. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled. 
 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Today actually we’re joined by a number of officials from 
different departments as this is a miscellaneous statutes Act that 
contains changes to a number of different pieces of legislation. 
So I’ll introduce a fairly large number of officials who are here 
to provide answers in case the questions are asked on specific 
issues. 
 
Seated next to me is Tim Epp, who is the Crown counsel for 
legislative services in the Department of Justice. Directly 
behind me is the executive director of protection emergency 
services for the Department of Corrections and Public Safety, 
Tom Young. Sitting next to him is Dr. Ross Findlater, the chief 
medical health officer with the Department of Health. Just 
behind me is Ron Wallace, the director of health registration 
and vital statistics for the Department of Health. 
 
And then also in the Chamber, seated behind the bar are Doug 
Walton, the acting manager of legislation and legal services for 
Saskatchewan Environment; Ralph Paragg, the acting manager 
of information and regulatory services for the Department of 
Highways; Bernadette McIntyre, the assistant vice-president, 
driver and vehicle safety services, Sask Government Insurance; 
and Myron Sereda, the director of engineering services branch 
with the Department of Industry and Resources. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
the minister and his officials. The nature of this Bill obviously 
means you have a lot of officials because we’ll be going all 
over the place with this particular Bill. 
 
Going through it in a fairly orderly manner though, the first 
section deals with charitable fundraising, and I would just like 
for the minister to explain exactly what is being tried to 
accomplish in this section on charitable fundraising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’d like to thank the member for the 
question. There’s been a lot of attention in the media over the 
last several months about charitable organizations who are often 
suspected, or may be suspected, of fundraising and then using 
those funds to support terrorist organizations. This section of 
the Bill largely attempts to accomplish the same thing that the 
federal legislation has tried to do in terms of identifying dealing 
with charitable groups or organizations that may use the mantle 
of a charitable group to fundraise for a terrorist organization. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, thank you. The answer seems to 
indicate that there’s definitely a concern in this particular 
province, and I’m wondering is this a result of a concern that 
was raised due to what’s happening in other provinces or has 
there actually been a problem in Saskatchewan with fundraising 
of that sort that this is trying to address? 
 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
The member’s question, I think, highlights in many ways an 
overriding set of issues that we’re dealing with in this Bill. 
 
While there’s no specific set of instances in Saskatchewan that 
we’re aware of where charitable organizations have been 
involved in fundraising for terrorist activities or are linked to 
them, nevertheless this legislation anticipates or provides us 
with avenues to deal with it in the case that something like this 
would happen. 
 
The federal government has enacted legislation to deal with it. 
Alberta has enacted legislation which is similar. I would 
anticipate other provinces will come along in the same way. 
 
But the member highlights an important set of issues that a lot 
of this legislation is largely preventative. It enables us to dictate 
a response before we are in a crisis situation. And so that is 
largely, as we go through this Bill, what I think the member will 
find. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. In part III, the section dealing 
with The Clean Air Act in 24(1), there’s some talk about 
immunity. And that’s always an interesting phrase when that 
shows up. And I’m wondering exactly what that immunity 
section is all about. Who’s going to be immune from whatever 
is happening there, and why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m advised that The Clean Air Act did 
not contain this provision previously, as other pieces of 
legislation that this Assembly has dealt with does. And what 
this particular amendment will do is provide a relatively 
standard clause that we have found in other legislation be added 
into The Clean Air Act. 
 
To specifically answer the member’s question, the immunity is 
granted to the Crown when it has acted in good faith. Obviously 
this is open to court interpretation, but nevertheless is . . . that’s 
the purpose behind it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Part IV deals with Dangerous 
Goods Transportation Act, and much as the first section that we 
talked about, it also deals with terrorist activities and is directed 
at that whole area. 
 
The one question that I do have is there’s some reference there 
to fines and penalties, and I’m just wondering are these new 
fines and penalties or are they a change in the size of those fines 
and penalties? And because we don’t have the old section there, 
from what level have they been raised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that this 
section is a new one and as such, there were not previously 
fines in place before for this type of activity. 
 
The concern that’s being addressed in this section of the Bill is 
around the transportation of dangerous goods that may be used 
for a terrorist activity. It’s very specific in that particular, 
particular set of provisions. 
 
I think, as all of us know, in Saskatchewan there are a number 
of dangerous goods that are hauled on our roadways. And part 
of what will be important in the interpretation of this Act 

overall is making sure there’s a clear understanding of the 
difference between a terrorist-related activity, ordinary — I 
don’t want to say ordinary criminal activity — but more 
standard type of misuse, or in just a general use of general 
dangerous goods hauling. 
 
This is one of those things that we have articulated with a 
separate clause. There will be additionally be, as we go through 
the Bill — and it was one of the things that I should have 
perhaps made more clear in the second reading speech — that 
while the Bill addresses in a large part terrorist-related activity 
and preventative measures as well as procedures to deal with it, 
there are provisions in this Bill that also deal with additional 
powers that may be invoked in times of emergency. And I think 
as we move further into the Bill that we will see some of that. 
 
A lot of this will obviously be dependent upon interpretation. 
As I listened to the debate in this Assembly during the second 
reading phase, I know that a lot of members on the opposition 
had highlighted this. This is certainly a key set of issues we 
addressed in our caucus as well. 
 
And so I think as we deal with this, certainly provisions are in 
some ways broad, but we believe that they’re there to provide 
us with sufficient leeway to deal with these kind of 
extraordinary situations. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well thank you. Moving on to section 6. 
Now section 6 does exactly what the minister referred to, and 
that is involving the concept of an emergency as well as a 
terrorist activity. 
 
In section 6 you have a new organization, which is 
Saskatchewan emergency management organization. We’ve 
been used to acting under the Saskatchewan emergency 
planning unit. Does this replace that? Is it in addition to it? Or is 
it just a renaming of the old organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We’ve undertaken this set of changes 
for two reasons. One is to reflect more what this organization 
deals with. It used to be the emergency planning group. It’s not 
now simply dealing with planning, it also deals with crisis 
management and emergency issues response within the 
department and the interdepartmental way. So this reflects part 
of the change in that organization. 
 
We’ve also adopted the name that’s in use largely across 
Canada and much of North America for emergency measures 
organizations. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s also in 
section 6, I believe, changes to . . . No, section 7, environmental 
management and protection. There’s also some sections dealing 
with possible acts of terrorism. And I’m wondering exactly 
what the concerns are that brought about section 7. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this section of the Act 
deals with changes to EMPA, The Environmental Management 
and Protection Act, and it allows us to deal with crisis 
situations, emergency situations, where we need to move 
around what might otherwise be considered the normal process 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

or protocol in terms of dealing with waterworks or things that 
are maybe outside of normal provincial control but under other 
municipal control. 
 
And so what we have allowed here is a set of statutory changes 
which will allow us to act quickly to deal with a potential crisis 
situation. That’s largely what this section of the Act does and as 
such it is more preventative in terms of nature but tries to 
respond to the ability for government to move quickly in the 
case of a threat. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Then we get to parts 8 and 9. I 
think these are the ones that are always the frightening ones in 
that whenever there’s an emergency there tends to be a 
diminishing of freedoms and privacy and all those sorts of 
things. And when we look at section 8 and 9, I am wondering 
what the minister can say to alleviate fears that are obviously 
out there that in case of any kind of emergency, people’s rights 
and freedoms and privacies are taken away and destroyed and 
sometimes we know when they’re going to come back. 
 
So I’d like the minister to give some reassurances to the people 
of this province that under 8 and 9 we’re not going to have a 
Big Brother. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well the member’s quite right. This is, 
of all the changes that are happening in terms of security 
framework legislation across the country, this is certainly 
among the most contentious set of those changes. But because 
this is where we start to run into the need for us to be able to 
share across provincial borders in a secure way and a secretive 
way, an ability to share intelligence information back and forth, 
this has been a subject of a great deal of debate in parliament 
around the Anti-terrorism Act of 2001. This is a part of the 
debate that’s going on around the Public Safety Act in 
parliament. 
 
We believe that while the changes do provide for a greater 
degree of . . . I would say security, others may say secrecy, 
within terms of dealing with maintenance of private 
information, the fact is that this under our legislation will still 
be available for review by the courts and the FOI (freedom of 
information) commissioner. But certainly as we have looked at 
this issue and we’ve debated it with my federal colleague, the 
Solicitor General, federally, this is a very significant set of 
issues. 
 
We have tried to respond in a measured way with this in a way 
that still protects privacy rights and we have tried to narrow the 
scope down. This is one of those sections that is very clearly 
intended to be invoked around security issues only. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I’d like to move on 
to section 15 and that’s with The Public Health Act. If we keep 
in mind, and as we said, this Bill deals not only with terrorism 
but also with other unforeseen acts that could cause some 
difficulties, some serious problems in our society. 
 
Under section 15, we see that there’s more power for the 
department to deal with situations probably such as SARS in 
Ontario. And I’m wondering if there are any specifics that this 
particular piece of legislation has that would make 
Saskatchewan more able to deal with emergencies such as 

SARS or West Nile or whatever? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the member is quite 
right that in fact this piece of the legislation, because of the 
timing of bringing it forward, we were able to take advantage of 
the lessons being learned in other provinces like Ontario around 
the SARS outbreak. 
 
The most important provisions in this largely deal with 
quarantine provisions that allow the . . . make it very clear in 
terms of the province’s responsibilities but also its ability to 
deal with quarantine issues. 
 
There are additional measures in here that deal with other 
biological agents. As the member will know and members in 
this Assembly will know, we have had in this city two 
significant anthrax scares, one of which of course resulted in the 
evacuation of a government building last year. This allows us to 
deal with those kind of issues in the case that they become a 
real and serious threat. 
 
But we were fortunate in the timing of this legislation to be able 
to take advantage of the lessons we’ve seen being learned in 
other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Chairman, that takes us 
to the end of the questions that we have on Bill No. 32. 
 
The Chair: — Hon. members, this is a lengthy Bill. Is leave 
granted to deal with it by part . . . Oh, recognize the minister for 
wrap-up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — If I might, there was one other set of 
questions that I’ve been asked around this particular Act on the 
identity theft issue that I want to make clear for members of the 
Assembly. 
 
One of the issues that has been raised is what type of identity 
theft are we dealing with? Is this a case where some underage 
person borrows their older brother’s ID (identification) to get 
into the bar, are they then stealing the identity? Clearly that’s 
not what the intention of this Act is. And as we go through 
dealing with law enforcement agencies on educating them about 
the Act, we’ll need to make sure that those normal provisions 
are dealt with in other legislation. 
 
This contemplates more serious types of identity theft as we 
may have seen coming out of the ISM (Information Systems 
Management Corporation) hard drive situation. We were 
fortunate in that that there appears to have been no identity theft 
issues. But this would respond to that. 
 
Clearly, if I may leave the members of the Assembly with one 
other overview that I think we need to stress here, and that is 
that clearly the police, prosecutors, the courts are going to need 
to be cautious and judicious in their use of this legislation. It is, 
I believe, a measured response. I don’t believe it’s a draconian 
one. But nevertheless I think we are going to have to be 
circumspect in terms of its use. 
 
It is designed for a very specific set of circumstances 
throughout and that is something that we’ll have to make sure 
through constant monitoring is in fact the case. 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

 

So I would like to thank the many officials who have joined us 
here today, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to thank the members of the 
opposition for their thoughtful comments in the second reading 
debates, as well as the questions of the member today. 
 
The Chair: — Hon. members, this Bill has many clauses. Is 
leave granted to deal with it by part? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 83 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
move that the committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2)/ 

Loi corrective (gestion de la sécurité) de 2003 (no 2) 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Okay. I now recognize the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I thought I had the same officials. Most of them have 
run off on me. So we’re down to the two who know the most 
about this: Tim Epp, who is the Crown counsel with the 
Department of Justice, responsible for legislative services; and 
seated behind him is Ronn Wallace, the director of health 
registration and vital stats for the Department of Health. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Yes, Minister, and welcome again. As you 
commented, your ministers run away on you. It may be 
something you’ll have to get used to. But anyways, Bill 33, part 
II is basically The Change of Name Act and I’m wondering 
what exactly is being changed there and why do we need that 
particular change of name. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the change of name 
provisions . . . This Act deals with two things, change of name 
and vital statistics reporting. The change of name provisions are 
there largely to make provincially issued identity cards, drivers’ 
licences, birth certificates, health cards, these kinds of issues, to 
make them more secure in terms of ensuring that the names on 
them are in fact associated with the individuals they’re 
supposed to be. 
 
It’s part of a set of changes which are going on across the 
country and it’s designed to make sure that provincially issued 
identity cards are in fact secure and not easily accessible to 
people with nefarious purposes, be they terrorist or otherwise. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Part III, Vital Statistics Act, 
section 15, has something to do with marriage. Is there anything 
in that section that members on that side of the House should 
know about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, sections 14 through 17 

are, I believe, all identical provisions that strengthen the ability 
to make sure that the director who’s issuing the identity is in 
fact able to verify that those are the individuals. It makes no 
substantive change to the definitions of any of these items. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and thank you to the minister and 
his officials, and that concludes the questions we have on that 
Bill as well. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will move 
that the committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that Bill No. 32, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003, be now passed 
a third . . . now moved a . . . read a third time, read a third time 
and passed under its Act. Amazing what you can do without a 
script, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2)/ 

Loi corrective (gestion de la sécurité) de 2003 (no 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I am absolutely certain, Mr. Speaker, 
that I will move that this Bill be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Health to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me today, to my left, Glenda Yeates, the deputy 
minister. And to her left, Kelly Kummerfield, who is the 
executive director of health human resource planning. And 
directly behind me, Duncan Fisher, the assistant deputy 
minister. To Duncan’s right, Bert Linklater, who is the 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

executive director of district management services. Then to my 
right, Rod Wiley, who is the executive director of finance and 
management services. 
 
And then there are a number of other people who are at the back 
of the room who will help us, depending on the topic. So those 
are the people I have with me. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees, and 
welcome this afternoon to the minister and to the officials from 
the Department of Health. Mr. Minister, I would like to take the 
opportunity for the next hour or so to cover a broad range of 
topics that I think are important to discuss, both because I think 
they are important issues to have in front of the people of 
Saskatchewan and to give the opportunity for the department to 
sort of outline its official position. 
 
The first area that I want to talk about is the concern that I have 
and many have about the shortage of medical professionals and 
what plans are in place in order to take . . . or deal with this 
shortage. 
 
First of all, Minister, there have been some increases for 
specifically registered nurse education training programs. We 
have moved from 260 current positions to 300 with the addition 
of 40 seats at the P.A. (Prince Albert) campus. 
 
Mr. Minister, both the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association are calling for 
significant increases above that level. Could you tell me please 
what plans you have to further increase specifically the 
registered nurses training seats, registered nurses and registered 
psychiatric nurses, in that category? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — So thank you for that question. What 
happens in this particular area is that we obviously work with 
SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association), SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), the management, and other 
places that hire staff. And right now we do have 300 positions 
for training RNs (registered nurse) and 176 positions for 
training LPNs (licensed practical nurse), and so that we have 
that kind of a education structure. We’re just now in a point like 
we were in 1999 where we’re getting a study based . . . looking 
at the whole needs in nursing over the coming years. Mr. Elliott 
has been preparing this and we anticipate getting that very 
shortly. That will set out the needs over the next number of 
years in the same way that ’99 did and then we used that to 
expand the number of places. 
 
As you would understand, the Department of Learning is 
actually in charge of setting up the various spots so we have to 
work together with the Department of Learning. But we 
anticipate that there is some . . . Well there’s clearly a demand 
for the spaces but practically we want to make sure that it’s in 
line with the projections within the workforce in Saskatchewan, 
taking into account obviously that some of our grads do go 
move to other places as well. 
 
So right now the number that we do have is 300 on the RN side 
and 176 . . . RN and the RPN (registered psychiatric nurse) side 
— and 176 on the LPN side but that’s under review right now. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure you’re aware that 

both the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association have written to you as they 
have to me and to all members, I believe, of the legislature, 
saying that they are calling for an immediate increase to 400 
from the current 300 level. And it sounds like your response is 
to commission another study to look at and investigate the 
obvious. 
 
The Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association have 
indicated that over the next five years some 3,500 nurses will be 
eligible for retirement and at that rate . . . And I think that with 
the workload nurses have in Saskatchewan right now, it is 
highly likely that every single one of those individuals will take 
their retirement when they’re eligible for it. 
 
That would indicate an outflow, if you like, due to retirement 
over the next five years of an average of over 600 nurses per 
year. I don’t know why the minister has to take so much extra 
time to study what seems to be to everyone in the nursing 
profession and the health care profession something that is very 
obvious. 
 
So instead of studying this further, why isn’t the minister 
making recommendation to the Department of Learning to 
dramatically increase these available seats as soon as possible, 
rather than delaying at least another year’s potential enrolment 
while they’re studying the obvious? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I beg to differ with the member’s 
comments about what we are doing. We’ve been working on 
this study over the winter and around this particular issue 
because clearly it is something that we need to address. 
 
What is going to be happening is, we’ll going to be getting this 
report very shortly. It will deal with exactly the kinds of issues 
that have been raised about the numbers of nurses retiring, the 
numbers who will stay in the workforce in a part-time basis, 
and how you provide for some of that. 
 
But I think that the important thing is that we get the 
information in as clear a way as possible, that we share it with 
all of the people who are involved — obviously we’ve got the 
unions and the Registered Nurses Association, the psych nurses, 
make sure we include the licensed practical nurses — so that we 
get the whole complement, the whole picture into place. And 
we will be working around increasing the number of nursing 
positions. 
 
One of the challenges that we have is in training nurses in 
Saskatchewan. We end up having to make sure we have the 
capacity to do that. There’s some ability to expand, using some 
of the existing facilities that we have now. But if there’s a 
dramatic increase, it also means a fairly dramatic change in the 
kinds of space, resources, and the teachers — the people who 
are going to be the ones that provide the education. And we 
have to do all of these things together in a reasonable planned 
way. 
 
We are doing that by listening and working and carefully 
planning, rather than just sort of increasing a huge number 
without seeing what effect it’s going to have on the educational 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

 

institutions, on the professions, and on the whole situation. And 
so that’s what we’re doing, like we usually do, is working very 
carefully on this issue. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I too would like to beg to differ, Minister, 
because what you usually do is wait until it gets almost to a 
crisis before we deal with it and then it’s much more difficult to 
remedy the situation. 
 
Mr. Minister, certainly all of the issues you raise in terms of 
facilities and faculty and things of this nature are of course 
major concerns and challenges in order to get into place. And 
it’s all going to take time anyway, and because you’re delaying 
even making any initiatives, it’s going to take even longer. 
 
And as the minister should know, that if you started making the 
decision today, it’s probably going to take four or five or maybe 
even six years before you actually have any outcomes at the end 
of the graduate program that are going to meet the increased 
numbers. So time becomes very important. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a note here from Chris Bailey, who you 
know is executive director and the registrar of the Licensed 
Practical Nurses. 
 
And one of his comments about the fact that he says there’s 
about 150 graduating — and I imagine the difference between 
the assigned number of seats and graduates are who actually 
complete the entire program — but he says, and I note here, that 
roughly 40 per . . . I’m sorry, roughly 70 per cent of LPNs are 
40 years of age and older. And he goes on to say that in the near 
future more LPNs will be leaving the system annually than are 
being trained for replacement. 
 
Minister, it seems is that every single person in the health care 
system from the registered nurses, SUN people, the licensed 
practical nurses — everybody knows that we’re woefully short 
in the number of training seats. Everybody that is except the 
Department of Health and yourself. 
 
And I wonder why you can continue to justify these delays 
because you have to realize it’s going to take time to have 
graduates coming out of any of these programs once the 
decision to increase numbers according to the information 
coming from all of these professional associations are achieved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, the department is not 
unaware of the challenge. We’re working at it in a very careful 
way. The number of graduates, total nursing graduates in the 
province in the year 2000-2001 was 167. So that was . . . It was 
in 1999 we got the study. That year there were 134. Well 
basically at that point the decision was made we have to 
increase dramatically the number of spaces; so we did. 
 
So the next year, 2001-2002 — and this includes nursing degree 
and practical, the LPN program — we ended up with 332 
graduates. Estimates for this year, or the last year ending March 
31, are 332 total. But we know that in the lag time we’re going 
to end up with a total between those two in the . . . over 400, 
450. 
 
Now the question really is, what is the kind of jump or change 
that needs to take place over the next 6 months to 18 months in 

training of nurses to deal with the problem that’s going to be 
there 5 years, 10 years down the road? 
 
That’s exactly the question that we’ve asked Mr. Elliott to do 
with all of the information he has about Saskatchewan, and it’s 
exactly the kind of information that we know that he has 
provided to many industries in Saskatchewan as everybody 
plans to deal with the demographics that we have in North 
America. 
 
And what we are doing is getting all of that information, 
making sure we can then work carefully with our institutions 
that provide that training in Saskatchewan, so that we will be 
prepared three to five years from now, as well as making sure 
that many of the young people who are interested in 
opportunities in the health professions have that opportunity to 
study. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to 
move on to the role . . . And I preface this by saying that I’ve 
met with some MLTs (medical laboratory technologist) who are 
somewhat concerned about the descriptions of what the nurse 
practitioners are going to be and that have been gazetted in the 
proclamation of the roles of the advanced clinical and nurse 
practitioners. 
 
And the concerns surround this, is that in the wording it says 
that nurse practitions are going to be able to perform certain 
tests. And there’s four or five or six categories that are listed 
where they can perform these tests. 
 
The concern by the MLTs are, will these nurse practitioners be 
given the appropriate training and in-service to make sure that 
these tests that they perform are being performed appropriately? 
And second of all, is there going to be consultation between the 
registered nurses who are setting up the regulations in regard to 
the nurse practitioners and the MLTs to make sure that there’s 
an appropriate transfer of function and accreditation of these 
people to be able to perform these tests? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The whole issue of nurse practitioners and 
their role is being developed right now in the bylaws around the 
competencies that nurse practitioners will have. 
 
They will do things in a similar way that the doctors do. They 
will order the tests but they won’t actually do the tests. The 
other people will actually perform the functions and do the 
tests. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, the wording in this was to 
perform, that they’re actually functions that they could do. And 
I think that word perform was what was concerning medical 
laboratory technicians. And I’m wondering, if the relationship 
is going to be as you state, then why is the word perform in the 
proposed regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The issue really is the competencies, what 
things will the nurse practitioners be able to do, and that will be 
defined in the consultations as we go along. And practically 
what it means is the ordering of the tests; it won’t mean the 
actual doing of the tests. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I think that will be 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

useful in terms of reassuring the medical laboratory technicians 
that these tests are going to be conducted in an appropriate way. 
 
Minister, I would like to move onto imaging and diagnostics a 
bit if I could now. And I certainly want to say initially that the 
announcement that the department made to include CT scans in 
Yorkton and Moose Jaw and Swift Current on a permanent 
basis is welcome news and very much supported. 
 
And I also would encourage the department to consider 
finalizing that, if you like, and looking at the two northern sort 
of regions — I’m thinking in particular of North Battleford and 
the Melfort area — in terms of really using these regional 
centres to be a part of the imaging and diagnostic opportunities 
in the province. So I certainly commend the department on 
being on the right track, and I would hope that in their longer 
term planning they would look at these other locations. 
 
Minister, I would like to ask you specifically though about 
MRIs, if you like maybe the next level of imaging. And could 
you indicate to me how many MRIs there are in operation in the 
province and where they’re located? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, there are three MRIs in 
Saskatchewan; two located in Saskatoon and one in Regina. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Are all of these MRIs 
in active service or is, in Saskatoon, one used as a backup or are 
they both being used? And if you can tell me what the operating 
schedule or usage is. Are they being used, each of them, eight 
hours a day or is one being used 12 hours and the other six? 
Could you outline for the three MRIs what the average weekly 
or daily usage is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have the 
information as of right now, June 2003. At the Royal University 
Hospital in Saskatoon, the MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 
operates there on a five-day-a-week basis at 10 and a half hours 
per day. And the MRI at City Hospital operates at 
five-day-a-week basis, except the third week is four days, so it’s 
five, five, four, and that’s nine hours per day. 
 
In Regina it operates every day, Monday to Friday, 12 hours a 
day Monday through Thursday, and then eight and a half hours 
a day on Friday. That’s as of June, right now. 
 
One of the challenges comes . . . is making sure there’s enough 
qualified staff. It’s an area where there’s demand right across 
the country, and so as they’re able to get more people 
sometimes the hours are able to increase, but this is the base 
that we have now. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I guess it goes to the 
crux of even our previous discussion about medical personnel. 
Certainly the question of the availability and number of 
radiology technicians to staff and man the MRIs or supply the 
person power for the MRIs is an important issue. 
 
Can the minister tell me how many educational training seats 
there are in Saskatchewan for technicians that would be capable 
of operating this MRI equipment? 
 
(15:30) 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. How this works on 
the training of the MRI people is they take the SIAST course, 
the one-year course that is available here, but then they need an 
additional nine-month course which is not provided within the 
province. And people go out of the province and get that 
nine-month training and then come back and serve. 
 
This present year ending now in, I guess May or April, we’ve 
had two return-service bursaries . . . (inaudible) . . . in the fall 
we will have four return-service bursaries in this particular 
field. And that relates to the nine-month course extension on top 
of the initial one-year SIAST course. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, in order to get the wait times 
reduced for MRI imaging, how many further technicians would 
the system need in order to operate the MRI so that there isn’t 
the delays that currently exist? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, this question is not a simple 
question, the way it was laid out, in the sense that, as I 
explained at a previous session, in 1998-99 we did just over 
5,000 MRIs in Saskatchewan, all in Saskatoon. The projected 
numbers as of the end of March 31 this year are 13,650. So 
that’s just over four years of more than, you know, 150 per cent 
increase, maybe 160 per cent increase in the numbers of MRIs. 
 
The challenges that the length of time it takes to do a single 
MRI really depends on the particular medical problem. So you 
have a variable length of time involved in the process. 
 
And the numbers of uses for MRIs seem to be expanding as the 
capacity expands. I think a fairly good example of that is some 
of the challenges that they’ve had in Alberta where they’ve 
expanded the numbers of MRIs in the public system and still 
end up with even greater waiting lists than it had when they 
went through the big expansion. 
 
So one of the things we’ve been trying to do is work together 
with Saskatoon Health Authority and the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Authority around how to make sure that we’re providing 
as broad a service as we can. And the numbers of people 
training on return-service bursaries have been developed in 
conjunction with those two health authorities who in fact are 
having to hire the people to provide the service. 
 
This is not a simple task of doing this, and obviously we 
continue to look at and see what the . . . the numbers of people 
who are waiting. And in actual fact our surgical care waiting list 
project, as we’re getting that underway, the next step will 
obviously be to look at the diagnostic care and assessment and 
make sure that there’s the appropriate resources — whether it’s 
people or machines or whatever — to deal with the needs of the 
province. 
 
But it’s a tricky area to just give a simple answer. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I understand 
that, for example SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), 
Workers’ Compensation Board, the RCMP, and the armed 
forces pay for MRI imaging services. 
 
Is that true and can you tell me how many of these services 
were provided in the past . . . or the year that you have the latest 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

 

information for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Once again, Mr. Chair, a simple question 
has a complicated answer but I think a reasonable answer. 
 
As it relates to SGI, in the province, SGI provides a certain sum 
of money in a global way for the whole health system related to 
the kinds of tests that they need and the service that they need 
for accident victims. And so it becomes a general amount. We 
can probably get the exact figure, but that relates to all of the 
kinds of care that is provided for accident victims. 
 
As far as WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) is concerned, 
there have been discussions with them around providing some 
compensation that would give them access to a certain number 
of spots per month, for example, on the MRIs. But that has not 
yet been finalized. So at this point there is nobody that pays 
anything extra directly around any particular MRI process. 
 
And what we’re . . . I mean the idea behind working with WCB 
is to say, well let’s increase the capacity for MRIs, and that 
allows then the WCB people to get into the system in a timely 
way based on their needs. But it also gives that capacity 
availability for all of the citizens of the province. But that’s not 
quite yet finalized, that kind of a process. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I understand that if 
space isn’t available in Saskatchewan — and this may not be 
your department per se — that WCB or SGI or those people 
will actually send people to Alberta or other jurisdictions and 
pay for MRIs. Does the department track any of that outflow to 
see what potential increase in capacity in Saskatchewan could 
be captured here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have the information 
about the WCB and the SGI numbers, but what we do have 
information about is the number of out-of-province approvals 
that our medical services branch gives each year for MRIs out 
of the province, and sometimes that’ll be people actually going 
out of the province or sometimes it may be people who are 
somewhere and they’ve been in an accident or something and 
need an MRI. But for this present year there were 312 that were 
approved out of the province and 63 were denied. 
 
So that’s kind of the numbers, but clearly we’ve been looking at 
these numbers and also trying to work with WCB, for example, 
to figure out what their demand is so that we can increase the 
capacity in Saskatchewan so that wherever possible people can 
get the diagnostic test here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Moving to the funding 
for the regional health authorities, I have . . . In the Estimates 
book of course it gives the global amounts under the 
sub-programs under vote (HE03). But I have a document or a 
sheet that was circulated I think through the health districts that 
not only has that information, it has a percentage increase, it’s 
got a ranking, how many people in the population in that 
regional authority, and the funding per capita. 
 
And I certainly appreciate and understand that the Regina 
Qu’Appelle and the Saskatoon health districts, because they 
provide many more services and also that they provide services 
that are not necessarily solely or as much for their own citizens 

in their own regional authority, would receive a greater amount 
per capita. But for example, on this document, it shows that 
Regina Qu’Appelle receives $1,820 per capita and Saskatoon 
1,703. 
 
Can the minister explain why there is a significant difference in 
the amount of dollars per capita each of these two tertiary 
centres receive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’m not sure which document 
the member is referring to but it’s not a document from the 
Department of Health. But I know there were some calculations 
done in one of the health districts and it may be that document 
that he’s talking about. 
 
Practically, one of the challenges in looking at the kinds of per 
capita funding on a district basis relates to the fact that not all of 
the funding is in the regional health authority budget. So for 
example, it doesn’t include money that goes to the College of 
Medicine. It doesn’t relate to money that goes to medical 
remuneration; it doesn’t go to alternative payments of funds. 
 
And so there’s a whole . . . there’s lots of money in the health 
budget outside of what’s the regional health authority, that 
actually goes and is spent in a particular community for health 
purposes. 
 
And so our funding in the province is provided on a global basis 
and a particular area may or may not have programs that are 
used by people from all over the province. And a good example 
is the North Battleford area where they have a number of 
facilities there that provide broader services. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Also another part of this relates to the actual structures that 
some communities have to work with versus others. Some have 
newer, modern, more efficient structures as part of their budgets 
whereas other areas are still having to fund and deal with some 
physical places that need a lot of work. 
 
And so on a broad basis across the province, that kind of 
comparison is not that helpful. And we’ve looked at that but 
there are many other factors that are also included and that 
comparison is not helpful at all. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. The Page is delivering 
a copy of the document that I received, for your use, so you can 
see it. 
 
Minister, as you notice on that, as well the smaller health 
districts have by and large similar per capita, if you like, 
funding except for the Heartland which is sort of more 
significantly lower than that. Is that a reason of because of the 
nature of the services that are available in that district? Is that as 
well what explains the discrepancies in these numbers? 
 
And if you look, the global numbers on the funding come right 
out of the budget documents so that that’s where the money 
that’s been assigned by the department through the budgeting 
process comes from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. Very clearly Heartland has no 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

regional hospitals and so therefore their funding is different. 
Whereas if you go to Prairie North, they have two regional 
hospitals — Lloydminster and Battlefords. And so there are 
those kinds of discrepancies. 
 
Thank you for providing me with a copy. I think this was 
actually prepared by some of the people in Prince Albert and I 
had seen this before. But it’s not that helpful. It doesn’t include 
a lot of the other kinds of funding that are part of the health 
system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, there is 
currently been negotiated between the Department of Health 
and the physicians of the province a tentative contract. Can the 
minister update us on the terms of that contract? 
 
I believe it’s been circulated to all of the physician members of 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association and it was my 
understanding that until that happened, you know, it would be 
kept in confidentiality. But now that that is done, is the minister 
in the position to detail terms of this contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — My understanding is that they’re just 
completing the voting process within the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association) and hope to have the results by the 
weekend or early next week so that can be announced publicly. 
But practically, much of the detail has been set out in an article 
dated June 10 — which I guess is today — in The Medical Post 
and so I’m . . . I can tell you kind of what, what’s happened. 
 
From a government perspective, the overall cost to government 
is about 22 per cent over the number of years. The fees and the 
program increases will be basically October 1 this year at 8.3 
per cent on the fees, and then 6 per cent on April 1, 2004, and a 
further 6 per cent on April 1, 2005. So when you add those, 
those numbers together, that gets you I think to the 20.3 per 
cent. But then there’s also about $20 million for the various 
retention and recruitment initiatives and other programs 
building on a lot of the joint innovative kinds of things that 
we’ve been doing with the SMA and with the medical 
profession in general. 
 
So that’s kind of where it’s at. They moved some, we moved 
some, to get some, to get a deal that makes sense for all of us. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. You outlined the 
various percentage increases over the next three years. In the 
negotiations of the contract, are the details of the actual fee for 
service for individual procedures automatically just increased 
by that same percentage? Or in the negotiations are there 
adjustments and weighting of individual procedure fees, if you 
like, to potentially increase the remuneration for medical 
professionals that are working on more complicated procedures 
that are well within their scope of practice and perhaps 
lessening the remuneration for those kinds of services that could 
be done by other medical professionals, and I’m thinking like 
nurse practitioners, etc. 
 
So my question is, is there a flat increase on every fee . . . on 
every individual fee for service or is there negotiations that will 
be ongoing in terms of the actual fees for individual 
procedures? 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What happens in the contract is that we 
provide global amounts relating to the various percentages and 
then the SMA actually does the allocation between the various 
procedures and the various specialties within the medical 
profession. 
 
But Saskatchewan Health is in constant discussion when this is 
happening because we may have some concerns that a 
particular area, we have a need for more doctors in that area. 
And one of the problems is that the fee structure is not 
comparative across the country so that kind of advice would be 
provided from some of the officials in Saskatchewan Health. 
 
There may be some other trends across the country that are of 
concern around some of the fees, and that would be fed into the 
discussion. But the final allocation is something that is done 
within the SMA. 
 
And it’s a challenge because different groups have different 
ideas about how money should be divided up. But ultimately 
over the years they have been able to sort this one out and we 
have had most of the needs or if not all of the needs that the 
province has, resolved in the discussions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I want to leave the 
doctors and move to pharmacists now if I could. Is the minister 
aware of the projected or the estimated shortage of pharmacists 
in the province and specifically the unfilled pharmacy 
positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d like to thank the member for that 
particular question, and I’ll try to describe a little bit of what’s 
happening within the profession. And I think I’ll be able to 
answer all of his questions as I do that. 
 
The number of pharmacists in Saskatchewan reported by the 
Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association in 1990 was 909. By 
1999 that number had risen to 1,087. In the year 2000 it was 
1,108. In the year 2001 it was 1,129. 
 
Right now Saskatchewan has about 105 pharmacists per 
100,000 population. That’s higher than the Canadian average 
where there’s only 76 pharmacists per 100,000 population. 
 
But one of the challenges in Saskatchewan is that 
approximately 85 per cent of all of the pharmacists in our 
province work in the private sector, and so there are demands 
for pharmacists clearly within institutions and within some of 
the clinics that are across the province. 
 
We have had some bursaries in this area with return service to 
the, sort of public sector work, but they haven’t worked that 
well because people can get a job that pays them very well 
when they finish, and so they just borrow the money on their 
own and take the course and then not have to worry about the 
return service. 
 
So what we’ve done for this year is created five internship 
programs — three in Regina and two in Saskatoon — whereby 
students will have a chance to work within the institutional 
pharmacy kind of program to see what kind of a career that is as 
opposed to the careers in the . . . for pharmacists in the private 
sector. 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

 

And our hope is that a number of people will see that there are 
many interesting ways of providing their pharmacy services 
within the public sector jobs and so that we’ll get more of a 
balance there and not have the pressures that we sometimes 
have in our hospitals and clinics and other places across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Information that has 
been shared with me anecdotally from a number of pharmacists 
is that they would indicate that the shortage of pharmacists 
globally in Saskatchewan could be approaching as many as 100. 
And if that information is correct, and that would be both in the 
private sector — in the local community pharmacists — as well 
as the pharmacists working in the institutions that you indicate. 
 
Minister, as well, do you track, does the department track what 
the retention rate is of the graduates coming from the University 
of Saskatchewan? I understand that the retention rate is not very 
good. And I wonder if you have the information to indicate 
what the retention rate is at the University of Saskatchewan 
from the graduates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Madam Vice-Chair. One of 
the interesting things about Saskatchewan is that our University 
of Saskatchewan College of Pharmacy graduates approximately 
80 pharmacists every year. This is the highest number of 
graduates per population of any province in Canada. In other 
words it ends up having maybe more pharmacists than our 
province can actually take in, in the province. So that’s been a 
long tradition of people actually getting training here and 
maybe working some other places. 
 
According to some of the information that we’ve received — 
and I don’t have the most recent information; this is from a 
couple of years ago — but in 2001 only about 40 per cent of the 
graduates from the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 
actually stayed in Saskatchewan, which is one of the challenges. 
 
And most of the people who take pharmacy and then leave our 
province go west to BC (British Columbia) or Alberta. And so, 
you know, one of the challenges there obviously was some of 
the compensation packages and how we related to those places. 
One of the things I have heard, when I’ve been talking to 
pharmacists across the province, is that the compensation 
package worked out last fall in the HSAS (Health Sciences 
Association of Saskatchewan) agreement has changed some of 
that balance but it doesn’t totally deal with that issue. 
 
(16:00) 
 
So once again it’s an area where we have continual work to do. 
We train enough people but there still is a long tradition of 
people going and practising other places. But there’s also a 
tradition of some of those people, after having spent a number 
of years, having growing up in Saskatchewan, they want to try 
some other place but then they really like Saskatchewan and 
they come back. So it’s a double-edged sword. Sometimes it’s 
good for people to go and try another place, then come home; 
other times you lose them because they make connections 
somewhere else and stay there. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, has the 
department a concerted effort to retrain and retain and recruit 

health care professionals? We’ve just talked about pharmacists, 
we’ve talked about doctors and nurses, technologists. Can the 
minister outline what comprehensive plan the department has to 
do everything that is humanly possible to make sure that these, 
first of all, these people are told how valued they are and how 
important it is that they stay in Saskatchewan? I know that there 
is some bursary programs, but certainly the minister, I’m sure, 
acknowledges that we have to try to improve those percentages 
from the 40 per cent, for example, you’ve quoted in pharmacy, 
to a higher level so that we can help to alleviate the medical 
professional shortages that we have in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Madam Chair. I’m not sure if 
the member wanted to ask me that, such an open-ended 
question because we do have a plan to retain, recruit, and train 
health care providers. It’s part of our action plan. It’s one of the 
sections in that particular document. And I’d like to provide a 
bit of the flesh on that plan. There’s some very clear ideas that 
were there from December 2001. 
 
But basically it goes like this. The action plan provides the 
blueprint for how we’re going to improve the system while 
delivering everyday health care services in an accessible way 
with the best . . . ensuring the best value for every health dollar. 
And supporting, attracting, and developing skilled personnel is 
one of the largest challenges in Saskatchewan’s health care 
system. 
 
So we’ve been doing a number of things and Saskatchewan 
Health has provided $3 million in new funding for health 
provider retention, recruitment initiatives, plus a further half a 
million dollars for the emergency medical system training 
initiatives in 2002. We’ve continued this level of funding into 
2003. 
 
And so, what’s the strategy? Well the first part of it is to train 
more health care providers. So we’ve spent, we’ve got money 
directed — $400,000 — to purchase six new training seats 
added to in a number of small medical diagnostic disciplines 
including MRI technology, cytology, sonography, orthotics, and 
prosthetics technology. We have a new cytotechnology program 
that’s being developed for delivery by SIAST, commencing the 
fall of 2003. 
 
The new northern nursing program was introduced in the fall of 
2002, increasing the nursing enrolment by 40, to 300. That’s for 
the RN nursing. We have 80 new or additional emergency 
medical responders for upgrading to the EMT (emergency 
medical technician) basic annually. 
 
SIAST has increased the intake of pharmacy technicians from 
16 to 24 in the fall of 2000. SIAST is increasing the dental 
assisting program from 60 to 65 students in the fall of 2004. 
SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) has established 
a degree program in environmental health and science for the 
fall of 2002 which will allow for more of the public health 
people to be trained. 
 
We have interprovincial training agreements already in 
existence. We’ve increased the number of Saskatchewan 
students being trained as respiratory therapists up to eight, or by 
eight. We’ve increased the number of nuclear medics 
technologists by four. We’re increasing the number of 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

occupational therapy training seats from 10 to 15 at the 
University of Alberta in the fall of 2003, although we are 
moving some of the positions that have been at the University 
of Manitoba. 
 
We’re also expanding the bursary programs. In 2002 this was 
an extra $800,000. We offered 220 new return-service 
bursaries. There’s also a half a million dollars for a new nursing 
bursary program for students in registered nursing, registered 
psychiatric nursing, and licensed practical nursing. We’ve also 
had bursaries specifically awarded to RNs who are studying to 
becoming primary care nurse practitioners. We also have new 
first-time nursing bursaries for RNs, RPNs, and LPNs. We’ve 
also expanded the number of bursaries to allied health 
disciplines and offered bursaries to four new disciplines in 2002 
— medical laboratory technology, medical radiation 
technology, nuclear medicine technicians, and pharmacy. 
 
We’re continuing to offer the nursing re-entry bursary program. 
Provincial bursaries have proven to be very successful with a 
retention rate of graduates at about 80 per cent. We’ll also . . . 
We have the 500 more that came this year. These are the 
numbers from last year. And the budgeted amount for this 
year’s budget is $4 million. We also have physician bursaries 
with funds that are managed within the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association. 
 
We’re continuing to look at supporting continuing education 
and professional development. This is something that is about 
retention of professionals and this is work that’s going on with 
the joint committee on health human resource planning and the 
Health Human Resources Council, which are existing bodies. 
And this is a specific area mentioned in the action plan and it 
will take more work as we develop this, but it’s clearly what we 
see as an important part of retaining workers within the system. 
 
We’ve also allocated money to regional health authorities for 
priority professional development and there’s about half a 
million dollars been directed to clinical education. And we’ll 
continue to use a coordinated approach around training and 
orientation of preceptors and improved educational experience 
which we hope will result in improved retention of medical . . . 
or people who are studying in the health fields. 
 
And we also have been working at looking at some of the 
leadership development of managers within the health system. 
And that’s something that we know is something that many of 
the people who are providing leadership roles within the health 
system look forward to as part of what they are doing. 
 
We also are developing a representative workforce which will 
reflect the population of Saskatchewan. This is a continual 
challenge for all employers in Saskatchewan, and the health 
system is no different and there are many things that we’re 
doing in that area. 
 
We’ve been working on improving job satisfaction. Some of the 
specific examples are the quality workplace projects with the 
SRNA. The Health Quality Council has been working on 
evaluating these particular projects and that’s working out well. 
 
One of the other things that’s been done and was very 
successful in January of this year was a high-quality . . . 

achieving high-quality workplaces educational event, via 
satellite training, for 600 employees. And we hope to do more 
things like that. 
 
We’re also going to be implementing province-wide health 
human resource planning. And we have a new . . . Within the 
department, the health human resource planning branch was 
established in the fall of 2002. And this works with the Nursing 
Council, the Health Human Resources Council, joint committee 
on health human resource planning, the joint Saskatchewan 
Health-Saskatchewan Learning committee, and the Western 
Canadian Health Human Resource Planning Forum. 
 
Within the regional health authorities we’ve been doing many 
more coordinated things. The accountability documents that we 
use for regional health authorities deal specifically with some of 
the human resource issues. 
 
We’re also working on research that will support all of these 
initiatives, and we continue to support research within particular 
professions dealing with health human resource issues. 
 
We’re bringing health training programs together. Academic 
health sciences in general in the province have been having a 
fair number of discussions about how to integrate health 
training, and that’s continuing. 
 
We’ve got a very strong program to support the College of 
Medicine, as evidenced by the work we’ve been doing but also 
the announcement we made not very long ago. 
 
We’ve increased dramatically the support for health research, 
and we’re doing a number of things around developing and are 
pleased to have collective agreements in all areas. 
 
So we’re working on a plan that fits in with our overall Action 
Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care. There are more things that 
we can do, and we look forward to any ideas and suggestions 
that you may have and that others may have within the health 
field, but practically they’re the kinds of things that we have to 
do together. 
 
So I thank you very much for that question and the opportunity 
to answer it in full. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You certainly did 
provide a very full answer but I am pleased to see that the 
department is taking seriously the issue of trying to maximize 
the number of people that stay and return to the province 
because I think it is extremely important if we’re going to meet 
the shortages that exist in the health care sector. 
 
Minister, I’d like to turn now to . . . I understand that there are 
discussions going on between the health care unions on the pay 
equity front. And I wonder if the minister could outline what 
methodologies are being used to determine what 
reclassifications are going to be appropriate under this 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the process used is a 
joint process between management and union, and they look at 
all of the various jobs and try to figure out how they fit in an 
overall grid. And then once that’s been established, then the 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

 

union negotiates what kinds of adjustments need to be made to 
make the appropriate fairness be there in the whole system. 
That’s as simple as it is. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I understand 
when this type of discussion has happened in other public 
service unions, it has resulted in special wage adjustments or 
things of that nature that are required. Has the minister 
budgeted for special adjustments in remuneration as a result of 
this pay equity discussions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the answer is yes, that 
remuneration has been included in our budgeting plans over a 
number of years but the exact amounts can’t be known until the 
process is done. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, when 
this . . . When do you anticipate these discussions to be 
completed, and will there be a detailed kind of a breakdown of 
the various categories and the agreed-to wages that will be 
assigned to those categories when the process is completed? 
And will you be releasing that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The process will ultimately be public 
because it’ll just be published as the wage scales for the whole 
system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, and again 
I’d like to move to radiology and particularly the services 
provided in some communities. As the minister understands, 
it’s not only in the technician side that there’s shortages. There 
is also shortages of radiologists in the province. Can the 
minister outline what the estimated shortage of radiologists are 
in the province? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I refer the member to 
table 23 in the statistical report from Saskatchewan Health, 
which is the most recent one that we have, which is effective at 
the end of March 31 of 2002. And in the list of specialists on 
page 43 in that document it shows pathologists and diagnostic 
radiologists, the number being 35. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Does the department 
have an estimate of the required number? If 35 is what we 
actually have, how many do . . . what would be the ideal 
situation? What number would be the ideal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We know that there are certain parts of 
the province that are recruiting radiologists right now, but on a 
province-wide basis it kind of depends on the amount of work, 
the numbers of people who are already there, and how hard 
they’re working, I guess in the sense of how many hours they’re 
willing to work and . . . But at this point we know that there are 
a couple of parts of the province that are recruiting radiologists. 
But it hasn’t been identified as a huge problem in the province 
this year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to bring to 
your attention . . . I have a copy of a letter from the Associated 
Radiologists of Saskatoon to the Wadena Health Centre that 
says, and I’ll quote: 

Regrettably physician and technologist shortages have 
forced us to consolidate our out-of-town ultrasound and 
fluoroscopy service. 

 
In other words, they’re not able to service that community into 
the future because of a shortage of the people that they need in 
order to do that. And I’m concerned that communities like 
Melfort as well are needing radiology services to provide the 
regional services that they need. And I was wondering if in the 
initiatives that the department had taken and you outlined in 
detail, are there specific initiatives to increase the number of 
radiologists in the province? Because I think the minister 
understands that all kinds of surgical and other procedures are 
very much dependent on getting timely imaging results. And 
radiologists of course are a very important part of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m not able to 
specifically answer the question as it relates to radiology, but I 
do have some information around some of the special initiatives 
that we’ve been working at around retention and recruitment 
with the SMA. 
 
So with the SMA, which we developed a fund in the last 
contract which was called the Specialist Recruitment and 
Retention Fund, which has an annual budget of 1.5 million. And 
I’m assuming there’ll be some more money for that particular 
fund in the next contract that’s just being worked on now. 
 
But what happened in that . . . using that particular fund, there 
were 19 new bursaries which include return-service bursaries in 
2002 and then there are 25 ongoing bursaries as well as three 
grants for enhancement training. And we think that there’s 
some radiology people in that particular area. 
 
Another program that was new in 2002 was the specialist 
emergency coverage program which basically provides 
compensation for specialists, including radiologists, who are on 
call for emergencies. And this has added another positive 
incentive for radiologists to be part of our overall provincial 
system. And those things are still . . . are ongoing and they 
continue to develop and be refined, working together with the 
SMA. 
 
In a longer term vision of what may be happening in, not just in 
Saskatchewan, but clearly right across North America, are the 
issues around teleradiology. In other words, the ability to do 
digital images in one place and have them read in another place 
in a same-time environment. So that a radiologist who’s 
situated in Nipawin may be able to cover something that’s 
happening in North Battleford if they’re on that call that 
weekend. 
 
And there’s some pretty interesting opportunities for us in 
Saskatchewan, but once again it’s making sure we get the right 
kinds of programs and things. So it’s something that we’re 
working together with, with all of the people involved. 
 
But practically, we’ve got some specific things we’re doing and 
some longer term vision parts, and we’re wanting to make sure 
that services are provided right across the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Those complete the 
questions that I have for the department today. I’d like to thank 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

you and the officials for answering the questions very 
completely. And I would like to invite my colleague from 
Battleford-Cut Knife to ask questions. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I guess we do 
realize and we’ve talked about the shortage of staffing 
throughout the entire health services needs in that respect. 
 
I’d just like to go into that area of the LPNs and the RNs that 
we have in rural Saskatchewan and some of the difficulties that 
we’re having in rural Saskatchewan trying to maintain those 
services and that staffing as well. 
 
And there is, I guess, a concern out there in the sense of how 
that staffing is put together and the way — if it’s maybe 
through the contracts that are in place right now or the 
privileges that are given to the staffing in the sense of having 
part-time and full-time staffing, and the relationship of 
part-time and full-time staffing that’s out there in those facilities 
as well — that it’s causing a huge concern in the sense of how 
services can be delivered and having the opportunity of having 
staff available. 
 
Does the minister have any figures on the sense of even the 
percentages of full-time and part-time staffing that we have in 
the system right now and particularly in the rural sector of 
health care services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. This whole 
issue around full-time work, part-time work, and casual work is 
one of the challenges within the whole health care system. And 
I don’t have specific numbers but I can give you some rough 
ideas based on information that has been provided by SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) where 
approximately 60 per cent of the employees are full-time, about 
30 per cent are part-time, and about just under 10 per cent or 
approximately 10 per cent are in a casual situation. That 
includes all employees. 
 
Now as it relates to the nursing profession, there was a 
committee that was struck a few years ago to look at 
casualization of the nursing force, and that was the name of it. 
Because one of the concerns was that this was something that 
had been directed by the employer or by management. It 
became clear that it was a much more complex issue then that 
in the sense that many people were choosing not to work 
full-time based on other responsibilities, other things that they 
were doing, and preferred to have a part-time job or a casual job 
because it gave much more control over some of the things that 
were happening in their lives. 
 
So it’s not a simple problem and therefore there’s no simple 
solution. And what’s happened is ongoing discussion within the 
nursing profession around how to provide jobs that fit with 
people’s lifestyles and how . . . and that often changes 
depending on sort of which decade of their life that they’re in. If 
they’ve been working for a long time, they may want to start 
working fewer hours because they’re moving towards 
retirement. If they’re early on, then they want to work fewer 
hours because they are working and taking care of family or 
doing other things or maybe even doing some more study. 
 
And so it’s something we’re continuing to look at and it’s 

something we have to work together with the union 
management people and with also the training people — 
whether it’s the university, SIAST, or the regional colleges — 
because all of these things impact on the availability of people 
to provide work. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, if 
the minister could address the fact then, is it the ability for the 
nurses then to choose when there’s a job being posted as a 
full-time position, that that nurse — according to seniority — 
can then choose if they’re going to work on a part-time basis; 
and then a choice of whatever that part-time may be, if it’s a 50, 
60, 70, 80 per cent basis that they choose to work on. But 
through seniority they have the ability to make that choice and 
that causes then the district to try and fill that position in 
another form. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s really 
where my question is going in the sense of what we’re seeing 
. . . Like in my community in Wilkie and we’ve seen it in other 
facilities which was Greenhead and which is now Heartland 
district as well, is that when you have those positions filled with 
part-time people and there’s only those people available that 
have made up that team as such, and you lose one of those 
part-time people, you don’t have another staff member that’s 
available then to come and fill in that position. 
 
And you’ve created an atmosphere out there with a bunch of 
part-time employees. In the rural sector you’ll probably find 
that 60 to 70 per cent of those employees are part-time people 
because they’ve been given that ability to choose that position 
to that level. 
 
And we’ve got right now situations where we’ve got facilities 
that are going from 24-hour emergency down to 12-hour 
because of one individual that’s going to be off for an extended 
period of time. 
 
So when you’re looking for people that come in and fill that 
position from outside that local area, for them to come in on a 
part-time basis, you just can’t get them to come in. But if that 
was a full-time position that they were coming in to fill, then 
it’s much easier to recruit people and bring them back into that 
position type of thing. 
 
And I don’t know what the minister’s thoughts or the 
department’s thoughts are around that, but I think that’s an area 
that needs to be addressed and looked at quite seriously. 
Because if we’re going to try and recruit people into that 
industry and into those positions when you have part-time 
positions to fill, they become very difficult to fill in the future, 
or even today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think the answer is 
that the managers who are working with this in the system are 
trying to accommodate the people that they have in many ways. 
And sometimes that accommodation creates the kind of 
problem that you’ve identified. And so then the challenge is 
how to readjust or re-accommodate to get the full-time position 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

 

that brings a new person into the community if that’s what it 
requires. 
 
And so sometimes it’s . . . the retention side is well, can you 
make the job fit my lifestyle at this particular time? And it 
might have part-time capacity to it and it meets the needs of the 
local people but when they’re not there and there aren’t enough 
people and you want to bring somebody from the outside, then 
you end up having to try to reconstitute how the jobs are put 
together. 
 
And that’s one of the challenges in the system; it’s one of the 
challenges that I know that the managers have been working on. 
It’s further complicated by the various agreements that are in 
place and that is something that I think is continually addressed 
in ways, but it hasn’t been solved to deal with all of the new 
problems. You think you might have solved one problem by 
agreement or by setting up a new system; well then you create 
some other ones. 
 
But clearly the goal is to accommodate so that you can retain 
the professionals you have in your community and attract some 
new ones. And if that’s not working, well then you end up 
having to try some other ways. And one of the challenges from 
a broad provincial perspective is to make sure that both the 
employees and the employers have the tools to make those 
adjustments in maybe a faster way than we can now. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
the minister. Once again I think the department’s got to get 
serious in looking at, you don’t want to call them quotas but 
you need to maybe call them benchmarks as such, that the 
districts, the health regions now, are maybe limited to the 
amount of part-time staff, especially the LPNs and the nurses 
that they carry. Because if you’re trying to recruit and retain 
people in our system and attract people once they’re graduating 
and there’s only part-time positions that are available . . . 
Because on the majority basis the people that are going to get 
into the retirement mode, all of a sudden they’re on part time, 
so if you’re going to try and put somebody into that retirement 
position, it becomes a part-time position that you’re trying to 
fill. 
 
And it’s like the dog chasing its tail; you’ll never catch it 
because that position always . . . or that recruitment opportunity 
always escapes you because of not having the situation 
available for them to come and fill. So I think that’s an area that 
you need to take some serious consideration in that sense as 
well. 
 
And I think what’s also going to happen in rural Saskatchewan 
is utilization becomes a huge factor in providing services in 
these facilities. And if you start losing the ability to provide that 
service because you’re having to cut the service for a period of 
time that you don’t have staffing, the way the budgets are struck 
and the budgets are basically allocated is according to 
utilization. And if you don’t have the numbers out there for 
utilization, then all of a sudden the dollars aren’t there in that 
health region as well to provide the service or the staffing in 
that respect as well. So I think that’s an area that ties together 
quite handily that . . . to provide the service out there and we 
can’t provide all the services out of the major centres. We still 
have to use the regional concept of providing services out there 

as well in that sense. 
 
I just want to move on to nurse practitioners. There’s been a 
change in the way a nurse practitioner currently is supposed to 
be being brought in as a . . . There’s a new style or a new 
system that you’re looking at right now. 
 
And we have doctors out there that are on fee for service and 
you have salary doctors. And a nurse practitioner, on the system 
that was there originally, had to work with a physician that was 
on salary, that wasn’t a fee for service because of this 
opportunity, a loss of payment for the . . . to the doctors on fee 
for service. 
 
What is the change that’s coming in, that we can now take a 
look at using a nurse practitioner in the combination of the 
different type of physicians and the way they’re being paid out 
there, as well as is there a system now coming that you can use 
this nurse practitioner with a doctor that’s a fee for service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, this is a very good 
question that the member has asked, but it’s part of a much 
bigger question. And one of the things that’s happening right 
this month is that all of the regional health authorities are 
providing us with their plans for their regions around primary 
care initiatives. And I have Dr. Gil White who is here with me 
today who’s in charge of that particular area. 
 
What they are . . . What’s happening with nurse practitioners 
now is that almost 100 per cent of them are being funded 
through the regional health authorities and not through the 
medical services branch. And so it hasn’t become an issue, the 
specific question that you’ve asked. 
 
I think the more important point is that nurse practitioners are 
very much designed to work in teams, primary care teams. And 
in that particular setting where you may have a whole number 
of health professionals including the doctors and the nurse 
practitioners, the fee-for-service kind of mode as a just one little 
piece of that is quite a challenge. But all these things are right 
now in discussion. 
 
I think in many ways here in Saskatchewan we’re quite on the 
forefront of trying to sort out how some of these things might 
be done. But at this stage we haven’t solved that one yet. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
again to the minister. I guess setting up that team concept and 
using that nurse practitioner in that team kind of environment, 
does that nurse practitioner then work out of a pool of staffing 
of nurse practitioners? 
 
Or does it become . . . that person or that individual become 
part of that team that’s more of a localized individual that works 
out of that particular community or out of those facilities as 
well? Or is this kind of like a travelling nurse practitioners that 
is being able to be utilized throughout the different health 
regions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the general model is that the nurse 
practitioner would just stay in the community where they’re 
from and do the work there. And some of the models that we’ve 
had so far have included them working with the doctor that’s in 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2003 

 

that community. And so there’s enough work for all of them 
there. 
 
Other models include a doctor in one community and in the 
neighbour community a nurse practitioner. And then the doctor 
and the nurse practitioner might even cover a few more 
communities around that particular area where they’re located. 
But it’s quite flexible and it has to be because we have different 
needs in different parts of the province. 
 
But I would say that the main idea is that the nurse practitioner 
would work in their own community and be part of that 
community. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. Again, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, to the minister. And I guess this relates back to 
the LPNs and the RNs as well, for the availability of them in 
one form of another is, you know, to the shortages that are out 
there. And those shortages may occur in different areas at 
different times as well. 
 
Is there a pool of those type of people that are available that the 
different regions can draw on at times when you have that need 
for a short period of time as well? Do you have a pool of 
individuals that are available that almost become like free 
agents that can travel around almost throughout the province to 
fill in those spots of need at certain times? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think the answer to 
the member’s question is that we don’t specifically have that 
kind of a pool right now. But there are a number of people who 
do some of those things, depending on the regions where they 
are. 
 
One of the advantages but also a challenge for the new, larger 
regional health authorities is the fact that they do have a bigger 
pool of employees across a broader area. But when you . . . You 
can’t really force people to go and work many, many miles 
away from home. But sometimes there are people who are 
willing to go and cover in another community for three weeks 
or a month or some time when there’s a specific need. 
 
And what we have to be really careful of, and make sure that 
we, from a Saskatchewan Health perspective respect, is that for 
the management of the regional health authority, their goal is to 
recruit and then retain as many people into that area. And so 
they have a better idea of how to put those jobs together in a 
way that brings more people to work in their particular area. 
And if a particular region got a reputation as sort of directing 
where their employees should be across a broad area, I think 
that might create a lot of challenges for them to get new staff in 
there. 
 
So it’s a balancing act and people are working very hard. Often 
they’re working with their friends and relatives who do a lot of 
these jobs and you try to be as accommodating, but also to 
make sure that you provide the services to the best level that 
you can. And it’s not always possible to get all of those pieces 
to fit together. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, to the 

minister. As he can appreciate, I’m sure, given the unique 
geographical conditions of the constituency of Cypress Hills — 
the vast spaces and the under-populated regions of that 
constituency — many of the health issues that we have to 
address are similar to issues I would assume are addressed in 
the far North. And I’m wondering at this point whether we can 
see some flexibility in the policy of the department in a specific 
case. 
 
I have a constituent who lives right on the border of 
Saskatchewan and Alberta. And because the access road out of 
their ranch is the meridian road, their distance to Medicine Hat 
is considerably shorter than it is to Maple Creek, let alone Swift 
Current. And because they do all of their business in Medicine 
Hat and because their family is located in Medicine Hat, the 
situation would be of convenience if they could move their 
medical requirements to Medicine Hat. 
 
In this particular instance the gentleman involved had two 
serious strokes and was going to require extended care and 
probably ongoing fourth level care. And the request by the 
family was: could they place the husband, in this case, in a 
Medicine Hat facility and have Saskatchewan Health cover the 
costs? 
 
Now I know that ordinarily that wouldn’t be an acceptable 
situation. But I’m wondering if there are exceptions to normal 
policy that might help accommodate this very specific type of 
situation? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. I’m sorry to interrupt the proceedings but I would 
like to recognize in the Speaker’s gallery, Louis Gardiner, who 
is chairman of the Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division and Chair of 
the Northland College Board. I’d like to welcome him here to 
the Assembly and have all other members welcome him as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
(Subvote HE01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ll assume that the 
member was talking about long-term care facility. If a patient 
comes from another province to Saskatchewan and they’re 
accepted into a long-term care facility, we would end up 
covering that right away. 
 
The specific question that the member’s asking relates to what 
is Alberta policy in a reverse way where somebody moves from 



June 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

 

Alberta to . . . I mean moves from Saskatchewan to Alberta and 
then is accepted in an Alberta facility, and at what point do they 
deem them to be an Alberta resident and therefore covered 
under the Alberta health plan? 
 
And I don’t have a specific answer to that, although my 
understanding is that they have a bit of a qualifying period or a 
waiting period, which is different than what we do here. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister, I’m not sure 
if I elaborated the specifics quite well enough. In this particular 
case, the wife is going to remain on the family ranch which is 
still in Saskatchewan. The husband, they would hope to get 
level 4 care or extended care in Alberta, just for the 
convenience of it. There was no intent for them to actually 
relocate to Alberta. Although in our conversations with the 
individuals, there was some suggestion that that might be the 
upshot of the whole thing; they may have to physically relocate 
to Alberta but continue to run their operation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I don’t think in the long term that would be to 
Saskatchewan’s financial benefit to lose them as residents, but 
is there any type of reciprocal arrangement you might want to 
explore with the province of Alberta to see if care for this 
particular individual as a Saskatchewan resident would be 
available to him in Medicine Hat? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
challenge on the particular area that the member is asking is that 
it primarily relates to what are the rules in Alberta as it relates 
to residency? And we don’t have the specific information 
around how that works and that . . . But under our system, even 
if the couples were still married and one moved into an 
institution, they would be deemed . . . he would be deemed to 
have the residency of wherever that institution is, and so 
therefore they would be covered. 
 
And I’m not sure if there’s a different rule in Alberta or what, 
but practically that wouldn’t be a factor that one partner lived in 
one place and the other partner lived in another one. You just 
deal with what is the residency of the person who’s in the 
institution? 
 
But perhaps, so I think perhaps the member may want to check 
with some of the Alberta authorities around that particular issue 
to help this constituent with you. And maybe if you have some 
more details, we can . . . I can talk to you some other time. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to thank all the officials who 
have been with me today and thank the members opposite for 
their questions. And I’d like to move that we report progress 
and ask to leave, for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:56. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1588 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1589 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1592 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1592 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1596 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1597 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1612 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 MacLean’s Health Report 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
 Teacher Assistant Certificate Program 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
 16th Annual Regina Children’s Festival 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
 Rolling Stones Concert 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
 SIAST Graduates 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
 Montmartre School Becomes Environmental Earth School 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
 Shackleton Project 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1592 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1592 
 Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1594 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1594 
 Municipal Revenue-Sharing Grants 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1596 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1596 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan School Improvements 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1597 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1597 
 



 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1598 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1598 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1598 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1598 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1598 
 Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2)/ 
 Loi corrective (gestion de la sécurité) de 2003 (no 2) 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1601 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1601 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1601 
 Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2)/ 
 Loi corrective (gestion de la sécurité) de 2003 (no 2) 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1601 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1601 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1602 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1610 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1612 
 
 
 


