















































Hansard: March 19, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 11 
 March 19, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by the citizens of Saskatchewan concerning the 
deplorable condition of Highway 58 between Chaplin and 
Shamrock. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Shamrock. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
residents of my constituency concerned with the state of the 
hospital facility in Swift Current. The prayer of their petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners today are from the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with crop insurance: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reassess the grasshopper spray penalty assessed to farmers 
in 2002; and further to that, government review the 
definition of viable farming practices as outlined in 
present Saskatchewan Crop Insurance policy. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Hanley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition this afternoon from people in my constituency who are 
very concerned about possible reductions of access to Crown 
land for recreation and tourism in Saskatchewan. And the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary action to 
ensure that Crown lands and existing trails stay open for 
recreational and tourism purposes. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people 
from Meath Park and Weirdale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens concerned about adequate and reasonably priced 
telephone service. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
modify the exorbitant rates of telephone hookup to these 
cabins and provide reliable cellular telephone coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Edmonton, Martensville, 
Shellbrook, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 7 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: what is your 
department’s intention for moving elk north of Prince 
Albert for the year 2003? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — It is my pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, David Karwacki, 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party who is seated in the 
east gallery, and he is accompanied today by Ian Burgess, 
communications director for the Liberal Party. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to the members of the Assembly today, Hazel 
Lorenz sitting in your gallery. Hazel is the force behind our 
newly elected MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in 
the Battleford-Cut Knife constituency. And we know behind 
every successful elected member is someone who is a strong 
supporter and we want to express our appreciation to Hazel for 
attending this session. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all my 
colleagues in the Assembly, 30 grade 5 students seated in the 
west gallery. The students come from W.S Hawrylak School in 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have nothing but good memories of going 
to visit Hawrylak School. I’m always warmly greeted. I’ve been 
there for some family fun days and a number of years ago I was 
even able to be dunked in a dunk tank. 
 
The community there worked hard for the expansion of their 
facility so they would have some greater gym space in times 
and I really appreciate the support of all of the young people in 
the community. 
 
They are accompanied today by Brenda Martin, their teacher, 
and two parent chaperones, Susan Stasiuk and Leanne Leibham. 
And I’m looking forward to being able to meet with them and 
have a picture taken and join them for refreshments and any 
questions they have in room 218. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in a warm welcome for the 
students from W.S. Hawrylak School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the rest of the members I’d like to 
introduce Gerry Hertz, who’s sitting in your gallery. Gerry 
resides around the Edenwold community and is a hard worker 
in the community, dropped off a couple of tickets for a 
fundraiser coming up. Always looking for extra dollars to put 
on different events and other play . . . this one is for playground 
material in Edenwold. 
 
I’d like the rest of the guests, members to welcome Gerry. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you three members from 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) here 
today — Jeff Hryhoriw, Merv Norton, and Andrew Rathwell, 
and ask all the members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize some 
members, a couple of people in the gallery. We have of course 
former employees of mine when I was the minister of Northern 
Affairs. We have Don McKay, who’s now working in the 
mining industry. And as well we have Dale Robison who 
continues to work in the building. 
 
And as well, over on the gallery opposite, Mr. Speaker, we also 
have my niece, Sasha, and she’s come in from Saskatoon to 
give us a special visit, as well as my wife, Linda. 
 
All members, please welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d want to 
welcome all of our guests who are in the gallery today and to 
give a particular welcome to Andy Iwanchuk’s family. And I 
know I won’t be able to say Andy Iwanchuk much longer in 

this Assembly. Within a few hours he will be the — or a few 
minutes — he will be the member from Fairview. 
 
But I do want to welcome, I’m sure on Andy’s behalf and on all 
of our behalf, a number of those from Andy’s family who can 
be here today: Tasha and Alecia, Andy’s two daughters, 
welcome; Parker Anderson, and Andy’s very close partner and 
friend, Angela Anderson, welcome; Andy’s aunt and uncle, 
Ann and Orest Woytiuk, I think from North Battleford if I’m 
not mistaken; and a very special welcome to Andy’s mother, 
Sandra Iwanchuk from North Battleford. Welcome to you all. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Seated in your gallery this afternoon are two individuals who 
are here from Brazil who are here talking about the ethanol 
industry. And their names are Mr. Carlos Hiese and Mr. 
Angelos Santos. And their accompanied today by Lionel 
Labelle. And they’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d invite members of the House to recognize them and to 
welcome them to Saskatchewan, to what they said to me is the 
centre of the ethanol in the world today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Welcome to New Members of the Legislative Assembly 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and welcome back. It’s 
a fact of our profession, Mr. Speaker, that from time to time we 
lose members. On the other hand, it’s always encouraging to 
see that new, worthy citizens are willing to step forward in the 
service of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m pleased therefore to make the first member’s statement of 
this new session to welcome our new MLAs — the members 
for Saskatoon Fairview and the member for Battleford-Cut 
Knife. Both have big shoes to fill; both, we are confident, will 
be able to do so. 
 
I know all current members will join me in welcoming them 
and helping them in any way possible until they learn the ropes. 
 
Of course on this side we’re delighted to see the member from 
Fairview. He is a former union leader and we will put his 
negotiating and consensus building skills to good use. After all 
he built pretty good consensus in the by-election, doubling the 
votes of both of his opponents. The opposition’s win-Saskatoon 
strategy obviously needs some fine tuning. 
 
Regardless of political stripe, Mr. Speaker, we’re all colleagues 
in the service of Her Majesty. And in the spirit of collegiality 
we welcome the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. Now that 
the tough decision is over, or tough election is over, he will of 
course have time to review the Sask Party policy manual. 
Interesting reading, I’d predict. 
 
Welcome, and we look forward to the active involvement of 
both members. 
 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pending War in the Middle East 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, today the world stands on 
the precipice of another major war in the Middle East — a war 
that seems inevitable. As we speak, 280,000 British and 
American men and women are preparing to risk their lives to 
defend the peace and freedom that we enjoy each and every day 
in our province, freedoms that are the very foundation of this 
Legislative Assembly and of our society. 
 
While we can debate the merits of the decision to go to war in 
the Persian Gulf against a brutal dictator who harbours terrorists 
and supports their murderous actions, we cannot but honour the 
courage of those many thousands of young soldiers who stand 
ready for battle in defence of their countries and ours. 
 
There is speculation that as early as tonight or tomorrow there 
could be families in the United States and Britain who might be 
mourning the loss of a loved one, a son or daughter, a father or 
mother, who has made the ultimate sacrifice to defend the 
freedom that we so often take for granted. We pray that God’s 
protection will be upon these brave young soldiers and those 
who lead them. May they serve their nations with honour and 
then come home safely with the threat of terrorism reduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that all members also pray that the human 
carnage will be minimal and that innocent lives will be spared. 
If there is war, we pray it will be quickly replaced by peace. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Employment Statistics 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 
economy continues to grow and job numbers continue to climb. 
Recent StatsCanada figures show that 475,500 people were 
working in the province last month — an increase of 10,600 
over February 2002. This marks the 10th consecutive month 
that jobs have increased and it is the second highest February on 
record. 
 
Once again these job numbers demonstrate a resilient and 
diverse Saskatchewan economy. Our resource industry is 
particularly strong and recent tax and royalty changes have had 
an impact upon it with record drilling, record land sales, and 
more jobs over the past several months. 
 
Resource industries such as oil, gas, mining, and forestry 
recorded a gain of 1,200 jobs compared to February of last year. 
As well, non-agricultural employment increased by 12,700 
while youth employment increased in the province by 6,200. 
 
February 2002, Mr. Speaker, was a very good month. We had 
the third lowest unemployment rate in Canada, well below the 
national average of 8 per cent. The solid growth that we’ve seen 
over the last 10 months is proof positive that Saskatchewan’s 
future is exciting, promising, and wide open. 
 
(13:45) 
 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have many hollow slogans; 
but, Mr. Speaker, the Calvert government has a plan, and it is 
working. It is . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. I would 
like to advise the member for Regina Dewdney that his last 
statement was out of order, referring to a member by a name. 
The member is out of order and ought not to do that again. 
 

Junior Achievement Awards 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
fortunate to attend the Northern Saskatchewan Junior 
Achievement Business Hall of Fame 2003 awards on March 15. 
The evening was to recognize the achievements of 15 groups of 
students from Saskatoon, North Battleford, and Prince Albert, 
as well as the contribution of the volunteers in the company 
program. Sixteen awards were given to distinguished 
individuals and groups for their efforts in meeting an array of 
criteria. 
 
The mission statement for Junior Achievement is to inspire and 
educate young Canadians to value free enterprise and 
understand business and economics and develop in 
entrepreneurial and leadership skills. 
 
The evening also recognized a strong promoter and supporter of 
the Junior Achievement company program. Ms. Shirley Ryan 
was honoured as the 2002-2003 inductee in the Business Hall of 
Fame. Ms. Ryan is the executive director of the North 
Saskatchewan Business Association and has contributed a great 
deal to the business community as well as the Junior 
Achievement program. 
 
I would like to congratulate not only the award winners from 
the Junior Achievement program, but all those who participated 
in the program — students, volunteers, and sponsors. You are 
all winners just by taking part in such an educational activity. 
 
I would also like to congratulate Ms. Shirley Ryan for being 
acknowledged for her contributions as a dedicated supporter by 
her induction into the Business Hall of Fame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Z99 Radiothon 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, Z is the last letter in the English 
alphabet, the first in radio. Z99’s CC, Lorie, and Buzz were in 
the zone for their 16th annual 36-hour radiothon, March 13 and 
14. 
 
After a zippy start from zero, great zeal was demonstrated by 
all. No zombies here, Mr. Speaker. The Z’s trio were zestful. 
Some even thought they were like Zeus. The General Hospital 
neonatal intensive care unit is rumoured to have been quoted, 
“Zounds.” The more than $160,111 will be used not for zircons 
but for a neonatal X-ray unit, three infant breathing machines, 
and an incubator. 
 
Zany? No. Was zymurgy involved? Maybe. Was the zodiac 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

aligned? Definitely. CC, Lori and Buzz, Z99, and the listening 
audience reached their zenith by zero hour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been my honour to recognize these heroes 
for some years now. With joy and pride I say to all, but 
especially to Z99’s CC, Lori and Buzz, thank you and very well 
done this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Women’s Achievement Awards 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on March 
8, International Women’s Day, I had the privilege of attending a 
gala evening in Humboldt to celebrate rural women’s 
achievements. And I might add that one of the members from 
across the way was there too, and I think it’s Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. So I was really happy to see her attend this evening 
also. 
 
The evening was sponsored by the Partners for Rural Family 
Support, and Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan, Lynda Haverstock, was on hand to present the 
awards. 
 
A total of 28 women were nominated in six different categories. 
The Arts and Culture award went to Maxine Moore, a 
well-known Humboldt musician nominated for her outstanding 
contribution to music in Humboldt and district for over 20 
years. 
 
The award for Women in Sports went to Valerie Weseen who in 
conjunction with her husband, Wade, established a basketball 
program in Lake Lenore School that is second to none in the 
province. 
 
The Education award went to Majella Gareau for her tireless 
and valuable work in the school system. She is presently the 
director of student services for the Wakaw School Division. 
 
In the Business category, Val McNally of Humboldt was 
chosen as the successful nominee. Val owns and operates Sixth 
Avenue Stylists. As well, she is an enthusiastic volunteer in the 
community of Humboldt. 
 
The Volunteer award went to Ruth Hiebert. Ruth has been 
active on many boards and organizations over the years. She 
was a founding member of the local Canadian Diabetes 
Association. 
 
And Judy Ulrich was selected to receive the Agriculture award. 
Judy and her husband Paul operate a mixed farming operation 
and Judy acts as a director involved in research and pork 
production. 
 
I’d like to extend my congratulations to all nominees and award 
winners. We appreciate your contributions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Reality Television 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the most popular 

television shows these days seem to be what are called reality 
TV: Survivor, numbers one through infinity; Joe Millionaire 
about a guy who’s neither a millionaire nor a Joe; Bachelorette 
about which the less said the better. The only common thread to 
these shows is that they involve a contest in which someone 
wins a prize after passing a series of tests such as speaking a 
complete English sentence or wearing a wet swimsuit. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, to the so-called grassroots party 
opposite, that if they really want to be popular with the folk 
they should create their own reality TV show and they should 
call it Joe Candidate. 
 
The show, like the party, would be simple. It would feature a 
secret group called the executive council which would interview 
various Joes or Grants who want to be Sask Party candidates. 
They would be given quizzes on Alberta and Ireland, not 
Saskatchewan. They would have to explain in 20 words or less 
how they would increase services while lowering taxes. And 
they would have to be cute. 
 
All these shows have a trick, Mr. Speaker. For Joe Candidate 
the trick of course would be that none of the candidates would 
qualify. All would be rejected because, like Grant Schmidt, they 
would be unworthy for reasons kept secret until the last minute. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Keeping Young People in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, thank goodness for the choir 
from Swift Current. At least there was something worth 
listening to yesterday. There sure wasn’t anything in the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I listened to those very, very talented 
young people, I couldn’t help but wonder how many of them 
are planning on staying in Saskatchewan and what is this 
government, this NDP government, doing to help keep them in 
our province. And unfortunately the answer is again, absolutely 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the NDP Saskatchewan now has suffered 
through 16 consecutive quarters of population loss — our 
young people leaving Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in yesterday’s Speech from the Throne, there 
was absolutely nothing that would encourage these young 
people to stay in our wonderful province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP content to drive good people out 
of our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, listening to the Leader of 
the Opposition, I wish the choir were back here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the Leader 
of the Opposition, I had some opportunity yesterday to speak 
with a number of the members of that wonderful choir that were 
here. And I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition that many 
of those young people are planning a great future in 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . particularly . . . particularly, Mr. 
Speaker, in their region of this great province where we’re 
seeing some phenomenal economic development and growth. 
Mr. Speaker, we talked yesterday in the Throne Speech about 
expanding this economy — expanding an economy that 
excludes no one, expanding an economy based on what we’re 
seeing: record job growth, Mr. Speaker, record job growth in 
the last 10 months, record growth in the oil and gas industry, 
which will be particularly important in the Swift Current region. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I tell you this: we have only just begun. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the Premier, 
the young people that tell me they want to stay in Saskatchewan 
say they’ll do so if we win the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s because the 
Saskatchewan Party has a plan to grow our province and the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) doesn’t like it much because we 
found out they don’t believe in growing Saskatchewan. The 
NDP member for Regina Wascana Plains has said that it’s 
statistically unattainable to grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 in 
10 years. And she nods her head today in agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the average rate of growth for Canada. So 
that member and her government is saying Saskatchewan 
cannot even be average. We don’t accept that, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP may believe that Saskatchewan can’t grow, but the 
Saskatchewan Party believes that we can grow and we have a 
plan to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we believe in Saskatchewan; 
why doesn’t the NDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Let me correct what the Leader of the 
Opposition just offered to the House. He suggests that they have 
a plan. No, Mr. Speaker, they have a slogan. They have a slogan 
with very little plan behind it, at least very little plan that they 
are willing to expose. 
 
Now let me tell you, Mr. Speaker . . . let me tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, what a vision and a plan can accomplish — a great 
vision, and a hardworking plan. Let me tell you what it can 
accomplish. It can accomplish the kind of headline we see in 
January of this year, 2003, where right here in Saskatchewan 
the headline says, “More youth finding jobs.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And the article reports the fact, the fact 
youth employment — get this, Mr. Speaker — youth 
employment is at a 10-year high in Saskatchewan. That’s the 
result, Mr. Speaker, of a vision and a plan that is balanced and 
sustainable. It is not the result of a bunch of sloganeering and 
negativism that we hear from across the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the idea of the NDP 
government to create jobs for young people is for them to get a 
government job. All others need not apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has made it perfectly clear 
through their Throne Speech that they’ve run out of gas. They 
have no new ideas; they have no vision; there’s no leadership, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP is content to stand by and do nothing while thousands 
of people, primarily young people, leave this province. Mr. 
Speaker, they just stand there and they wave goodbye. That’s 
not good enough. 
 
Yesterday’s Speech from the Throne was an admission of 
failure by the NDP. They aren’t even trying any more. They’ve 
given up; they’ve thrown in the towel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last . . . in the last year Saskatchewan suffered its 
worst year of out-migration in a decade, and most of those 
people were young people. Why was there nothing in 
yesterday’s Speech from the Throne to encourage young people 
to stay in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Leader of the Opposition says this is 
a government that’s out of gas. Mr. Speaker, oil and gas drilling 
up by 68 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This is not a government that’s out of 
gas; this is not a province out of gas. This is a province full of 
energy looking forward to its future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me just say this, let me just say this: sloganeering won’t 
get us there; negativism won’t get us there; empty promises and 
unsustainable promises won’t get us there. What’ll get us there 
is a solid plan, and a government committed to that plan, 
working with the people and communities of Saskatchewan. 
That’s what’s going to get us there, Mr. Speaker — not the kind 
of rhetoric we’re hearing from across the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Participation in Potato Industry 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I happen to live in a riding 
where they’ve started drilling for gas. And you know what? The 
licence plates of the vehicles are Alberta plates. The people that 
work for the companies live in Medicine Hat. They may have 
been born in Saskatchewan. They live in Medicine Hat; they’re 
paying their taxes in Medicine Hat. Those are the facts. 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are asking two questions. 
The first one’s, when is the election? And I would ask the 
Premier to answer that soon. But they’re also saying, why is it 
that a minister who loses $28 million for the taxpayers of this 
province, has to admit that he misled the people of the province, 
why isn’t he held accountable? Why isn’t this minister fired? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that minister is still in cabinet and people are 
saying that they can’t believe that this is the best the NDP has to 
offer. They can’t believe the Premier said this is one of his best 
ministers and that minister will stay in his caucus. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister is not out one single dime, but the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan are out $28 million. So to the 
Premier I ask, why did he not fire the minister who squandered 
$28 million and then tried to cover it up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Aboriginal Affairs has stood in this House as 
recently as yesterday and made apology for mistakes that were 
made in the late 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the opposition would ever care to listen to an 
answer in this House, one might be able to answer the question. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has apologized 
but I will not apologize to that Leader of the Opposition or that 
party for keeping the minister, the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote, in the cabinet of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I will tell you why; I will tell you 
why, Mr. Speaker. This is a member that brings to this cabinet 
tremendous experience. This is the minister that served as 
minister of Industry and Resources, as we saw job numbers 
climb in this province. This is the minister who in Industry and 
Resources has seen the phenomenal growth in the oil and gas 
industry. This is a minister who brings to the cabinet table the 
voice and concern of Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition, why doesn’t 
he stand up and apologize for his performance, his party’s 
performance in government for $15 billion? Let’s hear an 
apology for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s more evidence 
out today of how bad this rotten potato deal really was in the 
province. Former NDP minister Carol Teichrob says she 
warned the NDP — warned the former premier, warned current 
cabinet ministers — about how rotten this deal was back in ’97, 
but they didn’t listen. She says the Sask Water Board was 
saying, keep away from this deal, but it went forward anyway, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

So who was driving it, Mr. Speaker? Who was driving this 
deal? Well the Sask Water president in The StarPhoenix article 
this morning says, and I quote: 
 

Eldon Lautermilch (and I’m quoting, Eldon Lautermilch) 
was a driving force in the process. 

 
He was the driving force, Mr. Speaker, in a deal that cost 
taxpayers $28 million and resulted in a six-year cover-up that 
the Premier has already admitted to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, the question is this: why is that 
minister still in his cabinet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member from Swift Current asked the question about who’s 
driving the deal in growing the potato industry in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is the question he asked. And I say 
to the member opposite, demonstrate for me today that the 
industry in that part of the province isn’t progressive. 
Demonstrate for me today, Mr. Speaker, that the potato industry 
in the Lucky Lake area of the province, Mr. Speaker, isn’t 
growing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s take a look at it, Mr. Speaker. We have a $250 million . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, when he asked a question 
about who’s driving economic development in this province — 
a good question that the member asks — the people who drive 
economic development, Mr. Speaker, in the province today are 
on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And driving economic development in the 
gas and the oil, Mr. Speaker. People who are driving in the 
agricultural area with ethanol development, Mr. Speaker, is 
who’s driving the economy. Those people today in the livestock 
area, Mr. Speaker, are driving the economy. 
 
And the response to the member opposite, when he asks the 
question who’s driving the economy in Saskatchewan: this 
government is driving the economy, Mr. Speaker, in this 
province and we’re going to continue to drive it because we’re 
going to continue to be the government on this side, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — First it was the minister responsible for CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) and now it’s 
the Deputy Premier of the province that characterizes the 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) debacle as a success. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of taxpayers, if losing 28 million of 
their hard-earned dollars and then lying to the people of the 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

 

province about it for six years, if that’s an NDP success, then 
we say, bring on the election before they have a failure, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the deputy minister to the Premier’s 
own report on this scandal recently indicated that the whole 
potato strategy hinged on getting a french-fry plant as its 
anchor. But here’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. Sask Water sent 
their potatoes to be tested and they fried up black — and 
apparently there’s not a great market for black french fries, Mr. 
Speaker. But that was in 1997. Plenty of time for the 
government to pull back to save the taxpayers’ money, but they 
didn’t do that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question is to the government opposite: 
would the minister who thought cornering the black french-fry 
market was a good idea please explain that to the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the party opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, had any idea or any understanding of how the 
agricultural industry worked, they would have paid attention to 
the report that was provided, Mr. Speaker, on why in fact 
potatoes may go black in a given year. They might know that, 
Mr. Speaker, if they knew. And because of a particular growing 
season that we had in 1997, Mr. Speaker, as the member 
opposite would know . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
would have read the report fully the member opposite would 
have seen, as was provided by the processor who was prepared 
to process the potatoes in Saskatchewan, he said, Mr. Speaker, 
that the particular growing season of that given year, the 
reasons why those potatoes couldn’t be used, Mr. Speaker, for 
the french-fry plant — because of the large sugar content that 
they had which was respectful, Mr. Speaker, only to the fact of 
what the weather conditions were in the province. Exactly what 
they say in the report. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, had you read the report, you 
would see, Mr. Speaker, today why in fact the potatoes were 
black. Now we grow potatoes, Mr. Speaker, for other parts of 
Canada, Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with answers like that the 
Deputy Premier and the NDP are going to be facing a long, long 
summer of mosquitoes and black fries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Premier cites a report that talks about how these 
french fries simply don’t . . . the potatoes don’t make good 
french fries because they fry up black. And he says, well if the 
opposition would have read that . . . The question, Mr. Speaker, 
the question is: why didn’t the cabinet read that report and put a 
stop to . . . 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s the question. So again, Mr. Speaker, the 
report was clear. The company in question said they didn’t have 
an interest in building a plant here because the fries fried up 
black. And the question to the minister is this: why in the world 
did the NDP proceed with the plan, lose $28 million in the 
bargain, and then cover it up when they had this information all 
along? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member 
from Swift Current makes a joke, makes a joke, Mr. Speaker, 
about the value of the industry today in the Lucky Lake area. 
Makes a joke of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I have correspondence, Mr. Speaker, here, I have 
correspondence here, Mr. Speaker, from people who are 
actually involved in growing potatoes in that part of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. And what are people saying who are 
growing potatoes in that side of the province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well one of the farmers from there says, Mr. Speaker, that in 
the future if we in fact could provide additional irrigation and 
storage for potatoes, they would grow an additional 400 acres, 
Mr. Speaker, in that area — which says, Mr. Speaker, today that 
those sheds and that irrigation system are providing a 
tremendous opportunity for that side of the province. 
 
And what does the member from Swift Current do? He stands 
up and jokes about an industry, Mr. Speaker, that’s making a 
difference on that side of the province. And he tries to pretend, 
Mr. Speaker, that he knows something about potatoes. And he 
knows very little about potatoes, Mr. Speaker, because on that 
side of the House they know very little about agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, never mind . . . 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the opposition doesn’t need to 
try to make a joke out of this government. They’re very 
competent in doing that themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Very competent in doing that themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s how much sense this potato strategy made. 
In order to fulfill their obligations to the company testing the 
french fry, testing the potatoes, the government wound up 
having to buy about a million pounds of American potatoes — 
because, of course, the ones from Saskatchewan were frying up 
black. 
 
They used Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars to do that, 
presumably. And the question to the Deputy Premier or the 
minister — who’s stopped answering any questions at all in this 
— the question is: how much did that cost taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift 
Current asks a very important question and he makes a 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

comment, Mr. Speaker, about who is the joke in this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. Who’s the joke, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I say to the member opposite today, he just needs to 
examine, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening in the Melville 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You want to know, Mr. Speaker, about what Saskatchewan 
people are thinking about which is the joke party here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? It’s right over there, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s who the joke party is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, yes, we brought some 
additional potatoes into Saskatchewan to meet the process 
requirements. Absolutely, we did, in the same way that we 
would import to Saskatchewan malt barley to meet the 
obligations that we have on the malt barley side, Mr. Speaker, 
and in the same way in this province that we would bring in 
additional wheat to make the flour milling industry in 
Saskatchewan whole, if we have to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that goes to show what very little that member opposite 
from Swift Current knows about the economy and the industry 
of agriculture in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Deputy Premier is that 
confident in his argument, fair enough. And he ought to whisper 
to the gentleman sitting beside him and encourage him to call 
an election and we’ll leave it up to the people to decide, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would wager . . . And I’d be willing to wager, Mr. 
Speaker, that in 28 days after that, we’ll be switching sides, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The question to the Deputy Premier was this, the 
question was this: because the potatoes fried up black, the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer apparently had to pay — had to pay — 
for American potatoes to be shipped to this company. And the 
question to the Deputy Premier was simple: how much did that 
cost the taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member knows the 
answer to that question. A part of the cost of the overall debt is 
part of that expense, Mr. Speaker. The member knows that, Mr. 
Speaker — he knows that. And he just needs to review it in the 
Crown Corporations so he has the answer to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I say to the member opposite this, Mr. Speaker. There 
should be no concern by the members on that side of the House 
about the expedience of which they’ll be on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, because it will be a long, long day in 
Saskatchewan before anybody from that side of the House ever 
gets over here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say to the members opposite, you just need to take a look at 
what’s happening in Saskatchewan land today. You just need to 
examine what’s happened in the constituency of Melville today, 
Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan people will speak out across 

the piece about the way in which you people are dealing with 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would just like to remind the 
member from Yorkton, the Deputy Premier, the Minister of 
Agriculture to keep all of his remarks, all the time, to the Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Treaty Land Entitlement Claims 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Deputy Premier, the Minister of 
Agriculture. Earlier this month, the Saskatchewan landowners, 
lessees’ rights group invited the minister to attend a public 
information meeting on the issue of Crown grazing lease 
renewals. That meeting will take place in Tompkins this Friday, 
the 21st. 
 
At the time of the invitation, the minister said that due to the 
numbers in the Legislative Assembly he could only attend the 
Tompkins meeting if a member of the opposition also attended. 
Mr. Speaker, I am attending that meeting this Friday but I 
understand that the minister has now told the group that he will 
not attend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the integrity of the lease renewal process is of 
tremendous importance to the lessees and will have a 
potentially significant impact for the province. Mr. Speaker, the 
question is: why won’t the minister attend this public meeting 
and openly discuss this very important issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I appreciate the question that the member 
has asked. And the member, I believe, was at the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 
as well when I answered this question on behalf of SARM. And 
I believe he heard me indicate why I wouldn’t be coming. 
 
I will have officials at the meeting on Friday as I’d indicated. 
And I’d intended, Mr. Speaker, to already have a conversation 
with the group from that part of Saskatchewan but my schedule 
had changed and I’ve not been able to do that. I now have a 
meeting scheduled. I now have a meeting scheduled, Mr. 
Speaker, with that group early next week and we’re going to 
have a long discussion about the importance of how we deal 
with the TLE (treaty land entitlement) in the province. And I’ll 
have officials at the meeting on Friday, Mr. Speaker, as I’d 
indicated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Several planned meetings have been brokered. 
Several planned meeting dates have been broken, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’ll be talking to the members of this organization as of 
Friday — maybe even sooner. We’ll find out if they have a 
commitment from this minister for a meeting in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the Treaty Land Entitlement . . . 
 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the 
Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement negotiated between the 
First Nations, the federal government, and the province of 
Saskatchewan, the province has 90 days from the time it is 
notified of the land claim to determine third party stakeholder 
interests and to indicate the government’s intention with regard 
to claims settlement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 90-day period for the remaining Poundmaker 
First Nation claims, involving thousands of acres of Crown 
land, has now expired. As clearly spelled in the TLE agreement, 
the province ought to have responded to both claims by now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: has the 
province of Saskatchewan responded to the Poundmaker First 
Nation’s last two claims? If so, what was the response? And if 
not, Mr. Speaker, why is the province violating the Treaty Land 
Entitlement Agreement which they supposedly negotiated with 
these people in good faith? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The member from Swift Current, Mr. 
Speaker, asks a . . . not from Swift Current, the member from 
Maple Creek, Mr. Speaker, asks a very important question. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we have an agreement with treaty land 
. . . under the treaty land entitlement, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve 
negotiated that agreement in good faith with First Nations 
people. But, by the same token, we have people today who 
represent . . . who that member represents, who are ranchers and 
farmers in that very area of the province, Mr. Speaker, who 
have come to me and said, we’d like to have access to that land 
for a longer period of time; we’d like you to renew the lease 
again for 33 years. 
 
And we’ve said to those farm groups and those farm 
organizations that we have an agreement that we need to honour 
with the First Nations. Farmers want us to take that land, Mr. 
Speaker, and renew it with them over a period of 33 years. First 
Nations people want that lease turned over to them 
immediately. This is a very delicate issue, Mr. Speaker, with 
farmers and First Nations people in Saskatchewan. And it is not 
about picking winners and losers, Mr. Speaker, as that party 
would do. It’s not about picking winners and losers, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s about finding a fair negotiated settlement with 
First Nations and ranchers in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a 
statement on the circumstances in Iraq. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY PREMIER 
 

Canadian Policy on Conflict in Iraq 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 
colleagues. As noted in yesterday’s Speech from the Throne, we 

join today with the hopes and prayers of all those who seek 
peace, justice, and security for all nations and peoples of the 
world. 
 
We believe that it is essential that in all matters of international 
security that Canada establish its own foreign policy and uphold 
the role of the United Nations. We loathe the undemocratic 
nature of Iraq . . . of the Iraq government and its aggressive 
actions. 
 
We support full United Nations intervention to ensure that Iraq 
does not jeopardize the peace and security of others. We also 
support international efforts to stop terrorism, the most 
abhorrent and cowardly of actions of humankind. 
 
It is for these reasons that we believe Canada’s engagement in 
Iraq must be supported by a resolution of the UN (United 
Nations) Security Council. Not to do so is to undermine the 
important continuing role of the United Nations. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I’d like to move first reading of two Bills. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Saskatoon Fairview 
Constituency By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 1, The 
Saskatoon Fairview Constituency By-election Act, be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Saskatoon Fairview 
Constituency By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move that the 
second reading of the Bill be . . . Bill No. 1 be now considered. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Battleford-Cut Knife 
Constituency By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2, The 
Battleford-Cut Knife Constituency By-election Act, be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Battleford-Cut Knife 
Constituency By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move second 
reading of this Bill No. 2. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Saskatoon Fairview 
Constituency By-election Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Battleford-Cut Knife 
Constituency By-election Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Saskatoon Fairview 
Constituency By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move that Bill 
No. 1, The Saskatoon Fairview Constituency By-election Act, 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Battleford-Cut Knife 
Constituency By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move that Bill 
No. 2, The Battleford-Cut Knife Constituency By-election Act, 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I am pleased to advise the members 
that Her Honour is here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 14:42 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 1 - The Saskatoon Fairview Constituency 

By-election Act 
Bill No. 2 - The Battleford-Cut Knife Constituency 

By-election Act 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:43. 
 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBERS OF 
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The House will come to order. 
 
Hon. Members, pursuant to an Act of this Legislative Assembly 
respecting a by-election in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Fairview which was assented to today, Mr. Andy Iwanchuk is 
authorized to take his seat as a member for the constituency of 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to 
present to you Mr. Andy Iwanchuk, member for the 
constituency of Saskatoon Fairview, who has taken the oath and 
signed the roll and now claims the right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Iwanchuk, welcome to the Legislative 
Assembly and I hope that your time here will be one that serves 
to be a record of honour to yourself and your constituents. 
 
Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, pursuant to an Act of this 
Legislative Assembly respecting the by-election in the 
constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife, which was assented to 
today, Mr. Walter Lorenz is authorized to take his seat as a 
member for the constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present 
to you Mr. Wally Lorenz of the constituency of Battleford-Cut 
Knife, who has taken the oath and signed the roll and now 
claims his right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Lorenz, welcome to the Legislative 
Assembly and I hope that your time here will be one that serves 
to be a record of honour to yourself and to your constituency. 
 
Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour for me to 
be moving the Throne Speech of 2003. I’ll be, of course, 
moving the motion in an official form just after the end of my 
presentation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I start, I would like to first of all thank the 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

 

Premier for asking me to do the motion at this important day in 
the legislature. And as well, Mr. Speaker, as I do my thanks, as 
I watch the new members, you know, coming in, I watched the 
member from of course Cutknife-Battleford and also from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
I did make an announcement last year, Mr. Speaker, that I 
would indeed be leaving politics and that this was going to be 
my last term. And you never know, Mr. Speaker, I may have 
one more chance at the Throne Speech, but for this one I am 
thinking that it . . . indeed it’ll be quite enjoyable. 
 
It was . . . I’d like to say in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
say a special thank you to my . . . to the people of the province, 
you know, for the great institution, you know, of democracy 
that we have established in this province since 1905. And the 
establishment of tremendous principles of what we see 
universally through the world. 
 
And as well, I’d like to thank my constituents from the 
Cumberland constituency who have put me on the floor of this 
legislature now for four consecutive terms. And I have been 
very, very proud to represent them over this period in time. 
 
As well, I’d like to thank my parents. My late mother, who died 
when I was 16 years old, often dreamed that I would become a 
teacher, you know, at one point. And it was very true. As I 
evolved and developed, I spent 19 years in the field of 
education before my 17 years in politics. And what she did not 
know that later on I would become, you know, the first 
Aboriginal person to be a minister of the Crown in the province 
of Saskatchewan and that is what I’m proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And, Mr. Speaker, when my mother dreamed 
that I would become a teacher, she did not think that I would 
become a minister also in charge of Education, you know, at 
one point in this province. And I was very pleased to do that in 
regards to northern areas where I’m from, which is my own 
areas, as well as with First Nations and Métis people in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was also going to say a special thanks to my 
family. I have of course seven sisters and one brother. And 
interesting, I lost two brothers when I was . . . both of them at 
23 years old. Of my sisters, I have . . . In my family, we have 
quite a few people with education degrees and one with a 
Bachelor of Administration, one had taken law. So we’ve had 
quite a successful family in regards to public service, in regards 
to being successful in the schooling system and in work. So I’m 
always very, very proud of my own family and their strong 
support that they have given me over the years, you know, as 
the politician, you know, of the family. 
 
And as well, getting into the family, I know that my sister’s . . . 
niece is here, Sasha, and as well with my wife Linda, who is in 
the west gallery. And I may say that, you know, as all MLAs, 
we know the importance of spouses — you know, wives and 
husbands — as we go on doing our work. I mean, it’s . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s not only as we deal 
with the stresses of politics. I mean there’s everything that you 
deal with: you know, different cases of abuse; you know, you’re 
dealing with the issues that we’ve dealt with on health, on 
health reform; you know, the privatization debates that I went 
through. On all of the things that we go . . . going through, that 
you always need a sense of support. Of course you have strong 
support from your colleagues; you have strong support from the 
public. 
 
But it’s also very important to have that strength that you get 
everyday as you wake up and your wife is there and your 
spouse is there to give you that support. It’s not only a place of 
emotional support, it’s a case of the knowledge the person 
brings to the floor because, as a resident of the province, he is 
part of the history of the province. And also the skills that they 
bring, you know, as . . . in regards to their own work. My wife 
has worked in the field of education for many, many years — 
teacher education as well as being a teacher in northern 
Manitoba, northern Saskatchewan, and throughout the 
provinces. 
 
So I’d like to say a special thank you to my wife for all the 
years of the support that she has given me and also for being the 
great partner in raising two of our daughters, Koonu and Danis, 
who are . . . When I talk to them they say: Dad, you know, as 
we were growing up, nine and ten years old, we knew that you 
were in teaching earlier on but we kind of forget that, all we 
have ever known you as is a politician and a dad. So in that 
sense, you know, the great aspect, the family life that a person 
brings, you know, to the legislature, is an extremely . . . an 
integral part of what we do. So again, thank you to my wife in 
that regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I will be doing the overview. I 
will be interjecting some of my speech with due respect to all 
languages of the world and also to all indigenous languages in 
this province, in Canada. I’ll be interspersing my speech as well 
as . . . in Cree, in the Cree language. And I’ll be doing that in 
the major sections. 
 
I’ll be doing my first section on the issue of economic 
development and talk about the economic development aspect 
of the Throne Speech and as well as the history of economic 
development, particularly as it pertains to Aboriginal people in 
the North and, to a certain extent, the province as well. But I 
thought that I would do that aspect, and as well, on the case of 
Aboriginal people in the North. I wanted to get into a little bit 
more in-depth, specific detail on the accomplishments of 
building with people. 
 
We had a policy not only of building partnerships with people, 
Mr. Speaker, but also we had a policy of being wide open in 
this province, of being inclusive — open and inclusiveness was 
the essence of our government. 
 
And in regards to the fact that many governments in the past 
have tried to make a breakthrough in regards to northern 
development and in regards to working with First Nations and 
Métis people, I thought that I was very proud of our record in 
that regard. So I’ll be dealing with that aspect as well. 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

Now as I looked at the first issue on economic development, we 
know that part of our development is the case of resources 
development. The first two I want to deal with are mining and 
forestry. On the mining sector, as I was growing up I had heard 
stories about the development of mining in our area. My 
grandfather, who used to work in Flin Flon at the mine, had 
come from Cumberland and had worked in Flin Flon and was 
working on transporting ore. He had gotten injured on the job at 
that time and later on he caught . . . he got sick and had TB 
(tuberculosis). 
 
And it was quite the thing that as I looked at the mining sector 
there was people in my background that had done the mining 
sector thing and my grandfather, you know, was obviously one 
of them. We were, as Aboriginal people, people involved in the 
finding of the ore. It was Aboriginal people who found the ore 
in Flin Flon, one of the longest-serving mines in the history of 
this province. Sometimes the benefit does not, you know, go 
back to them but that’s the way it was and that’s what I had 
heard when I was growing up in Cumberland. 
 
And it’s very, very important as I talk about this that I bring in 
the aspect of relationships with people. You know, the question 
of inclusion, inclusion of Aboriginal people and sometimes a 
history of racism, you know, that stems in on that regard, and 
sometimes that we get too overly rigid in our policies in regard. 
I remember my dad telling me about visiting his dad who had 
TB. And my father went over there and had travelled all the 
way by . . . He first of all had to go from Cumberland to The 
Pas, and had gone in on the train and had come to P.A. (Prince 
Albert) to see his father who was at the TB clinic. 
 
But with the policies of the day they were not allowed to see 
him. He had to leave there without seeing his father. And after 
he left, not long after that, his father died. So he was never even 
to see his father and where his dad was buried. He ended up 
being buried in P.A. We finally found the place where he was 
buried, you know, later on. And it was those types of situations, 
you know, that I dealt with when I was growing up, that I heard 
stories about that were very, very important in terms of the 
building of self-determination on my part. 
 
You know, my great-grandfather had been part of the Métis 
resistance in Red River but also on my mother’s side in 
Batoche. And they were my . . . (Cree) . . . was my . . . we said 
it was my grandfather in Cree. Technically — I checked it out 
— it was my great great-uncle. And he was part of the 
provisional government and he had been stoned to death by the 
Wolseley militia, you know, in regards to the time they came to 
Red River. 
 
So it was ironic that later on in regards to making a strong 
stand, you know, as a Métis person in those days, in trying to 
get . . . to develop the province of Manitoba . . . to try and make 
Manitoba into the province and bringing Métis people into the 
province, that I later on, you know, would be part of the Crown 
myself. That was the irony of history —that as a Métis person I 
became a cabinet minister, you know, of this province. 
 
And it was those types of things that got me going on the 
economic development side. On the side of . . . I saw the 
evolution of welfare. Many of our people were resistant to 
welfare and many of our people who were very proud to be on 

the trapline . . . Although after the development of the dam 
which knocked off over 90 per cent of the wildlife in our area 
on trapping, you know, a lot of the transition to other jobs was 
very, very difficult for people. 
 
And as I was . . . during that, you know, development on 
working on the trapline and dealing with the issues, a lot of the 
things that became to . . . that we saw in regards to the 
environment and the destruction of the dam, you know, the idea 
of sustainability, it was a very, very important lesson for me 
when I was growing up. We had, as Crees in that area, key 
concepts of sustainability. 
 
As a matter of fact we used to have a concept called . . . and in 
Cree we called it kuochinan, meaning that if you destroy your 
environment, it comes back to haunt you; that if you destroy 
and do not take care of your environment, for example, and that 
applied to wildlife . . . if I was hunting and I did not do a 
proper, quick kill and if that animal escaped, then in the long 
run if that animal got disease from that wound that I would have 
given that animal, then I would catch that disease. That was the 
belief that we were raised with and it was called kuochinan in 
Cree. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So many of those things, the fundamental aspect of my being is 
not only the aspect of learning English within the system of 
schools. When I first started school, I had to learn English; I 
didn’t speak any English at all. I mean the first words I learned 
was good morning, sister. And you know, we were taught by 
nuns and it’s a very interesting thing, you know, that language 
issue because I was . . . it was very, very difficult for me as I 
learned to speak English, you know, later on. 
 
Even in high school, when I was graduating with a scholarship 
from high school because of my science and math marks, I was 
in a situation one time when, as I was entering the room, my 
landlady was standing on the doorway. And this is grade 12 in 
the springtime. I’m in track and field and I’m there with my 
friend. I’m introducing my friend and I completely forget how 
to do introductions because the way we were taught is that you 
hold your hand out and you shake a person’s hand and you say, 
how do you do. But I’d been living in P.A. for about two years 
and nobody ever said that. And . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
One member says, they still don’t. And in my mind it was 
racing, well how do I do an introduction. Here I’m going . . . 
I’m winning a scholarship to go to university, how do I do an 
introduction? 
 
And sure enough my landlady sees I’m in a conundrum so she 
says, oh, what’s your friend’s name? And I went whew. And I 
looked around and looked at my friend — I had completely 
forgotten my friend’s name. 
 
So those were the types of situations, you know, that I met up 
with as I . . . as I was out . . . as I was in that situation. 
 
And I noticed as I’m going up here, there is also my sister 
Monica Goulet, whose daughter is Sasha that’s up there on the 
west gallery as well, so I’d like members to again welcome 
them . . . welcome her to the House. 
 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So those are the types of situations that I went 
through. 
 
On mining, therefore, a lot of our people went working in the 
mines in Manitoba. And I said that I lost a brother, one working 
on . . . (inaudible) . . . development, but another one was 
working in the oil rigs up in Swan Hills. That’s where he got 
killed while he was working there. 
 
So a lot of times people figure that our people didn’t travel 
elsewhere to go and work. My father used to work in the DEW 
(distant early warning) line. My father went to work one time in 
the United States to bring money, you know, into the house, up 
in Minneapolis. 
 
So, many people talk about this laziness concept about 
Aboriginal people and it is that type of racism, you know, that I 
had to deal with as I was growing up. And it was something that 
I was very, very strong about, in regards to making sure that 
you were proud of what you did and you spoke up of what you 
did as I was growing up. Because in many cases that’s the way 
it was. 
 
On mining what I was proud of — as we did 10 years of our 
government coming in, I knew that the Blakeney government 
had set a standard in the ’70s on mining — when we first 
started the mining ventures we only had about 5 per cent of the 
people working in the mines. After the construction phase was 
over, then our people were gone. They were not working in the 
developing phases or the maintenance phases of the mines. One 
or two people may be working there. And we saw that in the 
existing mines. 
 
But some of our people, therefore, lived in Thompson, Little 
Lake, and all of those places where mines were taking place. 
And some also worked in the mines up in, north of La Ronge. 
But it was something that I had recognized. 
 
I was very proud when we did the development. And many of 
the Tories at that time did not like affirmative action lease 
agreements. But the Blakeney government brought those in. 
And we continued that process even when the Tories were in, in 
the ’80s when Grant Devine was in. They didn’t pay much 
attention to those policies. 
 
The number of people who worked at the mines, particularly in 
one of the major mines, Key Lake, had dropped. Cluff Lake 
remained not bad at about over 40 per cent. But on that one, it 
had dropped to about 20 per cent. 
 
And when we started government — when we took over 
government — there was approximately 500 people in the 
mines. At our highest level we achieved close to 1,000 people 
on the mines. So that was a very important aspect. You could 
double the numbers over a 10-year period in the people who 
worked at the mines. 
 
A lot of people said, oh the Aboriginal people don’t have 
enough education; oh the Aboriginal people do not have 
industrial training. You know they won’t fit in the time 
orientation and all of that. But actually that was made to be 

false. You know people came in when they were given the 
opportunity on an affirmative action lease agreement. They 
proved that they could work with the best workers in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — An interesting thing too, a bit of the myths 
become shattered through the process — I know that I came in 
from the trapline— just because we had a different time 
orientation, when we did the trapline we used to get up at 4 
o’clock in the morning and get out there with a dog team and 
check the traps all day long and come back. 
 
Just because you start working at 7 o’clock . . . I ended up 
working one time in a furniture factory and I ended up working 
in an assembly line. And I got up at 7 o’clock in the morning. 
Well it was only three hours difference. You know I got up at 4 
o’clock when I was trapping. I’m in the assembly and I had to 
be at work at 7 o’clock in the morning and you know get off at 
4. But I learned both things. I learned to do it properly. And 
trapping I learned to do it properly, you know, when I was in 
the assembly line. But it was those types of things that were 
important. 
 
A lot of people thought that as the Crees got the job in the 
mines in the early days that the Dene people may have those 
problems because they’re a more traditional lifestyle people, 
you know, more on the trapping, fishing, and hunting. It’s 
proven wrong. 
 
We used to have about half a dozen people who were Dene, 
who were working in the mines. We had up to in time, in the 
past 10 years, we’ve had up to 150 people, 200 people, Dene 
people working in the mines. And that was a very important 
development as well, you know, as a Cree making sure that the 
inclusion not only of Crees but Dene people, all peoples, 
including First Nations. Métis was an important part of 
industrial development in the province. 
 
And as I looked at that aspect, that was something I’m very, 
very proud of, that we were able to achieve not only a strong 
position on jobs, but also on business development. 
 
When we took over government, there was about $20 million 
worth of contracts. In the past four years, we’ve added 180 to 
$200 million worth of contracts; 180 to $200 million worth of 
contracts. And you have now people who have done 
international work. We have Chief Cook in the Lac La Ronge 
Indian Band. We have people, you know, that have worked in 
from the west side, from Ile-a-la-Crosse, you know, from 
Buffalo — people who have worked in different situations, 
Patuanak. 
 
They have their corporations and they have worked through in 
regards to being part of the mining development. But it was a 
very, very important aspect, something in terms of development 
that not only was it important to have a job, it was important for 
people to be business developers. And that was a thing that was 
an important aspect of our approach. 
 
The other thing is that we didn’t forget about the environment 
as we did the uranium development. We had probably the 
world-class level in regards to the environment standards, 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

because we included not only the best of the federal and 
provincial government but in terms of regulations. And 
sometimes, we ran into a little bit of a problem there. But what 
happened is that, in the North we developed environmental 
quality committees. We have three committees in the North — 
the Athabasca region, the west side, the east side. And they all 
come . . . There was about 70 people that were involved in the 
process. 
 
They went to visit the mine sites. They went to different sites in 
Ontario. They went to see exactly how the environment was 
being run. They looked at the different concepts of radiation. 
They looked at the different concepts of how they used the dust 
meters. They used many other aspects of uranium mining 
development and they were very, very proud of what they’ve 
learned. 
 
And they’ve become part of not only the provincial process on 
checking on the environment, but also the federal process as 
well. And they played a strong, strong role in regards . . . It’s a 
first of its kind anywhere in the world to have Aboriginal 
people involved in the environmental type of monitoring that 
was there when Blakeney was around the first time, and the 
Tories did away with that aspect when they took power. So 
that’s another aspect. 
 
And the other thing is on forestry. We’ve tried to duplicate the 
forestry effort over time. I know that we had an excellent 
forestry centre, you know, going up in Prince Albert with 
partnerships with Métis and First Nations and the entrepreneurs 
and the educational researchers, you know, of the region. And I 
thought that we’ve been doing quite well, you know, apart from 
the fact that we had the softwood lumber issue which made it 
very difficult for our mills in the North because initially it was 
19 per cent and then it was 29 per cent. I mean, you try and take 
29 per cent away from people on their profit margin, it is 
extremely difficult. 
 
And, you know, at a time when the Americans want to get us 
onside on some other issue relating to the war, you know they 
are putting a tough position on us on softwood lumber as well 
as on the agricultural sector. And it is something that I know in 
regards to the development, that forestry is something that we 
need to do on a sustainable level. 
 
Just for an example on sustainability, a lot of people didn’t 
know that as we’re doing the forest fire fighting sometimes we 
spend $95 million on forest fire fighting in the North. A couple 
of times we went up over 90 million in the past 10 years. But 
the forest fire itself destroys about, oh approximately 10 to 15 
times, depending on what year it is, the number of trees that are 
being harvested. It’s an interesting statistic. 
 
But it is something that we know that a lot of people care very 
much that indeed over the long run you have to have a 
sustainable cut. And we’ve been having a lot of the aspects this 
year as part of our budget. We have of course a carbon 
sequestration project, which is the first of its kind in Canada; 
you know four million trees are going to be planted. And it is 
something to be very, very proud of, that as we do economic 
development, whether it’s, you know, the . . . (inaudible) . . . in 
mining and forestry, we have these type of what I would call 
green power type of situations and green policies. And we’re 

moving on them and making sure that indeed that the word 
sustainability is meaningful. 
 
The other thing on forestry is this. We were the first in Canada. 
There was nobody that touched us in Manitoba, Alberta, 
anywhere, on working with Aboriginal people, on working with 
First Nations and Métis people because not only was it 
important to train people, not only was it important to do 
business development. The last major highest form of 
development in the province is a lease agreement because in the 
lease agreement you handle all of those things, including 
resource management. You do the environmental impact 
assessments along with it and, in that sense it is something 
that’s very, very important for us is that our people in the North 
. . . the only place where it first happened where we have people 
involved in lease agreements making up First Nations is in 
northern Saskatchewan. We have the chiefs starting out in 
Meadow Lake. Up in the west side we now have many 
communities joining forces vis-à-vis the lease agreements. And 
in central location we have La Ronge and the Zelinsky brothers 
joining up with a partner over the long run on a lease 
agreement, Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation, and possible partners 
in the future as well. 
 
And the only other province that came close to us was 
agreement that Quebec government did last year in regards to 
the forestry development. That was the only one that came close 
to what we were attempting to do in this province. And the 
other thing is that we had a . . . we’ve been trying to get the 
federal government for the longest time . . . they used to provide 
about 60 per cent of the money in the North on development. So 
we’ve tried to establish a partnership with them for a long time. 
We spent about 4 and $5 million a year on economic 
development. And we wanted to get at least a northern accord 
with them. 
 
And this past year the member from Athabasca, who is the 
Minister of Northern Affairs, did an agreement — the northern 
accord, with a $20 million agreement. And that $20 million 
agreement was $10 million from the feds. So we get $2 million 
a year from the feds, you know, on a five-year basis. That was 
an important step because a long time ago we used to have a 
federal-provincial agreement . . . so we created a 
Canada-Saskatchewan agreement and that is an important 
aspect in regards on an important standard of policy 
development anywhere in Canada. 
 
Okay, so that . . . it is indeed something that I was proud of as a 
minister having been able to work on it on a developmental 
phase and my friend, you know, from Ile-a-la-Crosse, the 
member of Athabasca, finished the job and away we went in 
that regard. 
 
We also did a bit on . . . some developmental work on fisheries. 
Fisheries was something that was important. I had done fishing 
when I was young — I used to do winter fishing, summer 
fishing — and it was something that I wanted to do was to work 
with the traditional resource users. So we developed a plan 
where we used to do a fish transportation subsidy about . . . 
about $250,000 a year. We have then increased that now to 
$450,000 a year, because there was an uptake with the . . .  
 
When the Minister of the Environment was there, the member 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

 

from Athabasca and myself, we did a joint strategy to try and 
get $700,000 worth of development on lakeshore facilities for 
the fisher people in northern Saskatchewan. And it was very, 
very important for us to be able to then carry that through. 
 
(15:30) 
 
I’ve always challenged the member from the . . . the MP 
(Member of Parliament), Rick Laliberte, in regards to the 
federal level, because I know that they do good work on cost 
sharing on fixing houses; not on building houses though, but on 
fixing houses. And I like the cost-shared agreement on that $10 
million and I thanked the federal government on that. And I was 
proud of their position vis-à-vis the war. 
 
But I wanted them to look seriously at cost sharing some of 
these projects like fisheries. But they didn’t bite . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The fish didn’t bite, one of the members says, 
and the federal government didn’t bite on the $700,000 on the 
fisheries development that we did. 
 
And so it’s that type of thing that was very, very important 
vis-à-vis the traditional resource users. So we were not 
forgetting the major developers. We were looking at traditional 
resource users as well. 
 
On the trapping, I was proud of the record we did as the 
government. We stood by the trappers when the animal rights 
people . . . And some of the animal rights people were properly 
very good people in regards to having practical policies, but 
there was also a more extreme type of animal rights people who 
were there. And we met with them . . . When we did the trip in 
1996 with the trappers and the veterans, the veterans were there 
to support us. 
 
Our line was very simple at that time. When we went to Europe 
with the veterans, First Nations and Métis veterans came along. 
Some of the people thought that it wouldn’t work. But we had 
strategically designed it so we were 10 days prior to the major 
decision at St. Petersburg. We got together and we said, 10 
days, we’re going to hit England first, because that’s where the 
centre of the fur trade. Then we would go to Ireland because 
Ireland was where the presidency of the European Union was. 
Then we wanted to go to Belgium, and then we finished off 
where the centre of a lot of the animal rights people were, was 
at The Hague and also in Amsterdam. 
 
So we did all of that, and we came away with an agreement that 
was acceptable to both sides. We still had debates on this and 
that, but we dealt with the issue of the safety vis-à-vis the 
trappers but also to the animal rights people in a sense that the 
humane trapping standards were established. And it is 
something that we are proud of. 
 
Because a lot of people thought, how do we move Europe? You 
know, these are big countries. How do we get Germany to come 
onside? How do we get the Soviet Union to come onside? By 
the way, the Soviet Union was onside on that one. But how do 
we get the Europeans, because they knew they had strong 
environmental problems and there was strong environmental 
movement in those areas. But we were able to do it and that’s 
one thing I was very, very proud of, you know, as a person, and 
we continue to work with trappers into the future. 

The other aspect is this. I mentioned that it is very important for 
me to say a few words in Cree and I will now say a few words 
in Cree on that which I presented. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was doing the development, I wanted to make 
sure that we were talking and explaining the major aspects in 
Cree. And that is a very, very important aspect of my being too, 
as I did a lot of debates in Cree in the House over the past . . . 
over 16 years. 
 
Now I want get into the aspect of diversification. In the Throne 
Speech we see the many areas of diversification. Now of course 
when we want to do diversification, there’s investments in 
different areas. And the Tories, the Saskatchewan Party, will 
throw in our face the question of SPUDCO. And sure enough, 
that is indeed what they will do. They will pick examples, one 
or two examples, where things may have not gone as best as it 
could and they will utilize those examples to say that that’s the 
way it worked. 
 
They will forget that we play a leadership role vis-à-vis when 
we did the Chunnel in between England and France. SaskTel — 
world experts in regards to the development there — became to 
be recognized internationally for the work that they did. But 
will those members mention that and be proud of Saskatchewan 
workers? Not at all. 
 
You know a lot of our people do work all over the place and 
we’re proud of our workforce. But those Saskatchewan Party, 
they do not like what our workers do. They just pick on the 
ones that fail. 
 
And also on the business side, you know there’s a lot of proper 
businesses that were done over the past few years. And I 
mentioned even Lac La Ronge Indian Band and I met a lot of 
the business development. There’s $200 million worth of 
contracts in northern Saskatchewan — very successful. And 
also hundreds of millions in the province in many sectors. But 
are these people proud of the Saskatchewan entrepreneurs? No. 
No. They keep being negative about it. 
 
As I looked at the SPUDCO issue, it reminded me it was 
connected with the . . . Of course Grant Schmidt was a former 
PC (Progressive Conservative) guy. Well and now he may be a 
former Sask Party guy. And I’d like to say a few words in that 
regard because one of the things that has come through, through 
the Grant Schmidt issue, is the question of democracy. But it’s 
not only a question of democracy; it’s a question of speaking 
the truth. 
 
One of the things that’s very, very important is the question of 
trust that people have on the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. 
And a lot of people are questioning because every single one of 
their members . . . If you look at the time when they were 
working with the Reform Party . . . Oh, oh. The Reform Party 
changed their name to the Canadian Alliance. And the PCs 
changed their name to the Saskatchewan Party. Well they may 
change their name, but they’re the same, the same, same people. 
 
And so when they’re . . . During this development on the 
SPUDCO case and also on the Schmidt case . . . And they’re 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

occurring at approximately the same time. So here you have this 
Schmidt who used to be of course working with Grant Devine. 
And in democracy, the Sask Party said, oh we’re the grassroots 
party. We listen to the people. You know we will listen to all 
our members. We are the party that listens to the community 
level. Tremendous, tremendous speeches being made by Sask 
Party people all through the place. And a lot of them made the 
same speeches when they’re at the Reform Party convention or 
at the Canadian Lions convention or the PC convention. You 
know, they were making all of these speeches all the time. 
 
And I would like to look at some of the things . . . the letters 
that I’ve read. I look at this letter from, on this particular issue, 
from, it was from Wanda Bartlett. It’s a letter to the editor, 
March 11, 2003, Weyburn; Weyburn, Saskatchewan. Now this 
is what she says: of course, she says, that it’s very, very difficult 
to make sense of the Saskatchewan Party these days on exactly 
what they really mean, you know, on democracy and local 
control probably. But this is what she says, quote: 
 

Some, like former Conservative Dan D’Autremont, say 
Schmidt has been given the boot because of his ties to the 
Conservative Party. 

 
My goodness, they are going to wear out their shoes picking out 
everybody who meets that description. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — She goes on to write: 
 

What about MLA Brenda Bakken? What about MLA 
Doreen Eagles who was Grant Devine’s personal assistant? 

 
I’m reading a quote, Mr. Speaker, from a letter. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 
order, the member from Cumberland knows full well that you 
do not use the names of any member of this Assembly. He’s 
been a member since 1986, Mr. Speaker, and is very aware of 
the rules. 
 
I ask that you ask him to retract his comments and his naming, 
and apologizing for doing so when he knows full well what the 
rules are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
the same point of order, the Opposition House Leader raises an 
issue which has been brought to this House many times over the 
years. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that you will be well aware 
that although it is true that we cannot do indirectly what we’re 
not permitted to do directly, you will be aware as well that there 
have been precedent rulings in this House which have permitted 
for the reading of quotes when it’s referenced. And I was 
listening very carefully to the remarks brought by the hon. 
member from Cumberland and he said, Mr. Speaker, as he 
introduced his information that he was reading from, he was 
quoting his source. 
 
He in fact while making his statement again made reference to 
the fact that he was again quoting his source very clearly on the 

record, Mr. Speaker, and I’m confident that when you consider 
the precedents that have been set in this House, that you will 
find that in fact the hon. member’s remarks were really quite in 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much. Members of the 
Assembly, in this case both the leader, the Opposition House 
Leader and the Government Deputy House Leader I believe are 
correct as according to precedent, that is that we ordinarily 
don’t use names in speeches; however, that in the case of 
quotations, that we have in the past allowed the use of 
members’ names and we have done so I believe on the idea that 
quite often members’ names appear, particularly in newspapers, 
and . . . Order, please. 
 
So I say that the member is in order and I recognize the member 
for Cumberland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And the member says that we were not paying 
attention. I think they are indeed paying attention because truth 
hurts, Mr. Speaker. The truth hurts very much. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will continue the quote, the quotation. Quote: 
 

What about MLA Brad Wall who was an assistant to the 
disgraced John Gerich while Gerich was Grant Schmidt’s 
Associate Minister in Economic Development? MLA Don 
Toth served one term in the Devine government. And 
nearly all of the current SaskParty senior staff cut their 
political teeth in the same government. 

 
I might add that Bill Boyd, who was the head of the PCs, is now 
heading up the political campaign, you know, for the Sask 
Party. And as well, we have people such as Rick Swenson, 
former PC guy, who is a campaign manager in Moose Jaw 
North. So we have still a whole bunch of Tories that are 
working for the Sask Party. 
 
And so it begs the question, you know, when they’re kicking 
out Grant Schmidt, whether or not they will kick out the rest of 
those members, you know, that I’ve named, you know in 
regards to keeping, you know, certain types of standards. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Now the other thing that was very interesting. I was looking at 
this article vis-à-vis the Progressive Conservative angle and 
also the angle vis-à-vis the Reform Party and the Alliance. And 
this was an article by James Parker, March 7, 2003 and it’s in 
The StarPhoenix. He was basically saying that, if the 
Saskatchewan . . . And quote: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party decides Grant Schmidt is an 
unsuitable candidate because of his association with the 
Grant Devine government, what will it do if an employee 
of Saskatoon Humboldt MP Jim Pankiw is nominated as a 
candidate? 

 
He further on says: 
 

Patrick Bundrock, who has worked in Pankiw’s Saskatoon 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

 

office as executive assistant for the last five years, is the 
only person running for the . . . (Saskatchewan) Party 
nomination in the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. 
The nomination meeting is set for March 27. 
 

He also said: 
 

Bundrock, (Bundrock) ran for the Progressive 
Conservatives in the 1995 provincial election, . . . 
 

So I rest my case in regards to that. In regards to the Tories, a 
lot times they try to forget that, and try to say that, they were 
not the PCs. It didn’t work; people still know that they’re the 
old Tories. But also too, the Reform Party did the same when 
they changed their name to the Canadian Alliance, but it didn’t 
work. 
 
All I know is that Jim Pankiw definitely didn’t vote for the 
NDP. I think that Jim Pankiw . . . And he wouldn’t vote for the 
federal Liberals. I definitely know that Jim Pankiw would be 
voting for the Alliance Party and the Saskatchewan Party. That 
would be very, very clear because he was a supporter of the 
Saskatchewan Party as well. And that’s why his executive 
assistant is running for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I would like to say, as I was mentioning some aspects on the 
economic development, on the issue of diversification, you 
know, vis-à-vis agriculture, I mentioned a little bit on the side 
of the subsidies vis-à-vis forestry in the North and how much it 
hurt us on the subsidies on the united . . . American side. 
 
I’ll give you a couple of pieces of information vis-à-vis the farm 
side on the subsidies by the American government comparing 
them to the subsidies of Europe and also the subsidy in Canada. 
If you look at wheat — these are the 2001 comparisons — in 
Canada the subsidy level is at 18 per cent, in the United States 
it’s 40 per cent, and in the European Union it’s 44 per cent. 
 
If you look at the question of barley it is 13 per cent in Canada, 
36 per cent in the United States, and 50 per cent in the 
European Union. There was always the question you know 
being raised in the past in regards to the subsidies . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And either you’re opposed to Jim 
Pankiw or you’re in favour of him. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — That guy is still very impressed with Jim 
Pankiw, the Saskatchewan Party. And they still kept talking 
about them over there. I know that he’s a supporter of Jim 
Pankiw, so I don’t know. I think that the member of 
Saskatchewan Party . . . And he also helps Reform Party the 
same way Jim Pankiw helped the Reform Party. I remember 
that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, you were with the 
Reform Party. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . tell him that there is no Reform 
Party. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — There is no Reform Party and it changed its 
name to the Saskatchewan . . . to the Canadian Alliance the 
same way the PCs changed their name to the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I was looking at this aspect in regards to tax 
cuts. Of course in terms of tax cuts and the province, we’ve 
done various tax cuts. We’ve done over $400 million worth of 
tax cuts to the working people of this province so that they have 
a greater buying power in this province. And we cut the small 
business tax as well. And we have cut, you know, specific 
aspects of different taxes on the manufacturing side, etc. 
 
And I might add this. I was reading this from Randy Burton, 
who was in the The StarPhoenix on March 11, 2003. He says 
that we’ve done some tax cuts as well in the agricultural side. I 
remember because we knew that there was a lot of problems 
vis-à-vis the subsidies in the European Union as well as on the 
side of United States; we need to do some tax cuts on the 
agricultural sector. But I’ll read what Randy Burton says about 
that on March 11. He says: 
 

The province now gives farmers some $160 billion 
annually in various tax exemptions. 

 
These are the quotes from Randy Burton. By the way, he says: 
 

Would the . . . (Saskatchewan) Party end this investment 
in the farm economy?  

 
It was a very interesting commentary. Because I remember 
when I was a minister, I knew that the fuel tax exemption, you 
know, at the farm level, totalled approximately $115 million, 
and it was an important strategic decision that we made because 
of the pressures on the agriculture community in this province. 
And we, as a government, have made that type of decision in 
support of the farm families. 
 
I’d like to make some commentary now vis-à-vis the issue 
relating to Aboriginal people and also to the North . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from . . . The Jim 
Pankiw supporter over asked me a question again as to whether 
or not I’ll be repeating certain things. No, I will not be 
repeating. I’ll be, for your information, giving you a proper 
education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the member in his 
remarks, even though he is addressing a question that may be 
posed rhetorically from across the way, should continue his 
remarks through the Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I appreciate your comments, Mr. Speaker, and I 
will continue my comments through you in this House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to make a commentary on treaty 
land entitlement. Land is a strong issue, and whether you look 
in Europe and you look at the First World War, the Second 
World War, you know, the separation of . . . and the quest for 
land internationally, it’s always been a strong issue. And you 
saw it in Africa vis-à-vis Hutus and the Tutsis, there was always 
this fight for land over . . . (inaudible) . . . And it’s been . . . It’s 
had very strong emotions; it’s tied in with concepts such as 
motherland, fatherland, and in Cree it’s also a very strong word 
for us, we call it a . . . (Cree) . . . you know . . . (Cree) . . . those 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

types of things. 
 
Land is a very, very, very strong element in regards to the 
history, not only of many countries in the world but also in this 
province. 
 
Now on treaty land entitlement, why is it that as a government 
we supported it in the 1970s? We were the first government to 
do that in Canada on a major scale where we had the 1.4 million 
acres of land. Why is it that we went ahead with a new formula 
in 1992? 
 
After Grant Devine had been in office for nine years, although 
he had made all kinds of promises, they did not move in on 
treaty land entitlement. They made all kinds of promises on 
economic development, Grant Devine. They said if they 
privatized potash, they would give 5 per cent to treaty Indian 
people. They never did that. They made all kinds of promises. 
And I hear the same type of promises being made by the 
members from across. 
 
On treaty land entitlement it’s very important to look at the 
history in this province, our province, 1905. The first phase of 
settlement occurs in the 1890s; second major phase, you know, 
after we become a province, to about 1930. By 1930 there’s 
over 900,000 people in this province. 
 
Why did a lot of people come here? A lot of people came here 
because of two things. There was a free Homestead Act and a 
paid Homestead Act. And in that regard a lot of people came 
here because of the land policies of the federal government at 
that time under the Dominion Lands Act. 
 
And in that sense if you look at the history, Mr. Speaker . . . I’m 
going to talk about the history on how much land the new 
settlers got, how much land the corporations got, and how much 
land the First Nations got, just so that there is an historical 
understanding of what really actually happened by 1930. In 
1930 therefore, in regards to land vis-à-vis the free homesteads, 
there was 31 million acres of land. On the minimal payments on 
the paid homesteads, there were 6 million acres of land. In other 
words, there was 37 million acres of land on the homesteads 
policy. 
 
On the case of the issue relating to the aspect of corporations, in 
Western Canada we had about approximately fifteen and a half 
million acres of land, of which famous corporations, the CPR 
(Canadian Pacific Railway) got 6 million acres, over 6 million 
acres of land. It’s very interesting. When the land was 
transferred in 1869 to later what became the Dominion of 
Canada, you know, the . . . When we established Canada in 
1867 and there was Ruperts Land under the Hudson Bay 
Company supposedly, that land was very, very important to the 
Hudson Bay Company and they were able to get over 7 million 
acres of land. In this province alone, they had 3.4 million acres 
of land — 3.4 million acres of land. 
 
Thirty-seven million acres on the new settlements. You add 
about . . . over 15 million acres of land on the development 
aspects of the railroad corporations, and we also had 3.4 at 
Hudson Bay Company. 
 
In regards to the questions that were raised earlier on, on school 

loss tax compensation in municipalities, we had 4 million acres 
of land for schools. It was very, very interesting. And many 
other types of land development issues were done. Those I will 
. . . In terms of time, I will leave you with that. 
 
But on the First Nations, by 1930 they had lost over 800,000 
acres of land because of some crooked deals that were made by 
some of the agents. The total amount of land was also done and 
1.2 million acres of land was there. 
 
Obviously, the member from across says, when I mention 
crooked agents, there were some. And there were some that 
were very, very trustworthy. But there were some that were not 
because we found out in legal cases later on, many of those 
legal cases on special claims now come to bear on us and 
indeed, they have found them to be not lawful. But indeed, they 
have won their cases; the First Nations have won their cases. 
And I think that, for the members across, it’s a very, very 
important part, you know, of history. And so it was very, very 
important. 
 
So when we did the treaty land entitlement this time, we’re not 
talking about 60 million acres. We are talking about an extra 1 
per cent of the land of the province of Saskatchewan — 2 
million acres. Two million acres is about 1 per cent of the land. 
So the First Nations will now have approximately 2 per cent of 
the land. 
 
In regards to British law, they owned the land before, so they 
are left with 2 million. So even if people challenge the concept 
of treaties — which we don’t on this side of the House — we 
agree with the treaties. And we follow the treaties because in 
the treaties, when we add the Resources Transfer Agreement, 
there was a clause in there to respect the treaty. And as a 
government under Blakeney we respected that. 
 
And we also respected that in 1992. Six months after we were 
re-elected, we promised we would deliver on TLE and we did. 
But it was a very, very important fact of history that the new 
TLE would be about 2 million acres of land, you know. And 
there was an improvement over the Blakeney model ’76, 
formerly at 1.4, to be about 2 million acres. And that was very, 
very important in regards to development. 
 
(16:00) 
 
The other thing that is very, very important is that as we’re 
doing First Nations and Métis developments, we look at Métis 
people and also treaty Indians whose first language is Cree, 
Dene, etc. In the Cree court we have started a process to 
recognize one of our indigenous languages of this province. 
And my first cousin, Judge Gerry Morin, has got the 
recognition, you know, and the pride, to be the first judge in 
Canada to do an official Cree court. And it was very, very 
important in terms of our development because I knew that 
when I was speaking in this House . . . (Cree) . . . I speak Cree 
in here, often in the House. I was very proud over the history, I 
saw more people starting to speak German, Ukrainian, Polish, 
and everything. It became more acceptable. 
 
And we have been doing that type of work and the openness of 
people to respect, you know, their people who came here, who 
had many different languages, is an important part of a new 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

 

democracy. And it is that type of thing that I really agree with 
in regards to the Cree court. But I was saying that racism does 
exist in the system. And sometimes you know I got letters, 
when I was speaking in Cree, for me not to speak in Cree in the 
House. 
 
But also, when in 19 . . . when we were doing the debate, on the 
potash debate, when we were privatizing potash, and I was 
doing a debate at that time when the Progressive Conservatives, 
you know, were around and they were privatizing potash 
development. I remember they promised the Indians 5 per cent 
of it, which they never — treaty Indians — and they never gave 
them a cent. 
 
And they said if you support us we’ll give you, you know that 5 
per cent, but they never did. But as we’re talking about the 
potash debate, I was speaking about the debate just for a short 
time. I was speaking about three hours in the House. So I was at 
the debate for about three hours and then all of a sudden . . . 
(Cree) . . . and I started speaking in Cree. And while I was in 
this House, lo and behold — I put it in the records — one of the 
members on the Tory side signed a document, took it across to 
me. And you know what that letter said? Speak English, you 
sound like a babbling fool. 
 
I replied, you know, later on in the House that we have enough 
racism on the streets than to have racism in the House. And it 
was a very, very important part. I called it the politics of 
intimidation. 
 
Many times they were trying to get me from saying statements 
not only in English, but also in Cree. They wanted me to stop so 
that the democracy of the people would not be fulfilled. Many 
of the elders who don’t know how to speak that much English, 
listen to the radio and listen to the TV and they hear me speak 
Cree. Democracy is enhanced when they see that I speak in 
Cree and they can understand the processes of this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And as I was looking at that, I saw another 
aspect vis-à-vis the politic and the political history of this 
province. 
 
As a Métis person, as a Cree Métis person, I was proud of my 
Métis heritage and my Cree heritage and you know being that 
my great-grandfather, . . . or my great great-uncle was part of 
the provisional government. 
 
But not only that, later on . . . although I didn’t pay that much 
attention, we had a lot of people . . . My mother and father were 
both CCFers (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation). You 
know I talked to my father later on. Of course, my mother died 
when I was 16. My father ended up seeing me become a 
minister and he was very, very proud of that. 
 
And as I was, you know, looking at that history of the 
development . . . A lot of the values of being a social democrat, 
of being a CCFer, were therefore raised with me. It was 
therefore not a mystery even when I became, you know, an 
NDPer, you know, later on in life. And in that sense, it’s a 
respect not only of the people and our language, it’s a respect of 
your parents, your grandparents, and how they communicate. 

And it is a very, very important point. 
 
On The Métis Act itself, we passed it last year. . . the other year 
but we put it in officially last year, and I was very proud of that. 
I was a Métis person and we had, for the first time in this 
history, recognition. We had had program recognition before, 
but we had a recognition for the first time in history. 
 
And it is something that I needed to say that the . . . when the 
PCs were in power, they tried to do away with it. But we . . . I 
was in opposition and I was asking questions. And the way that 
I asked the questions was such that I said, how could it be that 
you could support, for example, the different colleges at the 
university levels and not support the Métis institution? Through 
that type of questioning they came to accept the fact that 
Gabriel Dumont Institute could survive, and that was in a 
debate in 1987. But it’s something that I’m very proud of. 
 
The thing that I was not proud of in this legislature is that the 
Sask Party, all of them except for two, all of them voted against 
The Métis Act. Yes. I might even add that the member from 
North Battleford voted against The Métis Act on second reading 
and he never came into the House on third reading to vote for 
The Métis Act. So he’s also on the record, the member from 
Battleford . . . the member from North Battleford, also is on the 
record on the second reading of voting against The Métis Act. 
 
The members over here are talking about SIFC (Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College). I’d like to make a comment on that. 
I just listened to some statements by the member from Weyburn 
vis-à-vis SIFC. Saskatchewan Indian Federated College is a 
world-class institution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Saskatchewan Indian Federated College has 
over 1,500 students when they started with 20. They are doing 
all kinds of programming not only in . . . (inaudible) . . . to 
education but also into the sciences, development in the 
sciences research. And they have got one spectacular building. 
It is something to be proud of in this province. It is something 
to say yes, this is not only a monument to the great input of 
First Nations people in this province, but it is something to be 
proud of all across Canada. It is something that we can look 
back in our heritage and say yes, I was there to see it. 
 
Now you look at something like that that’s very positive. We 
used to provide about just over $700,000 on program money for 
SIFC. We increased it by 800,000. And through the process of 
getting money from the federal government and from the 
private sector, they’re able to build this tremendous building. 
 
But the Sask Party, they try and throw mud on that. I just 
noticed the member of Weyburn and I will read some quotes 
from that. When I looked at the quotes that were written by 
Vice-Chief Lindsay Cyr, Chair of the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College Board of Governors, this is what it says on 
March 18: 
 

The Chairman of the SIFC Board of Governors responds to 
statements made by the Opposition Saskatchewan Party 
accusing the Calvert government of having mixed up 
spending priorities when it comes to the Indian Federated 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

College. The Saskatchewan Party today criticized a $1.2 
million investment towards the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College. 

 
I also look at the quote . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would 
like to see the quote the member wants me to tie it in very . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, and I will do that, Mr. Speaker. He 
says that the quote on CTV (Canadian Television Network 
Limited), 6 p.m., Tuesday, March 18, on the headline in there of 
SaskParty critical of SIFC Expenditure. This is what it says: 
 

The Indian Gaming Authority and the province will finance 
the $1.2 million (it says on the) teepee. The SaskParty says 
it’s a waste of money, Brenda Bakken: (says) “When they 
originally put forward the plan (to put it in) . . . to put in the 
teepee they said they did not have the funds that it was too 
expensive . . . now all of a sudden we have $200 thousand 
over the next six years, every year, to spend (on a TV) on a 
teepee. I think they’ve got their priorities very, very much 
mixed up.” (is what she says) 

 
I thought that that was highly insensitive. I thought it was 
totally insensitive. 
 
That part of the building, it was there to honour the veterans. 
The veterans fought and died for this country. Many of them lay 
on the shores of Europe never to have come home. They 
liberated Europe, all over the place. Many of them died. They 
couldn’t come back home to raise their own children. 
 
These same veterans are the veterans that are going to be 
honoured on the new building which is exemplified through the 
original home of First Nations people — the teepee. 
 
And she says, the priorities are wrong and that it’s very mixed 
up. To me, I find that very, very, very disappointing, Mr. 
Speaker. Some members have said it’s even offensive, Mr. 
Speaker. And I agree. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many aspects of the Throne 
Speech that I would like to talk about, you know, over the next 
while. But because of the timing, I wanted to talk about, a bit on 
the . . . (inaudible) . . . Education in the North now, SIFC, 
Gabriel Dumont Institute, we now have thousands of First 
Nations and Métis people involved. In the North alone, in the 
past 10 years, we’ve gone from 1,200 people to over 2,600 
students in post-secondary in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — We have seen a lot of the development in 
many, many areas. We’ve seen, and I’ve mentioned, you know, 
the green part of our plan. I’ve mentioned many, many things in 
regards to economic development. The health side, we will have 
a new northern planning system. Many, many things need to be 
done. 
 
We as a government recognize we still have to move more in 
the question of openness. The question of inclusion on First 
Nations and Métis people are very important as part of our 
overall strategy in economic, social, and cultural development. 
And I really, really believe that the basis of where we’ve come, 
although we have a long ways to go, is a strong base. We are 

leaders in Canada. First Nations and Métis people are leaders in 
institutional processes of self-government on many aspects in 
this country. 
 
And as we move forward in this concept of openness, in this 
concept of inclusion, I predict that this new century we will see 
the diminishment, we will see the case of racism slowly going 
down. We have helped the concept of racism go down to a 
certain extent. I would like to see this new century where the 
hatred that we have seen in the Second War, that we see in 
many countries, becomes toned down and destroyed over time. 
 
It has to be eliminated in time. The peaceful process is the way 
to do things. You cannot create war on people in economic 
terms, in social terms, or in military terms. People have to be 
working peacefully together as we face the future. And I really 
feel that it’s a very important aspect of development. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I make my statements and I’d 
like to make the official statements of the motion both by 
myself and seconded by the member from Regina Wascana 
Plains: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor: 

 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For my 
dear friend, the member from Cumberland whose motion I am 
proud to second, here’s a bit of poetry which I think perfectly 
defines him and I quote: 
 

Statesman, . . . friend (to) truth! of soul sincere, 
In action faithful, and in honour clear! 
Who broke no promise, serv’d no private end, 
Who gain’d no title, and who lost no friend; 

 
End of quote from Alexander Pope. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — It has been a pleasure and an education for 
me to serve with the member from Cumberland these past 12 
years. And I know I speak for all members when I express our 
gratitude for his many years of public service — first, as an 
educator; secondly, as an elected member of this Assembly, a 
member of Cabinet; and as eloquent a spokesman for the North 
and its people as we are likely to find. A man truly who served 
no private end and who lost no friend. 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

 

I regret that he has announced his retirement, but he has dearly 
earned the time to pursue other endeavours, and also to be with 
family and friends. 
 
Being given the honour to second the Lieutenant Governor’s 
eloquent address, I enjoyed taking a moment to review some of 
the remarks made by members during past Throne Speech 
debates. I’ve always looked forward to varying views expressed 
on both sides of the Assembly and the snapshots of the ridings 
across the province. This session, I anticipate hearing from our 
two newest members. 
 
An opening remark from the former member from 
Lloydminster struck me as appropriate for today, Mr. Speaker, 
and appropriate to the speech by the member from Cumberland. 
Vi Stanger said in 1993 that she found it significant and 
humbling to be a part of a legislature that in its makeup was 
breaking down the old traditional barriers to public life — 
gender barriers, racial, and religious ones. She was referring 
primarily to the fact that for the first time there were a number 
of women MLAs elected, but the comment applies to the other 
categories as well. 
 
Admittedly, we have a long way to go before we do achieve a 
more fair degree of racial and gender equality in our 
representation. But as the member from Cumberland said, he’s 
seen the number of First Nations MLAs increase by 100 per 
cent in his time. If the next members from Cumberland and 
Athabasca and others can do the same, we’ll be well on our 
way. 
 
Even now we can say that we are no longer just a male, white, 
Anglo-Saxon, protestant bastion, and I believe our decision 
making is the better for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — And as I make my customary and deserved 
nod to you, Mr. Speaker, and to your wise and tolerant guidance 
of this House, with the able assistance of the Clerks at the 
Table, it’s worth pointing out that even a few years ago, you 
yourself would not have been in the Chair because of your 
Ukrainian heritage — what we would have lost. What the 
school children of Saskatchewan would be missing in the work 
you do between sessions to teach them and others about our 
democratic British parliamentary system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to give a welcome to the new pages. 
I’m sure that they will be run off their feet. But I know that they 
are going to learn much and have fun too — or at least I hope 
so. 
 
One more thing before I begin, Mr. Speaker, I welcome all 
members back to our place of doing business and I look forward 
to working with each of them. In particular I want to welcome 
the new members from Battleford-Cut Knife and Saskatoon 
Fairview. Both won hard-fought by-elections and both, I’m 
sure, will represent all of their constituents. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping the member from Battleford 
knows, and is not too surprised to learn, that his party and his 
leader will not be supporting his campaign for government 
investment in the worthwhile project of a geothermal spa for his 

community. Or maybe they will because there will be some 
measures for friends and others for the rest of us. 
 
The member from Cumberland spoke eloquently of his 
constituency. Mine is a bit smaller geographically but I’m 
equally proud of the people of Wascana Plains. In 1991 my 
constituency was totally urban and encompassed much of the 
area I served as a city councillor. The major issues of the day 
were government debt and lack of funding to urban centres as 
well as to education. 
 
By 1995 the southeast of Regina had grown and boundary 
redistribution made this one of the first four urban/rural seats in 
the province. Over the years I have had a wonderful opportunity 
to get to know families in the centres of and around Zehner, 
Pilot Butte, Balgonie, White City, Emerald Park, Richardson, 
and Rowatt. 
 
With the changes made in the December session, I’m becoming 
nostalgic about the many friends I’ve made in Balgonie and the 
surrounding farm land. They’ve provided me warm hospitality 
at fowl suppers, dinner theatres, pancake breakfasts, winter 
carnivals, and that list goes on. I will be, in the future, there for 
good visits but will no longer represent them in the Assembly 
after the next election. 
 
To the mayors and council members, the school board officials, 
the wildlife association members, and all the communities, 
thank you for supporting me and challenging me. I do however, 
with this boundary distribution, gain an area north of Zehner to 
the scenic Qu’Appelle Valley, including the First Nations 
community of Piapot. You saw and heard yesterday from the 
talented young men from the Piapot as the Dakota Cree 
drummers played for all of us in the rotunda. Congratulations to 
all of them and to their driver, Sylvia Obey, who’s also a 
mother, aunt, and grandmother to some of the band members. 
They told me they travel extensively. This Easter, they’re going 
to Kenora and a week later to Missoula, Montana. So I give 
them all best wishes and hopes for safe travel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — It is my hope today that my speech will 
reflect the issues important to all of the constituency of 
Wascana Plains. Almost five years ago to the day, I was given 
the privilege of moving the Speech from the Throne. I began by 
saying, and I quote: 
 

Since we last met on December 19, Christmas has come 
and gone, and in the spirit of peace and goodwill which . . . 
(the) season calls forth, the world has just avoided a return 
to armed insanity in the . . . (Middle East) — thanks, in no 
small part, to the world at work through co-operation, the 
United Nations. 

 
I use this again for two reasons. First, once again world stability 
is being threatened by a potential and deadly conflict in the 
same part of the world with different contestants this time, but 
once again the world faces the dilemma of choosing peace over 
war with no clear way of achieving it other than trusting the 
world’s nations will co-operate through the guidance of our 
international instrument, the United Nations. The United 
Nations may be imperfect, but it is far better than the 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

alternative. 
 
Here we are, a provincial body with the affairs of Saskatchewan 
people our immediate concern, but we are also citizens of the 
world and cannot but be affected by the consequences of what 
may occur. We pray for peace; we fear the opposite. We can 
take some comfort, I believe, in the fact that the world now has 
two superpowers: the United States of America; but also the 
world of public opinion overwhelmingly in favour of peace. In 
these next few hours, we hope and pray that these voices of 
peace and reason prevail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Secondly, as I said our concern in this 
Assembly is with the business with our beautiful province as we 
begin the fourth session of the twenty-fourth legislature. The 
citizens of this province expect us to conduct their business 
with decorum and thoroughness, as is their right. Especially 
during this time of world crisis, they expect us not to add to the 
divisiveness and conflict we see daily in our headlines. And as 
the old Sunday school song goes — which comes back to my 
Broadway United Church background — they expect you, Mr. 
Speaker, in your small corner and I in mine, to let our lights 
shine and do what we can to provide a measure of stability. 
 
Frankly, I think we’re up to it. This government is committed to 
it. We can live up to that commitment because as Her Honour 
said yesterday: we have a vision, we have a plan. We have a 
vision; we’re ready to work hard, and dream big; and we have a 
plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — That plan is working because the vision is 
both practical and clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many aspects to our plan, as outlined in 
the Throne Speech, and each of us will want to highlight those 
closest to our own constituents and our own interests and heart. 
I want to emphasize a few. 
 
First I want to say a word about something people of Wascana 
Plains care deeply about — open, accountable, democratic 
government. What better way to illustrate our commitment to 
democratic, fair representation than to mention the two 
by-elections held two days ago and the new members who have 
taken their seats today immediately after being elected. 
 
Both elections were held well within the six-month timeframe 
legislated a few years ago. Legislated — in the phrase that some 
opposition members love to use, and we love to hear it by the 
way — by this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — You bet it was an NDP government who 
said all people will be represented. It wasn’t the Sask Party’s 
first cousins, the Tories, and it wasn’t the Liberals before them. 
It was Grant Devine’s government — I mean the other Grant, 
Mr. Speaker — who did allow seats to remain vacant in this 
Assembly for nearly two years. 
 

It was this NDP government that said every voter in 
Saskatchewan will have equal representation and that 
constituency boundaries will be drawn fairly and impartially 
after each federal census. Wherever you live in Saskatchewan, 
your vote counts. 
 
It wasn’t that long ago, Mr. Speaker, when some constituencies 
had 17,000 voters and others had 4,500. The Sask-a-Tories 
didn’t fix that inequity, this NDP government did. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, let’s just take a moment to look at the 
phrase the opposition believes is a negative — this NDP 
government. That stands for New Democratic Party. 
Democratic — one person, one vote — in our party dealings 
and in our government mandate. And, Mr. Speaker, I kind of 
like the sound of the phrase myself so I’ll try it one more time 
— our New Democratic government. That’s our vision of a 
democratic society and we carried out a plan to fulfill that 
vision. 
 
(16:30) 
 
What’s the alternative plan? What’s the Sask-a-Tory vision of 
democracy? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s to say one thing and do 
another. The SPer (Saskatchewan Party) vision is to use the 
term, grassroot democracy, in every other sentence, and to 
promise free votes in the legislature. The Sask-a-Tory plan is to 
quash the first signs of independent thinking by the members of 
those grassroots. I wonder if the people of Melville-Saltcoats 
believe they were treated democratically. 
 
We believe in and practise democratic principles. The Sask 
Party has a slogan, an anti-slogan, and then betrays it at the first 
opportunity. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to see in this Throne 
Speech the announcement of rule changes in this Assembly that 
will provide increased public input into the legislative process 
— a vision and a plan that works. Compare that to a slogan and 
immediate betrayal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we prepare to celebrate our first centennial, we 
are looking back with pride and awe at our pioneers and what 
they did to prepare the way for us. We’ll be showing our 
gratitude to them by presenting a vision of the future, a vision 
of the next 100 years, a vision that fulfills their dream of a 
stable society and an expanding economy not susceptible to the 
ups and downs, the booms and busts, of an economy at the 
mercy of weather and the world markets. 
 
The pioneers worked hard. They prayed and persevered and 
built for the future through their co-ops, their community 
institutions, their schools, their churches, their Pools, and their 
political parties. They dreamed of an economy diversified 
enough to withstand the forces arrayed against them. We are in 
a process of fulfilling those dreams because we have a plan, and 
a plan that is working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — The Lieutenant Governor’s speech reminded 
us of how strong our economy is today despite two years of 
drought. She mentioned the 10 consecutive months of 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

 

employment growth, of increased retail sales and business 
incorporations, of higher youth employment, and more. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, she’s not the only one optimistic about our 
economic progress. Let’s take a quick look at some of the 
ever-vigilant members of our provincial press and what they’re 
saying about our economy, just to test the validity of Her 
Honour’s address. 
 
The Leader-Post of February 5, headline: “Provincial Outlook,” 
“Economy’s looking good.” Here’s another from the oil patch 
in Kindersley Clarion: “Local oil industry looks good to 
Alberta-based company.” So unlike the members opposite and 
their adoration of Alberta, this story has it right. 
 
Let’s go down south to the member from Cannington’s 
constituency, from the Redvers paper, a headline on January 13: 
“Saskatchewan, a great place to work, live, and invest.” 
 
Back to Kindersley on January 8: “Local merchants mostly 
optimistic about 2003.” And to the east and the MinerJournal in 
Esterhazy, January 20: “Business owners confident.” 
 
And for our sister city, Saskatoon, The Conference Board of 
Canada predicts that it will rank second in economic growth 
among all Canadian cities in 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could read headlines like that all day. But the 
message is clear. Something good is happening here. Our future 
is wide open. And only the Saskatchewan Party remains 
negative about our province and this good economic news. 
 
In Saskatchewan our government has always used a 
multi-faceted approach to economic development that involves 
a combination of private industry and business; the public 
sector through its Crowns, co-operatives; and of course strategic 
investments. We still depend on this mix and it still works, as 
the newspaper headlines that I quoted have outlined and 
indicated to us today. 
 
We have a plan — a plan that includes ethanol, manufacturing, 
mining, forestry, tourism, culture, information technology, and 
value-added agriculture to go along with our traditional primary 
industries of oil, gas, and agriculture. 
 
Compare that with the Sask-a-Tory plan that says only one 
thing for economic growth — tax cuts for corporations and big 
business. I’ve heard a nation to the south of us use the 
trickle-down approach to the economy, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t 
work there; it won’t work here. 
 
And, oh, Mr. Speaker, I forgot. This great economic plan 
depends on, as the Leader of the Opposition stated, if the 
weather co-operates and the federal government gives them 
more money. A fair-weather plan if I ever heard one. 
 
The Speech from the Throne documents how the government’s 
plan is successfully opening the doors to a Wide Open Future. 
Our integrated plan is working, achieving economic growth and 
diversification. Most importantly, it is balanced and it’s 
sustainable — a plan that supports small and medium 
businesses; a plan that encourages development in our major 
industries; and a plan that creates new jobs and opportunities 

for Saskatchewan young people and all Saskatchewan people. 
 
I’d like to now mention two important aspects of our plan. This 
New Democratic government recognizes the worth and value of 
Saskatchewan workers. We support the rights of workers to 
organize, to bargain, and to form associations for their benefit 
and their protection. 
 
From the first days of the Douglas government we have 
supported the rights of workers with trail-blazing legislation 
like the first Trade Union Act in Canada, occupational health 
and safety legislation, and so on. 
 
I was very happy last month to take part in the 90th anniversary 
celebration of the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and 
General Employees’ Union). Beginning as a social and athletic 
association, this union of government employees has grown 
over the years into an effective bargaining unit and advocate for 
the welfare of its members. It is a leader in creating and 
suggesting progressive workplace environments and 
progressive changes. And even though the government is its 
employer, we are proud to work with this particular union 
because without its members, government and all its services 
would come to a halt. 
 
The same can be said for our non-unionized civil service, those 
members who serve at the pleasure of Her Majesty. Mr. 
Speaker, in some quarters across, it would be fashionable these 
days to criticize civil servants and to make false assumptions 
based on bad jokes. That criticism does not come from here. We 
know that no vision is workable, no plan can be implemented 
without the loyal, intelligent execution of a dedicated public 
service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our plan recognizes the value of workers and 
workers’ organizations. The Sask Party has also recognized 
these organizations. They’ve called them job killers, they’ve 
called them skunks, and would tell us to remember what those 
skunks did to the Devine government, the government they’re 
now refusing to acknowledge. An opposition speaking from 
both sides of its mouth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another part of our plan to expand the economy has to do with 
fair taxation. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Tories have one mantra 
which they repeat over and over about how they would increase 
the economy. They would say lower taxes, lower corporate 
taxes. Their own economist says their numbers don’t add up. 
 
Compare that plan to our plan. Mr. Speaker, since our first 
budget in May of 1992, this New Democratic Party government 
has reduced taxes in every single budget — every one. And 
remember, we began by having to dig our people out of the 
worst financial hole that was left to us by a provincial 
government that doesn’t look much different than the members 
opposite today. 
 
Nevertheless, in each budget we have targeted specific, 
sensible, sustainable reductions in taxes in order to reduce taxes 
on individuals or to boost certain areas of our economy. These 
tax reductions were made only when we were able to support 
them, and as I said, Mr. Speaker, sensible and sustainable. 
 
I have a document here that lists 10 pages, single spaced, of 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

revenue measures that improve the fairness and competitiveness 
of our tax regime, while enabling us to maintain a sustainable 
fiscal balance. And I’d love to read those whole 10 pages, Mr. 
Speaker, but just for the record, here’s a few. 
 
In 1992 we increased the child tax reduction for low-income 
families by 25 per cent. In 1992, ’93, and ’94 we reduced small 
business corporation taxes from 10 to 8 per cent. In 1995 — the 
year of our first eight consecutive balanced budgets — we 
eliminated the deficit surtax for low-income earners and 
reduced it substantially for others. 
 
We’ve reduced the PST (provincial sales tax) to 6 per cent, the 
lowest of any province that has a provincial sales tax. 
 
We have reduced taxes for families every year since 1995. In 
1998 we introduced the first film tax . . . film employment tax 
credit and we changed the oil and gas royalty production tax 
structures, both which have encouraged those two industries to 
expand and grow in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a rough tally says that there have been 72 — 72 — 
separate tax reductions, great and small, sustainable and here 
for the long term. And as the Premier says, we can now turn our 
attention to a review of the education portion of property taxes. 
 
I know the Sask Party has had very little new to tell the people 
of Saskatchewan about tax cuts. One mantra, one empty slogan, 
no plan. 
 
For us, a plan with each of the 72 or so measures that were 
introduced, not in isolation but as a part of a larger plan to 
protect families and to promote the economy. We did them 
when we could afford them and they’ve paid off. 
 
And as the impartial analysis of international credit rating 
agencies attest . . . And there’s just one quote, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to share from Dominion Bond Rating Services. It says, and 
I quote: 
 

The province’s approach to fiscal planning has not only 
strengthened its financial profile but it has contributed to 
the improvement in Saskatchewan economic fundamentals. 

 
A clear vision, a workable plan. 
 
The judicious application of targeted tax measures, the 
partnership with working people, encouragement of industry 
through improvements of provincial infrastructure, the 
encouragement of our small-business sector, the active 
participation of our Crown corporations — all of these are part 
of our plan to fulfill our vision of an expanding economy from 
which no one is excluded. We have a plan to expand the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
The members opposite, the old Sask Tories, here’s their slogan 
. . . It’s a slogan that Doug Elliott of Sask trends monitor has 
said that the Sask Party’s wish to increase our population by 
100,000 people in 10 years is, quote: “more wishful thinking 
than statistically obtainable.” 
 
Their numbers don’t add up, Mr. Speaker. They have a slogan. 
We have a plan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, one can guess that a word or 
two might be exchanged this session about the role of the 
Crown corporations in our economy. I’d expect that will be so. 
And one can be sure that more evidence will be present that 
proves the value of the crucial place of our Crowns in our 
political and our social life. And the more that happens, the 
more negatives the opposition will dredge up. You might even 
say there’s an election issue here. 
 
The other day I read a clip from the member from Arm River 
who said that every Crown will be up for review and you 
needn’t think that any of those Crowns will be safe from the 
privatization by the members opposite. 
 
(16:45) 
 
For the moment, Mr. Speaker, let me content myself with just a 
few fundamental facts about our Crowns. The Crowns that we 
believe in provide services to all communities in this province. 
Our Crowns provide safe, reliable services in all parts of 
Saskatchewan and at the lowest overall rates in Canada — bar 
none. They don’t cherry-pick the profitable areas in the cities. 
We have the lowest rates of automobile insurance, the third 
lowest rate of natural gas, and competitive rates for telephones 
and power. And by the way, Mr. Speaker, we have low power 
rates despite the absence of cheap hydro and without a nuclear 
waste dump the member from Thunder Creek would propose to 
build in Saskatchewan. 
 
I also have to note that the deregulation and privatizations of 
Crowns in Alberta, in Ontario, what’s happening in California 
is a disaster. We’re talking about increases in rates, we’re 
talking about brownouts and blackouts. Not here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Our Crowns employ more than 
9,000 people who put more than half a billion dollars a year of 
income back into our economy. Crowns support thousands of 
Saskatchewan businesses through $2 billion every year in local 
purchasing and system improvements. All Crowns have 
buy-Saskatchewan policies. 
 
During the past 10 years our Crown sector has returned $1.6 
billion in dividends to the people of Saskatchewan, dividends 
that would otherwise leave this province should the Sask Party 
get their wish to privatize our Crowns. 
 
And as Her Honour said, this year the Crowns will invest $650 
million in Saskatchewan to extend and to renew utility 
infrastructure in our province. More jobs for Saskatchewan 
people. Those are the facts. 
 
But what the Sask Party never talks about is how important the 
Crowns are socially and culturally to the communities that they 
live in and the communities that they serve — the communities 
of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskEnergy, as we know, collects and distributes thousands of 
warm coats and sweaters every year to donate to those who are 
in need. In January I was proud to be a part of the SaskPower 
Tournament of Hearts women’s curling championship held in 
Balgonie in my constituency. That community was behind that 
event and would tell everyone how they benefited from being 



March 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

 

profiled by a SaskPower-sponsored tournament. 
 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and SaskTel 
pioneers work closely with MADD (Mothers Against Drinking 
Drivers) and SADD (Students Against Drinking and Driving) to 
promote responsible driving and to save lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list of community involvement of our Crowns 
is as long as the Minister of Health’s arm and that’s a long arm. 
Our utilities work with Saskatchewan communities because 
their employees are Saskatchewan people. 
 
Our vision of Saskatchewan has a place for Crown 
corporations. Sask-a-Tories have a slogan straight from their 
brothers and sisters in the Saskatchewan Taxpayers Federation 
and The Fraser Institute. Their slogan: sell the Crowns and let’s 
deregulate. That’s the rule of the day. 
 
Well tell that to the people of Alberta who, yesterday’s paper 
said, will be paying upwards of 60 per cent more for their 
power thanks to deregulation — 60 per cent more. Tell that to 
your communities in rural Saskatchewan when you deregulate 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just remind the member 
that as she continues her remarks, to make all of her remarks 
through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard not to get 
a little emotional about a wonderful Throne Speech. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that in the last two sessions 
there have been no particular questions about highways from 
the opposition. Why? Because we are fixing the roads; because 
we’ve embarked on a four year, billion dollar commitment to 
repair and upgrade provincial roadways and highways; and 
because, finally, we convinced the federal government for some 
small portion of their fuel tax — 10 per cent — to be here in 
Saskatchewan to twin our two major Trans-Canada Highways. 
So it’s the $82 million towards those projects that will be 
matched by the federal government. Saskatchewan spends 
much more on highways than it collects on the fuel tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that our first priority — and it’s 
been ever thus — will be the health care system that responds to 
our medical needs. And because we have a health system that is 
the envy of the world and because it’s for every citizen . . . But 
it’s because this also means medicare is forever stretched to its 
limits in its provision of services. 
 
Each year, for instance, in our province of a million people, 
there are 90,000 surgeries that are performed. So we know that 
people who need services get them. The provision of quality 
health care though is ever challenging and ever changing. 
 
We have a province that gave a gift to Canada in medicare and 
we’re ahead of the pack today. We outlined an action plan for 
Saskatchewan health care, and as the Speech from the Throne 
said, we’re moving ahead in implementing this plan. We act 
responsibly and we have a plan to make it work. 
 
Now, put that in position to the Tory plan of freezing 
health-care spending for five years while they conduct some 

kind of an audit. I say that’s an American-style privatization 
plan and it’s no plan for Saskatchewan — but it’s no vision for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — We provide in our Throne Speech for 
highways, for health care, for community services to address 
the needs of those who would live in poverty in our 
communities. And these three areas have greatly improved 
under this New Democratic government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are three areas that I would also like to 
highlight from this Throne Speech — education, the Premier’s 
voluntary sector initiative, and the environment. There is an old 
saying, Mr. Speaker, we do not inherit the environment from 
our ancestors but we borrow it from our children. And I think 
that statement is absolutely true. And that is why I am pleased 
to be a part of this New Democrat government that clearly takes 
its responsibilities of the environment seriously because it 
belongs not to us, but to our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was the CCF Douglas government in 1946 that 
introduced the first forest management plan — in 1946. And 
that was the first program in Canada. If not for that vision, you 
could have seen that we would have barren rocks in northern 
Saskatchewan today without that plan. 
 
Environmental issues such as climate change are universally 
recognized as a major concern for the health of this planet. Last 
session the members opposite had one agenda — one agenda 
item — and that was to vote against the Kyoto accord. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s no plan and that’s no vision for this province. 
 
Years ago, the great Chief Seattle said the following: 
 

Man did not weave the web of life — he is merely a strand 
in it. 
Whatever he does to that web, he does to himself. 

 
We know that we have a deep responsibility to this fragile 
earth, our island home. We have a plan. 
 
This year I’ve been privileged to serve with the member of 
Saskatoon Idylwyld and the member of Cumberland in the 
Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative. As Chair of the initiative, 
I want to publicly thank all the members of the joint steering 
committee, both the public representatives and the government 
employees, who already in their lives are responsible for an 
amazing inventory of work. 
 
I am humbled to work with this group that has such an impact 
on the quality of life in Saskatchewan. I am proud that I will be 
a part of a government whose Premier said that we will now be 
acting on the initiative’s recommendations in the days ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, as we move into our 
second century, I’m delighted that it’s this NDP’s government 
vision for education and training and its workable and practical 
imaginative plan to prepare our students to fulfill their potential 
both in the workplace and communities that will lead us into the 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2003 

 

next century. 
 
We need, in short, for all of our educational institutions to work 
together with us to ensure children’s education needs are met 
and that their adult education training will be there to help them 
to provide suitable jobs for their society. I think this Throne 
Speech fits the bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s been a pleasure to speak to the people of Saskatchewan 
about what we’ve accomplished through our vision, our 
planning, and our hard work. It’s their vision, and their 
planning, and their hard work that have gotten us started. 
 
And I want to close with one more comment that is prompted 
by a quote I read recently from American author Kurt Vonnegut 
in his book Time Quake. He said the following: 
 

My uncle Alex Vonnegut taught me something very 
important. He said that when things . . . (were really going) 
well we should be sure to notice it. He was talking about 
simple occasions, not great victories: maybe drinking 
lemonade on a hot afternoon in the shade, or smelling the 
aroma of a nearby bakery, or fishing and not caring if we 
catch anything (or not), or hearing somebody all alone 
playing a piano really well in the house next door. Uncle 
Alex urged me to say this out loud during such epiphanies: 
‘If this isn’t nice, what is?’ 

 
Mr. Speaker, according to Kurt Vonnegut and his uncle Alex, 
from the Throne Speech to serving in this government — if this 
isn’t nice, what is? 
 
I am truly proud to be a part of a government that’s future is 
wide open and to second the Throne from the Speech . . . the 
Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, moved by the member 
from Cumberland. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Debate continues on the Throne Speech. I 
recognize . . . Why is the . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — It being near 5 o’clock, I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Stewart.........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Wiberg .........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Wiberg .........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Goulet...........................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................12 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Welcome to New Members of the Legislative Assembly 
  Jones.............................................................................................................................................................................................12 
 Pending War in the Middle East 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 Saskatchewan Employment Statistics 
  Yates.............................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 Junior Achievement Awards 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 Z99 Radiothon 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 Rural Women’s Achievement Awards 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................14 
 Reality Television 
  Van Mulligen...............................................................................................................................................................................14 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Keeping Young People in Saskatchewan 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................14 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................14 
 Government Participation in Potato Industry 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................15 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................16 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................16 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................16 
 Treaty Land Entitlement Claims 
  Elhard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................18 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................18 
STATEMENT BY PREMIER 
 Canadian Policy on Conflict in Iraq 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................19 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Saskatoon Fairview Constituency By-election Act 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................19 
 Bill No. 2 — The Battleford-Cut Knife Constituency By-election Act 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................19 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Saskatoon Fairview Constituency By-election Act 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................19 
 Bill No. 2 — The Battleford-Cut Knife Constituency By-election Act 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................20 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 1 — The Saskatoon Fairview Constituency By-election Act .........................................................................................20 
 Bill No. 2 — The Battleford-Cut Knife Constituency By-election Act .......................................................................................20 
 
 



 

 

THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Saskatoon Fairview Constituency By-election Act 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................20 
 Bill No. 2 — The Battleford-Cut Knife Constituency By-election Act 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................20 
ROYAL ASSENT ...............................................................................................................................................................................20 
INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................20 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................20 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................20 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Goulet...........................................................................................................................................................................................20 
  D’Autremont (Point of Order)...................................................................................................................................................26 
  Hagel (Point of Order)................................................................................................................................................................26 
  The Speaker (Point of Order) ....................................................................................................................................................26 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................30 
 
 


	Reality Television
	Government Participation in Potato Industry
	THIRD READINGS
	Reality Television
	Government Participation in Potato Industry
	THIRD READINGS

