















































Hansard: June 17, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1717 
 June 17, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and district who 
are concerned about the lack of dialysis services in their region. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Signatures this afternoon on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Moose Jaw, and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens concerned about the 
deplorable state of Highway No. 20. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 
address safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth 
in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Watrous, Strasbourg, Earl Grey, and Nokomis. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of southeast 
Saskatchewan who are very concerned about the crop insurance 
premium increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan, Lampman, 
Regina, and Gladmar. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present regarding the water levels on the Qu’Appelle Valley 
and the absolute, dreadful consequences if something isn’t 
changed. But the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with First 
Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level on the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people not just around 
the Qu’Appelle Valley, but also Regina and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on 
behalf of residents of the Southwest who are proposing to the 
government in this petition a constructive alternative to the CT 
(computerized tomography) plans that the government 
announced in the budget. And the prayer of their petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner to Swift Current instead of providing a new CT 
scanner for the Southwest. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners today are from Swift Current, 
save one from Waldeck. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens throughout Saskatchewan who 
are very concerned about the deplorable condition of Highway 
43. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Gravelbourg, 
Assiniboia, St. Walburg, and Thomson Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens of west 
central Saskatchewan concerned with the alarming rate of rural 
school closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to retain schools in rural communities 
such as Denzil and supply adequate education for rural 
families of our province. 
 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Denzil, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the fairness of Crown lease. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
presenting a petition on the ever-deteriorating highways . . . 
Highway 14. And your prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair the highway in order to address 
safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by the people of Wilkie and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
concerned with this government’s inaction in dealing with the 
Qu’Appelle lakes issue. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with First 
Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level in the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey, Cupar, Lipton, and Edenwold. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 

citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the government’s 
handling of the Crown land leases. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from the 
village of Shell Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 36, 41, 114, 119, 120, 124, 140, and 141. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 65 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: is the minister looking into 
biotechnology alternatives in the oil field that are 
environmentally friendly? 

 
And I have a number of other related questions. 
 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly, I 
would like to introduce 17 grade 4 students from Westview 
School in Estevan. They are seated in the east gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, and they are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Barnstable and Mrs. McCutcheon. 
 
And I would just like to welcome them here this afternoon. I 
look forward to our visit in a while. And I hope they have an 
enjoyable time in Regina and a safe trip when they return home. 
 
And I ask all members to join me in welcoming them here 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the House, 27 
grade 7 and 8 students from the Saskatoon Christian School in 
the west gallery. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Janzen, Mrs. 
Siever, and I hope this is somewhat correct, Mrs. Nienhuis. And 
I’m looking forward to meeting them at 2:30 for a photo and a 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

 

visit, and I’ll see you then. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 20 grade 4 students from Marion McVeety School 
that are seated in the west gallery. They’re accompanied by 
their teacher, Ms. Acton, and a number of parents. 
 
They’ve just spent some time getting me ready for question 
period, so I think I’ve had enough questions for today. I’ll 
advise the opposition to go and ask questions from somebody 
else. 
 
But let’s all give a big hand for these people and welcome them 
to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Melville Hole-In-One Golf Tournament 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
inform members about a very exciting event that took place on 
Saturday, June 14. The very first annual Melville Charity 
Hole-In-One Par Three Golf Tournament was held at the 
Melville golf course and was proclaimed by all participants to 
be a huge success, even though the hole-in-one was elusive. 
 
Although the committee would have been pleased with 100 
entries in this first tournament, the slate was filled with 144 
golfers and a fair number on a waiting list. 
 
As a direct result of this tournament the designated charities, St. 
Peter’s Hospital Foundation and St. Paul’s Home Foundation, 
will be the recipients of $7,000 each. You might say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the tournament committee, to put a new slant on 
an old expression, robbed to pay both Peter and Paul. 
 
Mr. Speaker, golf tournaments offer participants the opportunity 
to renew old acquaintances, make new friends. This one was no 
exception as I not only bumped into a whole bunch of good 
friends, but I also met Melville’s newest physician, Dr. Wessel 
Kriel, whom we welcome to Melville. 
 
The event received support from nearly 100 sponsors from 
Melville and Yorkton, including 36 major contributions. It was 
simply overwhelming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, such events provide communities with funding for 
critically needed funding. I want to congratulate the organizing 
committee: Jerry Jones, Brian Hicke, Gord Brown, Jim 
Schmidt, Jack Hargreaves, Lorne Warnes, Gary Houston, Merv 
Appell, Ed Pereyma, Cory Stoll, Len Wassill, and Merv Ozirny. 
These people worked very, very hard in order for the event to 
be successful. As well, the numerous volunteers who sat to 
make sure that if there was a hole-in-one, they could verify it. 
Congratulations to everyone for this successful event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Whitewood Regional 4-H Show and Sale 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Saturday the Whitewood regional 4-H show and sale was held 
in Whitewood at the Whitewood Auction Service. Mr. Speaker, 
4-H club members gathered from 4-H clubs in Kennedy, 
Kipling, Wawota, Fairmead, and Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout the day 4-H members participated in a 
number of activities and events including judging and 
showmanship competitions as well as showing their 4-H steers. 
At the end of the day, the grand champion steer went to Ashley 
Vargo of the Kipling 4-H Beef Club and the reserve champion 
steer went to Tyler Smyth of the Kennedy 4-H Beef Club. 
 
Following the show, Mr. Speaker, the annual sale took place. 
Despite concerns surrounding BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) the 4-H members realized an average of $1.47 
a pound for their animals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, events like this wouldn’t take place if there 
weren’t many hard-working individuals who volunteer many 
hours of their time in order for young boys and girls and 
teenagers to participate in 4-H events. And we all know how 
well the 4-H program has been accepted throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I want to compliment all of the 
4-H beef clubs, the volunteers, their leaders, and each and every 
one of the members for their achievements through the past 
year. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Multimedia Team Wins Awards 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — You know, Mr. Speaker, getting an 
education these days is a lot different from what you and I 
experienced. I remember reading in my textbooks about 
Champlain, Brébeuf, Wolfe, Montcalm, memorizing dates and 
explorers and never quite fully understanding just what it was 
they did or what they experienced while doing it. I knew 
Canadian history but I didn’t quite sense it. 
 
The times they are a-changing, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to tell 
the Assembly that a pilot project funded by Saskatchewan 
Learning and SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network) 
has developed an interactive Web site for the grade 4 social 
studies curriculum which will bring to life Saskatchewan’s 
differing cultural heritages, traditions, lifestyles, histories, and 
geography from 1600 to the present day — modern 
communications technology to address and dramatize the past. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the creation of this Web site has earned two 
awards for the Regina team of multimedia entrepreneurs who 
created it. Joyce Sotski of Adria Interactive, Bill Armstrong of 
Armstrong Communications, and Susan Risk of Live Wire 
Video Productions have combined their talents and in the 
process they’ve received two significant awards. The 
Association for Media and Technology Education presented to 
the team its Award of Excellence in the school system 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

interactive category. And the Canadian Education Association 
gave them its Achievement Award for combining qualities of 
originality, curriculum relevance, and high artistic and technical 
standards. 
 
I know we all congratulate them and the good news is that 
they’re working on more projects for more students in our 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Special Anniversaries in Cypress Hills Constituency 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two more 
communities and a municipality in the constituency of Cypress 
Hills are celebrating special milestones this summer and I want 
to take this opportunity to recognize them in the legislature. 
 
This month the village of Hazlet is celebrating its 75th 
anniversary, and the RM (rural municipality) of Pittville its 90th 
anniversary. Both these special events will be observed during 
the Hazlet homecoming festivities on the weekend of June 27 
through 29. 
 
The village of Abbey will celebrate its 90th anniversary the 
weekend of July 18, 19, and 20 and is inviting all members of 
the community, past and present, to come out and celebrate this 
auspicious occasion. 
 
And some rural communities in southwest Saskatchewan are 
struggling to maintain their identity and in spite of a declining 
or static population base are making great efforts to preserve 
their sense of community. The spirit and pride of our rural 
residents remains the driving force that allows our many small 
communities to retain their history and culture and enables them 
to preserve this important aspect of rural life for future 
generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the Legislative 
Assembly join with me to offer congratulations to the 
communities of Abbey and Hazlet and the rural municipality of 
Pittville on their special anniversaries, and wish them continued 
success for the future. 
 
Congratulations also to all the committee members for their 
initiative in planning these large-scale celebrations. Hosting 
festivities of this magnitude takes many dedicated volunteers 
and a lot of hours to ensure the success of these celebrations. 
 
So please join with me in wishing each of the celebrants a very 
successful event. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Giant Tiger Store Opens in Regina 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, North West Company 
out of Winnipeg, Manitoba has exclusive rights to Giant Tiger 
stores in Manitoba and the West. 
 
Edward Kennedy, their chief executive officer and president, 

was in Saskatchewan, more appropriately in the north end of 
Regina, to open the very first Giant Tiger store in 
Saskatchewan, in my constituency in the north end of Regina. 
 
This all-Canadian store offers quality family fashion at discount 
prices. They have clothing, housewares, groceries, giftware, and 
more. Mr. Speaker, you step into the bright new store and there 
is genuinely wow factor, there’s great appeal; it’s a wonderful 
looking store. This Giant Tiger store is potentially the first of 
many to come to Saskatchewan. 
 
North West Company is showing its confidence in 
Saskatchewan, and it has hired very close to 100 people. These 
100 jobs, Mr. Speaker, are most welcome and they help our job 
growth stay red hot in Saskatchewan. 
 
For the North West Company, Giant Tigers, and close to 100 
now-working people, the future of Saskatchewan is indeed wide 
open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Delisle Resident Honoured 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Edna Goodwin of 
Delisle, who is well known for her dedication to seeing a job 
through to its finish, was recently honoured for her 75 years 
membership in the Marian Rebekah Lodge. Her initial 
membership was held with the Lucky Lake chapter where she 
joined in 1927. 
 
She and her husband farmed in Qu’Appelle Valley. They sold 
the farm in 1946 and moved to Delisle where they bought the 
drug store and operated until 1971. With the lodge never far 
from her thoughts, Edna helped organize a Rebekah Lodge for 
Delisle in 1951. 
 
She has received all her Jewels: Veteran’s Jewel for having 
served 25 years; Past Noble Grand; Past President and District 
Deputy Jewel, head advisory to five lodges. To obtain the 
District Deputy Jewel one must be a Past Noble Grand. At the 
time she held the position in Perdue, Humboldt, Colonsay, and 
two Saskatchewan lodges were under her jurisdiction. 
 
The Rebekah Lodge was originally organized as a benefit lodge 
to help the sick and the poor. To this day they make their 
contributions to many worthy organizations both on a local and 
national level. 
 

“I’ve always strived to do my best and hope that 
somewhere along the way I did some good,” commented 
Mrs. Goodwin. 

 
If you speak to anyone who knows her, she did. In addition to 
her lodge responsibilities she spent time involved with 
Homemakers, United Church Women, and spent 35 years on 
the United Church Board. 
 
She was also involved with the group that organized the 
building of the Delisle centennial auditorium. Many jobs have 
been well done and seen through until the finish by this 
dedicated lady. 
 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

 

Please join me in congratulating Edna Goodwin, honouring her 
75-year membership in the Marian Rebekah Lodge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Native Prairie Appreciation Week 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. June 15 to the 21 has 
been proclaimed Native Prairie Appreciation Week in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan is the only province with a week dedicated to 
raising appreciation, awareness of native prairie ecosystems and 
the importance of maintaining their ecological integrity. Mr. 
Speaker, only about 17 per cent of the province’s native prairie 
still exists. In fact grasslands around the world are considered to 
be the most endangered ecosystems on the planet. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan our ranching community deserves 
particular credit for managing their use of grasslands so that 
biodiversity and habitat for species at risk is maintained. This is 
important not only to the thousands of native plant and animal 
species that depend on native prairie but also to Saskatchewan 
people who benefit from conserving native prairie whether it be 
used for agriculture, recreation, hunting, birding, or ecotourism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning as part of the Native Prairie 
Appreciation Week, the Prairie Conservation Action Plan was 
launched. This is a five-year plan involving a diverse 
partnership, chaired by the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 
Association, committed to promoting stewardship and working 
together to conserve native prairie ecosystems. I want to take 
this opportunity to commend that partnership and all those 
individuals and organizations working to ensure that native 
prairie is both valued and sustained. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Northeast on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — To ask leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the House, 
a constituent of mine who is joining us on the floor here, Ms. 
Terri Sleeva. 
 
Terri is known far and wide as being a very hard worker on 
behalf of the causes of people with a disability, and anyone 
who’s ever met Terri will know that she’s a very, very 
determined person. 
 
And joining her today is Gordon Slackoff, her cousin from 
Victoria, BC (British Columbia), and Gordon is in the province 
visiting friends and family. And I had the opportunity of having 
a conversation with Gordon a little earlier on today, and he 

shared with me what he sees as a very beautiful province and a 
very clean city of Regina and a very clean province. 
 
And I want to ask all the members to offer them both a very 
warm welcome to the Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And why is the member for Saskatoon Nutana 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — With leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to join with my colleague in welcoming Terri 
Sleeva to the Legislative Assembly. I came to know Ms. Sleeva 
when I was Minister of Health when she was very active in 
promoting the rights of people living with multiple sclerosis. 
And I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I think the minister . . . 
the former minister of Health and the associate minister of 
Health, we remember Terri with a lot of fondness now. 
 
Terri did . . . she was quite prepared to rip the skin off of you if 
she felt you needed to do something. She’s a tremendous 
advocate and she looks absolutely fabulous. And I want to 
welcome her to the legislature. Obviously she is still advocating 
and doing her work on behalf of people living with multiple 
sclerosis. 
 
So welcome, Terri. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Support for Beef Industry 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, just moments ago the Prime 
Minister announced that there will be a federal compensation 
package for BSE cost shared 60/40 by the federal and 
provincial governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Minister of Agriculture have any details 
of the federal compensation package and does our provincial 
government plan to provide 40 per cent of its cost share? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The answer to both of those questions, Mr. 
Speaker, is yes, is yes. We’re going to provide assistance to the 
compensation package at the level that has now been agreed on, 
which is the 60/40. And in fact we are in the process yet today, 
negotiating the package. 
 
We had a conference call this morning, 6 o’clock Saskatchewan 
time, with all of the ministers across the country, including Mr. 
Vanclief. We had another conference call at noon today with 
the Western ministers and their officials. And we’re scheduled 
to have another conference call at 3 o’clock this afternoon with 
the Minister of Agriculture and all of the ministers of 
Agriculture from across this country in attempting to put 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

together the final details of what the national compensation 
package should look like or will look like. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members on 
this side of the House are extremely pleased to see that our 
province will be contributing their 40 per cent. 
 
I would like to ask the minister if he knows what sectors of the 
industry will be included in the package and how soon the 
producers can expect a compensation payment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, our interest would have been 
to see a different formula than the 60/40. Although we’re happy 
that we’re getting close to an agreement, we’re not of the view 
that the 60/40 is what the compensation package should be in 
terms of cost share, given that this is clearly a trade issue. And 
on trade issues the provincial governments rarely participate. 
 
But in this case provincial governments are not going to stand 
in the way of getting money to producers. And it will be funds 
that will flow initially to the feedlot industry, people who are 
feeding livestock in Canada today. That’s what the package has 
concentrated itself towards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the $400 million package right 
away will help address the immediate problem, but if the 
borders remain closed the total cost to the cattle industry will be 
in far excess of the $400 million. A recent report pegged that 
cost to be around $2.5 billion but really no one knows for sure. 
 
If the borders remain closed for four months, Mr. Speaker, can 
the minister tell us, is this the only compensation that will be 
coming from the federal government or are they prepared to 
consider further compensation if the borders remain closed for a 
longer period of time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to just highlight the comment that 
was made by Premier Klein which I had the privilege of hearing 
at the Western Premiers’ Conference or meetings a couple of 
days back of last week. Mr. Klein said this, that if in fact the 
borders remain closed fully till the end of August of this year, 
we won’t have a beef industry in this country that we’ll 
recognize. We won’t have one. 
 
So when the member opposite asks what kind of ancillary 
compensation will be provided to all of the other industries in 
Canada, we need to start first by providing where the hurt is 
largest. And the hurt is largest to the industry that feeds. 
 
If we can get the US (United States) government to open its 
border so that some of the live animals can move into the US 
and some of the carcasses can move into the US and across the 
country domestically, we’ll see the beef industry begin to 
recapture its ability again to survive in this country. 
 

If we aren’t able to achieve that, if the federal government 
nationally is not able to achieve an orderly opening within the 
next several weeks, we will have an issue in this country that’s 
far greater, Mr. Speaker, that’s far larger than the $2.5 billion 
that the member talks about today. It will be issues that will be 
insurmountable in many fronts which treasuries will never 
cover, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there seems to be a lot of 
conflicting messages on where we’re getting or where we’re at 
with getting the US border opened. 
 
Yesterday the minister told the House that all the scientific 
reports were complete and had been forwarded by Lyle 
Vanclief to the officials in Washington. However, officials with 
the CFIA (Canadian Food Inspection Agency) are saying that 
that’s not true, and in fact the report from the international 
inspectors is not expected until sometime next week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what exactly has Lyle Vanclief sent to the 
officials in Washington and what indication does the minister 
have that the border may be opened sometime soon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what I said yesterday to the 
media, I said to the Leader of the Opposition who asked me the 
question yesterday and will repeat again for the House again 
today, last week the scientific community was in Canada, 
reviewed the scientific evidence, and provided a report to our 
Canadian government that says generically that we have a 
sound and a safe and a food inspection agency that has done an 
outstanding piece of work in a short space of time. 
 
(14:00) 
 
That evidence the federal government have included in a letter 
that went on Thursday to the national government of the US 
indicating to them that we should as Canadians now, the 
Canadian government, begin to have the detailed discussion 
about what it will take to open the borders. That letter, Mr. 
Speaker, went on Thursday as a fax letter to the US 
government. 
 
Minister Vanclief said to us that they’ll pursue the national 
government, through his department, will pursue today or 
tomorrow the detailed discussions with the federal government 
about what it will take to open the border. Those discussions 
will begin by the national government, beginning in the next 
day or two. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Automobile Insurance 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, auto 
insurance are skyrocketing all across Canada. I think the 
average increase this last year was 20 per cent in provinces 
without a publicly owned auto insurance agency. 
 
In Saskatchewan the Auto Fund is focused on providing 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

 

mandatory auto insurance, vehicle registration, driver’s licence, 
and personal auto injury coverage. And, Mr. Speaker, while we 
might have some suggestions on the PIPP (personal injury 
protection plan)/tort debate, we think that the Auto Fund is 
working well in keeping insurance rates down in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now, Mr. Speaker . . . Thank you. That’s . . . 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s still another Saskatchewan Party 
policy that the NDP (New Democratic Party) accepts, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re happy to see it. We’re happy to see it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this is what we’ve been 
saying all along. When the government sticks to its knitting, 
when it focuses on the province of Saskatchewan, good things 
happen. 
 
Later this day the Saskatchewan Party will be moving a motion, 
Mr. Speaker, that says, that encourages the Government of 
Saskatchewan today and in the future to maintain the publicly 
owned and operated Auto Fund in the interest of avoiding 
uncontrolled rising auto insurance rates seen in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
To the minister, Mr. Speaker: will the minister support that 
common sense resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member opposite on behalf of the government that in fact we 
will be participating in the debate. We will be as well amending 
the motion so that it reflects what’s in the best interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan. And the amendment would read: 
 

That this Assembly instructs the Government of 
Saskatchewan, today and in the future, to maintain the 
publicly owned and operated Auto Fund administered by 
SGI, in the interest of avoiding uncontrolled rising auto 
insurance rates as seen in other jurisdictions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re saying on this side of the House is that 
we support a publicly funded, or a publicly owned, compulsory 
auto insurance fund that has been in the best interests of the 
province, and we do not support wholesale privatization as 
members of that side of the House would, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re happy again that 
the government is on side again with the Saskatchewan Party on 
what is good public policy for the province of Saskatchewan. 
We have another question though, and if the minister 
responsible for SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) wants to answer the questions, well 
that’s great. 
 

It’s a concern about the expenses at the Auto Fund, Mr. 
Speaker, because what we have to do in this province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would like to be able to hear 
all these remarks. They’re quite well worth hearing, members, 
and I invite all members to listen to the remarks. 
 
Mr. Wall: — They holler when they don’t agree with us. They 
holler when they agree with us, Mr. Speaker. What they need to 
be listening to is the hollering of Saskatchewan people to get 
out of the way and let the Sask Party govern this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, of concern here is the expenses at 
the Auto Fund. In the most recent annual report we see that 
expenses — excluding, excluding claim costs, excluding claim 
costs — has gone up $5.7 million; 2.9 million of those 
expenses, Mr. Speaker, according to the annual report, are in 
salaries and administration and advertising. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question to the government is this, the 
minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) or the minister of SPUDCO: who will commit to the 
people of the province that this government is going to do 
everything it can do to reverse this trend and keep expenses 
down at the Auto Fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. As I said earlier, that we will be supporting 
compulsory auto insurance, and I want to tell you why we 
won’t get out of the way for the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s because of their party policy. 
 
No. CC0002, and I quote: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government will allow private 
insurance companies to sell vehicle insurance, above the 
basic licensing fee. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’re not going to get out of the way 
for those folks, and the people of Saskatchewan don’t trust them 
for that very reason. In here today they try and portray 
themselves as the protectors of publicly owned insurance 
company, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), when 
their party policy is 180 degrees out of phase with what they’re 
saying in this House today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no party in the history 
of the province, there is no party in the history of the province 
that is as good at ignoring its own policy resolutions than the 
New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We’re being very clear here today with this 
resolution. The government’s on side. We should agree to agree 
and carry on. Because, Mr. Speaker, what we’re worried about 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

on this side of the House with respect to the Auto Fund, what 
we’re worried about is this government’s track record in 
messing up the Crown corporations. We remember the 28 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order, members. A little 
order, members. More order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — . . . Mr. Speaker, because we remember that 
minister losing 28 million taxpayers’ dollars and then not telling 
the truth. We remember Minds Eye productions, Mr. Speaker, 
over 5 million lost; 14 million in a dot-com in Georgia; $2 
million lost on Clickabid, an on-line auction company; 9 
million lost on Ag Dealer — we remember all of those. 
 
So will that minister, the minister responsible for SPUDCO, 
stand in his place and assure the House that he won’t mess up 
the Auto Fund like he did the SPUDCO deal, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question 
myself. I want . . . A couple of them, as a matter of fact. I want 
to know, I want to know and will be watching very carefully 
this afternoon if they’re going to support the amendment to that 
motion that this government is going to put forward. I want to 
know if they’re going to support it because what it’s going to do 
is ensure that SGI remains in a position to be able to deliver 
good service to the people, and affordable service. 
 
And I want to know as well who’s telling the truth — the 
people who formulated the Saskatchewan Party policy or the 
member from Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budgetary Projections 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, over the noon hour federal Finance minister, John 
Manley, held a news conference at which he admitted that 
economic growth in Canada this year will be at least one 
percentage point less than forecast in his budget due to two 
things, Mr. Speaker: SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) 
and the mad cow scare. Fortunately our province has not been 
affected by SARS, but we have been hit with the economic 
fallout from the BSE crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s provincial budget was based on an 
unrealistic growth projection of 6.8 per cent. The federal 
Finance minister is now downgrading his economic growth 
projection. 
 
Has the provincial federal Finance minister reduced his growth 
projection since the March budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, certainly BSE will have 
an impact on the province of Saskatchewan. We have not been 
able to determine what that impact might be with regard to our 
real GDP (gross domestic product). 
 
But I must point out to the members opposite that since the 

budget of March 28, we have had two private forecasters who 
have updated their recent statistics. And the Laurentian Group 
is now predicting 6 per cent growth for Saskatchewan this year, 
and we’re also seeing Global Insight predicts 5.5 per cent. And 
we are quite confident we’ll meet our targets in the province of 
Saskatchewan because this economy is growing in this province 
in all sectors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
economic forecasters have looked at Saskatchewan when this 
Finance minister released this budget and said that 6.8 per cent 
was unrealistic. They were looking at 3.1, 3.2 per cent — just 
like the other Canadian provinces. 
 
And as a result of the downturn in the economic factors in this 
country, Mr. Speaker, those financial institutions have now 
changed, and have looked at the country, and said we’re going 
to drop by at least 1 per cent because of a tremendous economic 
slowdown. 
 
In fact Mr. Manley has indicated that he will introduce a 
mini-budget by the end of June. He has also admitted that 
economic growth would drop by at least one percentage point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP Finance minister provide a similar 
economic update by the end of June and will he adjust his 6.8 
per cent economic growth factor to a more realistic figure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, certainly this question 
has been asked by the member opposite in estimates, and the 
answer’s exactly the same. We look at last year, and we look at 
the forecast for Canada and their growth in the 2 to 3 per cent 
range, and we look at Newfoundland that grew a whopping 13 
per cent. We have indicated to the member opposite that the 
sector dynamics for Saskatchewan are based on the formula that 
is derived from our Department of Finance officials, and we 
stand by that because our officials have been the best at 
predicting the growth in this province for the last 20 years out 
of any group. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to panic at this point in time 
if the federal government needs to adjust its numbers. We’re not 
going to adjust our numbers. We stand by our numbers because 
the economy in this province is growing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister of 
Liquor and Gaming. In 2000 the NDP hired the accounting firm 
of Ernst & Young to look into the misspending of millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars by Dutch Lerat, the former CEO (chief 
executive officer) of SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority). 
 
It was the taxpayers’ money that Dutch Lerat was spending and 
it was the taxpayers’ money that was used to pay for the Ernst 
& Young report on the SIGA scandal. 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister come clean with the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan and release the Ernst & Young report today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I believe I indicated to that 
member last evening that legally we’re not allowed to release 
that report. I have a letter here from Ernst & Young, the third 
party involved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also pointed out that the Provincial Auditor, obviously our 
Provincial Auditor that that member does not trust or have any 
confidence in, reported that he had totally reviewed . . . And the 
member from Humboldt is laughing. Obviously they don’t trust 
the auditor because the auditor went through that Ernst & 
Young report and indicated that his report, based on what he 
found, was accurate. He was satisfied with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if that member does not believe that we have a document 
. . . I would like to send this over to that hon. member, Mr. 
Speaker, to indicate that this document is not to be released by 
the third party that’s involved. There is a legal process under 
the freedom of information Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The NDP continually either blames someone 
else or hide behind someone else. Today they’re hiding behind 
the freedom of information Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SIGA commissioned . . . SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) commissioned Ernst & Young 
to conduct a special audit in July 2000 because of the misuse of 
public funds by SIGA, yet this audit has never been made 
public. 
 
The Justice department says government officials knew about 
Dutch Lerat’s misspending. The vice-chief of the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) says government 
officials not only knew about the misspending but they actually 
gave approval of it. The minister claims otherwise. 
 
If the Ernst & Young report truly shows . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
I’m just finding it very difficult to be able to hear the words 
being spoken, and I’d ask members to make allowances so that 
I could hear it. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, if the Ernst & Young audit truly 
shows that no government officials were aware of Dutch Lerat’s 
misspending, will the minister prove it by releasing the Ernst & 
Young report today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I guess I’ve forgotten — I need to speak 
slower, Mr. Speaker. Legally we are not allowed to release that 
report. That’s the first time I’ve ever heard anybody say that 
we’re hiding behind the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, if this minister wants to clear up 
the issues around SIGA, we ask him to release the Ernst & 
Young report. Mr. Speaker, either way the government and the 
minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming were negligent 
around the SIGA issue. 
 
They either knew and chose to do nothing, or if they did know, 
then the government and the minister were incompetent because 
the government is the regulator and is responsible to ensure 
appropriate use of public funds. 
 
Will the minister release the Ernst & Young report once and for 
all, and show the people of Saskatchewan what really 
happened? What is the minister hiding? Who is he protecting? 
Will he release the report today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the member I believe has the 
letter. I’m not sure if it needs more interpretation. I would hope 
that someone could understand what the third party that carried 
out the audit indicated in that letter, supplied it to our Provincial 
Auditor, Mr. Speaker, who thoroughly reviewed it. 
 
Now obviously there’s a need to . . . for some further 
explanation, interpretation of the letter. I’ve read it, I’ve had a 
lot of other people read it, and it’s plain and simple. Legally, 
under the freedom of information Act, we’re not allowed to 
release that report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The freedom of information is not allowed if it 
is to protect a third party. It is not to protect the NDP. It’s not so 
the NDP can hide behind what they do not want the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — It is time that this government came clean with 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan whose money was misused, 
whose money they used to put forward the Ernst & Young 
report. It is time for this minister to release this report. Will he 
table it today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well there’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that 
the members opposite are without doubt wallowing in the 
shallow end of the question pool. We have discussed this over 
and over, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there were also some comments made that I would caution 
the member not to make outside of this Assembly, in that last 
dissertation — the accusations and allegations that get pretty 
serious, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There were issues with SIGA. They were discovered through 
audit processes. I have to remind them once again, we have 
strengthened the regulatory compliances. The $1.36 million, 
including the monies owed to the Associated Entities Fund and 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

community development corporation, was recovered. We’ve 
worked with SIGA to improve its financial situation. They 
virtually doubled their profits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I find it difficult to believe, again, the refusal by that member, if 
she doesn’t understand the way I’m answering her questions, to 
come and sit with officials — we’ll record it; we’ll document it. 
Obviously she doesn’t understand in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the whole problem that has gone 
on with SIGA, Indian Gaming, started with this government 
because they have abdicated their authority and not regulated 
liquor and gaming which they are supposed to do, which is their 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question on the minds of the taxpayers these 
days is, what is the NDP trying to hide? Whose interest is the 
NDP protecting? It is certainly not the interests of the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor indicated that SIGA 
misspent 2 million taxpayers’ dollars. The Provincial Auditor 
also indicated that Dutch Lerat spent 800,000 of that. The 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) investigation went on 
for two years and concluded that the government and SIGA 
officials approved of this misspending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who in the NDP government knew about Dutch 
Lerat’s misspending? Who in the NDP government approved 
this misspending? And why is the NDP now hiding behind the 
freedom of information Act? The taxpayers have a right to 
know. Will the minister stop hiding behind the freedom of 
information Act and release the Ernst & Young report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I sincerely and truly regret 
that that member has no respect for our legal processes. And 
I’m proud to recycle the answers to the questions that have been 
asked of me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2000 when it was determined that there was a problem, it 
was this government that initiated audits — forensic audits — 
police investigations, called in the Provincial Auditor. The 
Provincial Auditor is quite satisfied with all the reports. I don’t 
understand. Obviously no respect for the Provincial Auditor or 
any trust and confidence in that legislative officer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand here; we have nothing to 
hide. And if they do not believe that legal processes should be 
respected, then I feel sorry for those people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to the rest of this 
Assembly, four young men who are sitting in the west gallery. 
 
Nathan Markwart is one of these young men. Nathan might give 
a wave to identify himself, is here with Youth Parliament 
sponsored by our constituency. Nathan and I also are members 
of Heritage United Church. With Nathan are Trevor Holloway, 
Reed Miller, and Dean Weninger. And these men all attend 
Michael A. Riffel collegiate. 
 
So welcome them please to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Northwest 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery I notice 
that Richard Phillips has just come in. Richard would be well 
known to this building, having served as chief of staff to the 
former Liberal caucus and as well in my office. 
 
And he now works with the Food Grains Bank in Manitoba. 
And he has had some interesting times, having travelled to 
places like Afghanistan and Africa for his job with the Food 
Grains Bank. 
 
Also I would point out to Richard Phillips that we have just 
increased the limit on our highway to 110 so he’ll be closer now 
when he’s on the roads in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I would ask all member to welcome Richard Phillips here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, it is my 
duty to lay on the table the annual report for the year 2002-2003 
of the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy Commissioner. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 731 through 743 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 731 through to 743 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Public Ownership of the Saskatchewan Auto Fund 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
interesting 75-minute debate because finally, finally, we have 
an issue that the NDP are paying attention to. And I’m going to, 
at this point, just outline what that motion is, Mr. Speaker, and 
then we’ll go into the details of why it’s so critical at this 
particular point. 
 

That this Assembly encourage the Government of 
Saskatchewan, today and in the future, to maintain the 
publicly owned and operated Auto Fund in the interest of 
avoiding uncontrolled rising auto insurance rates seen in 
other jurisdictions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it becomes very important that we deal with this 
issue today. And the reason it becomes so important is when we 
look at the history that this NDP government has given us in a 
lot of other areas around the province, we are afraid, Mr. 
Speaker, we are afraid, Mr. Speaker, that they’re going to take 
this same issue, this same issue, and do to it . . . to a lot of the 
other good programs that we have around this province. 
 
And I’m going to want to take some time, Mr. Speaker, to 
outline what those other programs are that this government has 
decimated, destroyed, and made a disgrace. And when we look 
at that particular record, we worry, Mr. Speaker. We worry, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government’s going to do exactly the same 
thing to the Auto Fund that they’ve done to many other areas. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we need to outline what’s been 
happening across Canada, and taking an article from today’s 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix and it says: 
 

Automobile insurance premiums increased an average of 
19.6 per cent in 2003 from . . . 2001 . . . 

 
And then it lists what happens in a few specific provinces — 
New Brunswick experienced the biggest premium hikes at 27.5 
per cent increase; Newfoundland is seeing a 25.2 per cent 
increase; Prince Edward, 13.9; Ontario, 20.1; Alberta 15.4. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we worry what these NDP are going to do in 
Saskatchewan. And here’s why we worry, Mr. Speaker — 
here’s why we worry. We’ve seen over the years what happens 
when you have a good concept that’s good for the people of 
Saskatchewan and you give it into the hands of this group of 
socialists and we see how they totally destroy it. 
 
Let me take one for example, Mr. Speaker — health care. 
Health care. The NDP will take pride in saying this is the 
birthplace of health care. It probably is, Mr. Speaker. But in the 
hands of these NDP, what has happened? We have the longest 
waiting lists in Canada — the longest waiting lists in Canada. 
No other province but NDP Saskatchewan has had waiting lists 
that are as long. 
 
That’s why we start to worry, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we 
need to be vigilant. That’s why the Sask Party has to be 
vigilant. We have to keep the province and the NDP on their 
toes, because before we know it they will do to the Auto Fund, 

Mr. Speaker, they will do to the Auto Fund exactly what 
they’ve done to health care — the longest waiting lists. 
Everyone out there watching knows that’s the case, there is no 
doubt about that. And it’s been under the watch of the NDP, 
under the watch of the NDP that those lists have become as 
long as they are. 
 
Let me give another example from health care, Mr. Speaker. 
What is one of the reasons that we have those long waiting 
lists? Why do we have those long waiting lists? It’s because we 
don’t have enough workers in our health care system. Isn’t that 
strange, Mr. Speaker, that under an NDP government we 
wouldn’t have enough workers, that people who could stay 
working in Saskatchewan choose to leave an NDP 
Saskatchewan and work in other provinces and in the states of 
the US rather than work here. That’s because the NDP have 
made this province such an undesirable place to live. 
 
It can be turned around, Mr. Speaker, and the Sask Party is 
going to turn it around. We have the plan to turn it around. We 
have the plan to grow this province and we’re going to do that, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re going to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We look at small communities. We look at 
small communities. Nowheres across Canada have small 
communities been as decimated as in Saskatchewan. Now 
what’s going to happen if we leave the Auto Fund in the same 
hands? There is no reason, there is no reason, Mr. Speaker, to 
think that absolutely anything else is going to happen but what 
we’ve seen across this province. 
 
I brought two points, Mr. Speaker, from under health care. All 
you have to do is look around rural Saskatchewan and see how 
those people are fighting to keep their communities alive, their 
towns and villages alive, and we know exactly what’s going to 
be happening with the Auto Fund, Mr. Speaker. They’re going 
to destroy that in exactly the same way. Anything that’s good 
for the people of this province, this NDP government has the 
ability to destroy. 
 
It wasn’t long ago, Mr. Speaker, when they actually had an 
agreement, an agreement with the people of Saskatchewan, an 
agreement that the people of Saskatchewan said was a good 
plan. They liked it. They liked it. It was signed by the NDP 
government. It was called GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program). 
 
(14:30) 
 
These people tore it up. They tore up that plan; they tore up that 
agreement. And worse than that, Mr. Speaker, many farmers by 
now have sort of financially managed to get over that big 
financial kick that they were given by the NDP, but the scary 
part is, is that the NDP, Mr. Speaker, broke their word. They 
broke their word. There was a signed contract with those 
farmers and they tore up, they tore up that contract. 
 
Why should anyone in this province have any more faith in 
these NDP that they might not tear up the Auto Fund? There is 
no reason to suspect they wouldn’t do it. They did it; they did it. 
And I have one of the Regina NDP MLAs right now chirping 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

from his seat as to could that ever happen? It did happen, Mr. 
Speaker; it happened with thousands of farmers. They ripped it 
up. Why would they not do it with this one? We can’t trust 
them. It’s their word that’s at stake and they’ve shown the kind 
of people that they are, Mr. Speaker. Crop insurance is a fine 
example of that. 
 
We have no idea what else they’re going to dream up with 
regards to the Auto Fund, Mr. Speaker. Let’s just look at one of 
the things that they’ve done with some of their plans for the 
future; what they’ve done with the plans for the future. 
 
They took and they said in education, we’re going to plan for 
30,000 fewer students in this province. Plan for less, plan for 
less. And the people of this province better look at the same 
thing when we’re dealing with the Auto Fund. They better 
realize that this NDP government is going to be planning for 
less, Mr. Speaker. They can expect worse coverage; they can 
expect a more expensive coverage. And who knows, Mr. 
Speaker, they may decide to take the whole Auto Fund and 
scrap it. They’ve done this in a lot of other areas, Mr. Speaker, a 
lot of other areas. 
 
Let’s just look at what happened with electricity. People say, 
well surely here we have in Saskatchewan, we have this 
particular plan by the NDP that everyone has to buy their power 
from, you know, the government. Not true, not true. Saskatoon, 
Swift Current, and some major private organizations can buy 
their power wherever they want. 
 
These are the people that want to go ahead and force everything 
down their throats except when it comes to Regina, and this is a 
bit of a sidebar, Mr. Speaker, but I do have to mention this. 
When, Mr. Speaker, the contracts were made with the towns 
and the cities about that electrical thing, the cities that chose, 
Mr. Speaker, the cities that chose to give up their rights to 
handle their own electricity — Saskatoon and Swift Current 
chose to keep it; Regina chose to give theirs up, to sell it to the 
city of Regina — so now when the city or the government gives 
some of that money to the city, they call that revenue sharing, 
Mr. Speaker. Revenue sharing. First you buy it from it, and then 
when you make your payment you say that’s revenue sharing. 
That’s why it becomes so frightening to even contemplate what 
this NDP government may do with the Auto Fund, with the 
Auto Fund. 
 
I listed, Mr. Speaker, some of the provinces and some of the 
increase in rates that are there, and we worry. We worry, Mr. 
Speaker, what the NDP is going to do here in Saskatchewan. 
They mishandle most everything that deals with the ordinary 
people. Good example — same newspaper, Mr. Speaker, same 
newspaper — today’s The StarPhoenix, “Gov’t pension 
shortfall surfaces.” 
 
Now who would you think the NDP should take care of would 
be the ordinary people, but they don’t. Their Auto Fund is at 
risk, their GRIP was at risk, their pensions, Mr. Speaker, are at 
risk because the NDP, the NDP government, has not done their 
due responsibility for the people of this province. 
 
You can’t trust them, Mr. Speaker. You can’t trust them to take 
the very pensions, the people who have served this province for 
decades, and then find out that there may be shortfalls. Shortfall 

surfaces, Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon StarPhoenix today. This isn’t 
an old copy with some old history, Mr. Speaker. It isn’t that at 
all. That problem with workers’ pensions is serious. 
 
We haven’t in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, over the years, not 
had very many edges. The Auto Fund has been an edge that 
we’ve had because our Auto Fund rates have been low. They’ve 
been better than most other provinces. After we’ve had the 
debate about taxes with Alberta, with property tax in British 
Columbia, and we’ve gone through all of those all the way 
across Canada and we find out that as this province we tend to 
not stack up that well, we’ve always been able to pull out our 
Auto Fund. We’ve always been able to pull out our Auto Fund 
and say, at the end of the day, here’s where Saskatchewan is in 
the lead. Here’s where it’s in the lead. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had to list things from health 
care to power to pensions to education to GRIP; in all of those 
areas, one after another, the NDP has failed the ordinary person 
in Saskatchewan. It becomes important then, Mr. Speaker, 
when we look at that history that we realize that this Assembly 
needs to encourage the Government of Saskatchewan today and 
in the future to maintain that publicly owned and operated Auto 
Fund. We’re not dealing with the other Crowns here, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re dealing with the Auto Fund specifically, pure 
and simple. 
 
That Auto Fund is a good plan, Mr. Speaker. And a little later 
on we’ll go into some of the details of it and some of the very 
specific financial aspects of it and that will explain some of the 
need to maintain the Auto Fund in greater detail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Okay, dealing with a few other issues why we have to watch 
this NDP government. If we’re not careful, if we’re not careful, 
who knows where else they’re going to go? Look what they’ve 
done with some of the other good plans in Saskatchewan. 
 
Telephones. Instead of staying with telephones and giving us 
the service that they’ve done in Saskatchewan and done well 
and done for reasonable rates, where do they decide they’re 
going to make money to sort of subsidize our rates? They’re 
going to go all around the world — around Canada, around 
United States, Australia. No limit. No limit. 
 
And then they say they’re going to come back and keep our 
phone rates down. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that has 
backfired very seriously. It has backfired in spades on this NDP 
government and unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately it 
has backfired on every single citizen of this province, every 
single citizen of this province. Because our telephone rates, 
instead of being lower because of the investment in Alberta and 
Australia and any other place they could dream up, we’ve had 
to subsidize the losses over there, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had to 
subsidize those losses. That’s frightening. 
 
We talked a little earlier on how they broke their contract, broke 
their word. Now we find out that when they try to go outside of 
Saskatchewan to make investments to go ahead and keep some 
of our programs as economical as possible, they fail. It’s 
because when you turn a capital loose . . . a capitalist loose on 
something to make some money, they can do it. You turn a 
socialist loose on something, they’re going to lose money as 
they’ve done time after time after time. Probably the only ones 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

 

they’ve won is one that a previous capitalist organization 
probably set up. On their own, they can’t do it. They haven’t 
done it. 
 
And we worry, Mr. Speaker. We worry that they’re going to 
take the Auto Fund and decide they’re going to bring it to 
Australia or New Zealand or Louisiana. If they’re going to take 
our telephones to those places, why wouldn’t they suddenly go 
to Louisiana and say guess what, we have an Auto Fund plan 
for you. And if they do it over there, Mr. Speaker, the same 
thing’s going to happen that’s happened across the whole 
world. When these people invest Saskatchewan money, they 
lose. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw 
chuckles at my term, the whole world. That’s exactly what it’s 
been. Australia is about as far away as you can get, and they’re 
losing money over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the motion at this particular 
time: 
 

That this Assembly encourages the Government of 
Saskatchewan, today and in the future, to maintain the 
publicly owned and operated Auto Fund in the interest of 
avoiding uncontrolled rising auto insurance rates seen in 
other jurisdictions. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from Swift 
Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter this debate and it’s an honour, Mr. Speaker, to 
second the motion that was spoken to so eloquently by my 
colleague, the member for Rosthern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I know, I know of very precious few people in 
this Assembly that can put a finer point on a debate than the 
member for Rosthern and we all appreciate it on this side of the 
House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we had a few questions on this very issue in 
question period, and it was very interesting to hear the response 
and who responded. Clearly these were questions about SGI . . . 
well actually about the Auto Fund because the Auto Fund is not 
a part of SGI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the annual report suggests, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP annual report suggests the fund is operated on a 
break-even basis over time. The fund is not a Crown 
Investments Corporation subsidiary. SGI acts as the 
administrator of the fund, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the Auto 
Fund is. 
 
And it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that the fund operates on a 
break-even basis over time and neither receives money nor pays 
annual dividends to the provincial government. This is a 
stand-alone program, compulsory program of the government. 
 

And so we ask questions. In light of the fact that this is a 
burning issue across the country, we ask questions to the 
minister responsible. But the minister responsible doesn’t 
answer. 
 
Instead, believe it or not, the Government House Leader 
answers the questions. The House Leader, Mr. Speaker, the 
same minister that was responsible for the biggest scandal in the 
last 50 years in this province in terms of squandering taxpayers’ 
money and not telling the truth about it, Mr. Speaker — and not 
telling the truth about it, by his own admission, for six long 
years. 
 
Well then the House Leader stands up and he reads a resolution 
of the Saskatchewan Party. And I don’t know if I heard him 
read the whole resolution or the right resolution but here it is, 
Mr. Speaker. Here’s the resolution of the Saskatchewan Party, a 
Saskatchewan . . . on this issue: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government will allow private 
insurance companies to sell vehicle insurance . . . 

 
And I think he stopped there. But it goes on; the rest of the 
resolution says: 
 

. . . above the basic licensing fee. 
 

Mr. Speaker, above the basic licensing fee, which as the annual 
report points out is the compulsory program for the Auto Fund. 
Imagine that, Mr. Speaker, imagine the minister responsible for 
SPUDCO not dealing the whole truth in the Legislative 
Assembly. But that’s what happened just a few moments ago. 
 
The fact of the matter remains this, Mr. Speaker. Our motion 
and the resolution of our party are completely in tune with each 
other and, and they’re in tune with the spirit of the amendment 
that we hear is coming from the government side. Sorry, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re not the opposition yet — not yet — but they 
soon will be after the election. 
 
So the point of our party resolution and the point of our 
questions and the private members’ debate we’re having today 
is completely in line with the spirit with which the government 
is going to be proposing in terms of their amendment. Because 
he didn’t . . . I don’t think he read the whole resolution or 
maybe the wrong resolution but here it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we do have some serious concerns, as the member for 
Rosthern has pointed out. And the reason we bring this motion 
forward is our concerns are based on the track record of this 
government in managing their affairs. Now I . . . Managing the 
Crown corporations on one hand. And remembering this isn’t a 
Crown, Mr. Speaker — it’s a program by admission of the 
annual report — but the track record and how they’ve managed 
the Crowns gives us pause to be a little bit concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, about what they will do with respect with the Auto 
Fund. 
 
In fact you don’t have to go very far in the annual report to see 
the thin edge of the wedge, Mr. Speaker, when you detail . . . 
when you look at the detail of the kinds of investments the 
governments have directed the Auto Fund to take. 
 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, for the most part . . . And the member for 
Kindersley asks a good question, he asks, well what kind of 
investments? Well, Mr. Speaker, much of them seem very 
conventional — obviously treasury bills, shares, pool funds, and 
real estate. And, Mr. Speaker, those are certainly reasonable. 
 
And quite rightly the annual report also points out that the Auto 
Fund took a little bit of a hit in terms of its investment like 
every other insurance agency, or in this case — it’s not a 
company — but in this case they took a hit on their investments 
as did all other insurance companies or organizations across 
North America, except, Mr. Speaker, for ICBC (Insurance 
Corporation of British Columbia) actually, which is a system in 
British Columbia. They posted a surplus last year I believe. 
 
And that system by the way, Mr. Speaker, operates under the 
premier option, the premier option which of course, Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has modified slightly and 
would like to move to here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s the only one that I’m aware of, and there may be others, 
but I’m aware of that significant surplus posted by ICBC, 
another government-owned auto insurance agency but they 
operate under a tort system, not a no-fault system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
But we go on to find out what other investments is the 
government directing or approving the Auto Fund to make. 
Well here we go. We mention the normal ones, the ones we 
agree with: treasury bills, pooled fund shares, real estate. But 
here, Mr. Speaker, it says the fund owns 7 per cent in SGI 
CANADA Insurance Services Ltd., or SCISL as it’s known. 
Now what’s that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is still yet another of the NDP schemes to 
invest taxpayers’ resources outside of the province and, Mr. 
Speaker, more to the point, it is the source of huge losses to the 
taxpayers. We know we’ve lost millions of dollars in SCISL’s 
investments in Coachman this last year, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what we’ve lost. 
 
So that’s what we’re worried about. We’re not worried about 
the investments the Auto Fund makes and every other auto 
insurance and insurance company is making. What we’re 
worried about though, Mr. Speaker, is the Auto Fund being 
directed to make investments in the hare-brained schemes of the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re concerned about. 
 
And so we bring this debate to light, and we hope members 
opposite will agree. We have to do whatever we can in this 
province to strengthen, to strengthen this program. And let’s 
understand exactly what it is — it’s a program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every other commercial Crown is mandated by the government 
to return a dividend, certainly the major Crowns are. That’s not 
the case here. This is basically, to oversimplify it, this is a 
revolving fund, Mr. Speaker, that is to break even. And it has 
worked well in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But it doesn’t change the fact that Saskatchewan people, that 
motorists in the province of Saskatchewan should be very, very 
concerned as long as their publicly owned auto insurance fund, 

Mr. Speaker, is being managed by the people that brought you 
the Retx.com investment in Georgia that lost $20 million; 
SPUDCO, the people that brought you SPUDCO; the people 
that brought you the bingo scandal; Mr. Speaker, the people that 
brought you a failed bid to try to sell people’s health care 
information that lost over $1 million; the people that tried to set 
up a company to compete with eBay of all things and lost a 
million nine at that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s what the Saskatchewan Party is concerned about. We 
need to have a strong Auto Fund, publicly owned auto 
insurance program in the province of Saskatchewan. But more 
to the point, Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that it is 
managed by a competent government, the kind of government 
that will be brought to this province by the Saskatchewan Party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s the point of this debate. That’s the point of 
this debate. Mr. Speaker, you just look around the province, you 
just look around the province and you realize, Mr. Speaker, 
what people are concerned about when it comes to the 
management abilities of the NDP and why we need a motion 
like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we are demonstrating today on this side of 
the House is what we’ve been saying all along. When it comes 
to government in the province of Saskatchewan, we need to 
take a non-ideological look at things, Mr. Speaker. We need to 
commit to do what is right for the province of Saskatchewan 
and to do what it takes to grow the province, to maintain 
advantages like low auto insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that at least the officials — and from 
time to time the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) — agrees. Last year, the minister 
said he wasn’t ideologically opposed to selling off assets. We’re 
finding out in Crown Corporations Committee that officials are 
looking hard at various privatization schemes, and CIC III 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan Industrial 
Interests Inc.), including one-off sales of assets. But also, they 
look very closely at mutualizing the assets of CIC III and 
privatizing units in that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the officials understand the importance of taking a 
non-ideological view of this and doing what’s right for the 
province, but the government doesn’t. The NDP cabinet 
ministers and the caucus will have none of it because it’s not in 
the Manifesto. It doesn’t matter what grows the province or 
what’s good for the province. They check with their ideology. 
They check with their textbook and if it’s not there, they don’t 
do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we know that the House Leader should have finished the 
sentence on the party’s resolution, Mr. Speaker. We know that. 
We know that the party speaks to allowing private insurance 
above basic insurance, which is what we have now. And what 
we also know is that people of the province have a hard time 
trusting the NDP to manage something as important as auto 
insurance. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, with that, I can tell you that we on this 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

 

side of the House are looking forward to hearing from others in 
this debate and are also looking forward to sending a strong 
signal to the people of the province that under the coming 
Saskatchewan Party government, there is a strong and solid 
commitment to good public auto insurance in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’m pleased to second the motion of the 
member from Rosthern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
listened very carefully to what the two members from the 
Saskatchewan Party have had to say on this motion and I want 
to make this observation about the Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance Auto Fund. For many of us living in Saskatchewan, 
our current system of public auto insurance is the only system 
we’ve ever known. For tens of thousands of us, we have no 
memory of the private auto insurance system that predates SGI. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d make this note. In 1995, SGI celebrated 
its 50th anniversary when the Tommy Douglas government of 
the day, under the impetus of C.M. Fines, brought in 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance. And if the members 
would care to read the history, we knew at the time that over 
$50 million in auto insurance funds from this province were 
going outside of the province and only $19 million was being 
spent inside the province. 
 
Now those citizens over there have no memory of this because 
they are so ideologically bound that we’ve even heard some of 
their members refer to Tommy Douglas, who is a folk hero for 
thousands of people in this province, they’ve referred to him as 
Tommy the commie. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, SGI, SGI was built on a foundation of 
public policy and commercial Crown objectives. SGI’s Auto 
Fund’s mandate is to provide the following: compulsory, 
universal, accessible, affordable, non-discriminatory auto 
insurance to all Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Now we have heard the Saskatchewan Party — and I want the 
public to know this, for those people who are listening — we 
have heard the Saskatchewan Party say that they would 
introduce competition into the auto insurance area. Are the 
words, full competition, any way of saying privatization, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And why do I say they introduce full competition? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we have the very words of the member from Rosthern 
dated May 27, 2002, Hansard, where he says: 
 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people don’t have a choice 
when it comes to vehicle insurance; they have to deal with 
SGI. 

 
As well, Mr. Speaker — and this is very important for citizens 
listening to this debate today — it says, the Saskatchewan Party 
says, resolution CC0002: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government will allow private 
insurance companies to sell vehicle insurance, above the 
basic licensing fee. 

 

Now let me, let me explain to the public the difficulty with this. 
With full competition, Mr. Speaker, there is an appeal for many 
in the . . . on the idea of full competition. But implementation 
won’t be all that easy. 
 
For full competition to take place, one of a number of things 
have to occur. Private companies will be governed by the same 
legislation and regulations that apply to SGI. Two, SGI will be 
relieved of its statutory obligations and become just another 
insurance company competing with others. Three, SGI will be 
placed in a competitive marketplace while continuing to be 
governed by legislation and regulation; and such a scenario, Mr. 
Speaker, will not produce a level playing field. 
 
The first scenario is unlikely under any kind of Saskatchewan 
Party regime because they are bent on reducing regulations. The 
second scenario is possible, but if SGI is just another insurance 
company what, if any, public policy matters would remain. And 
the third scenario is very possible — SGI competing while 
being bound by legislation and regulation — and it would not 
be long, Mr. Speaker, until it would be driven into a financial 
mess. 
 
Private companies focus their efforts on the best-risk clients 
while avoiding the poor risks. So what we have is SGI with its 
statutory and regulatory obligations having to provide insurance 
to people — not the best-risk people, but the lower risk people. 
The best-risk people would be picked up by the private 
insurance companies and it wouldn’t be long before SGI had 
the high-cost insurers and in a financially troubled situation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve got to read the whole resolution, 
Pat. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I certainly did read the whole resolution; I’ll 
read it into the record again. And what the member says, a 
Saskatchewan Party government will allow private insurance 
companies to sell vehicle insurance above the basic licensing 
fee. But what I’m doing is putting . . . cutting apart their 
argument because full competition will mean the end to SGI. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what’s important to know is 
that SGI indicates that two-thirds of their 1,600 or so employees 
do Auto Fund business. And the increased cost for 2002 over 
2001 result from changes to PIPP and the improved benefits. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a comment about this 
party, the opposition party’s history when it comes to SGI, and 
it is a matter of public record. And the member from Swift 
Current worked for the Devine government during this period. 
 
And let me say this, let me say this about privatization. There 
was one other government in this province that tried to privatize 
SGI and that was the Grant Devine Tories. And it was halted in 
April 1989 when the NDP caucus boycotted this legislature for 
17 days. And after that the privatization plan developed by 
Grant Devine was to go by order in council through the cabinet 
to basically circumvent this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it was the employees, OPEIU (Office and Professional 
Employees International Union), that took the government of 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

the day, the Devine government, to court and the Court of 
Appeal denied the government, the Grant Devine government, 
and upheld their view that any kind of changes, any kind of 
privatization to SGI would have to be brought into this 
Legislative Assembly. And that ended the Devine government’s 
determination to privatize SGI. 
 
Now let me also say this, Mr. Speaker, let me say this. The 
Auto Fund . . . We had the member over there talking about 
SCISL and what is SCISL? Well I’ll tell you what SCISL is. 
SCISL was the NDP government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
SCISL, I’ll tell you what SCISL is. It was the NDP 
government’s response to the Devine era’s privatization of SGI. 
 
And we knew, we knew we had to explore other routes than 
privatization in order to expand the general insurance business 
in our province. And it was an important goal that we spread 
our corporation’s geographical base of risk, Mr. Speaker — and 
people in the insurance industry will understand this — and 
what we created was SCISL which was owned by SGI 
CANADA, 30 per cent by the Auto Fund, and 40 per cent by 
Crown Investments Corporation. Now, Mr. Speaker, SCISL is 
helping to ensure SGI, the parent company, continues its 
strength and its stability. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to introduce an amendment. 
And I challenge, I challenge those members over there to agree 
to this, member, and let this come before the Assembly because 
that will really tell us where the Sask Party stands on the Auto 
Fund. That will really tell us, because they’re trying to woo us 
with nonsense. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the amendment goes like this; it’s moved by 
myself, seconded by the member for Regina Victoria. What we 
want to do is replace the word encourages with instructs; insert 
compulsory before publicly owned; and add after the Auto Fund 
the following, administered by SGI. The amended motion 
would then read: 
 

That this Assembly instructs the Government of 
Saskatchewan, today and in the future, to maintain the 
compulsory, publicly owned and operated Auto Fund 
administered by SGI in the interest of avoiding 
uncontrolled rising auto insurance rates seen in other 
jurisdictions. 

 
I so move. 
 
(15:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Before we proceed with the debate . . . Order, 
please. Before we proceed to the debate, I would like to advise 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana that we have a protocol not 
to use these words in the Assembly — Reds, Brownshirts, 
Communists, or Fascists — or to quote anybody that may have 
used those words. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you very . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when I look back in the years that I’ve spent in public 
service and I try to analyze the various things that I’ve learned 
as an elected member of the legislature and prior to that in city 
council, one of the things that I have learned and I have 
observed over time, that the public tends to have confidence in 
leadership that sets a very clear direction and then maintains 
that direction. 
 
If you like, Mr. Speaker — I’ve had this metaphor used before 
— that is to say if the public are like passengers on a ship, they 
have confidence in a captain that they observe to be steering a 
clear course; gets them through the rocky shores, through the 
bad weather, and into the smooth sailing, Mr. Speaker. They 
will have confidence in a captain they perceive to be 
maintaining that direction. But they will lose confidence in a 
leadership that is forever changing its directions to suit any 
wind or any wind that might come along, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
my sense of what the public observes in their leadership and 
what they’re looking for when it comes to leadership. 
 
So I find this motion and this debate, if you like, somewhat 
bizarre, and if you like, at least very telling about the 
Saskatchewan Party opposition. This is a group, Mr. Speaker, 
that our viewers will know have stood in this legislature on 
many occasions this year, last year, and have spoken with an 
almost ideological fervour, ideological fervour about how for 
60 years in Saskatchewan the people of Saskatchewan have got 
it wrong; that people in Saskatchewan have supported CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP 
governments who, according to the opposition, one of their 
major, major shortcomings has been to, if you like, embrace 
public enterprise such as publicly owned automobile insurance. 
 
They take the position that we have fundamentally erred in 
doing that because it somehow has prevented an explosion of 
private investment in Saskatchewan that would so change the 
face of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that it would be a much 
better Saskatchewan than it is now. I don’t believe that, but that 
is essentially the point that they are trying to leave the public of 
Saskatchewan. That is the point that they are making; that is 
what they believe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of them have gone so far as to denigrate the leadership 
over the past — a leadership that is much respected by the 
people of Saskatchewan — to the point that one of their 
members, quote, referred to a former premier as “Tommy the 
commie.” Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the member to, 
at this time before he proceeds any further, just to withdraw that 
statement, the derogatory statement, quotation, that he made 
with respect to Tommy Douglas. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw my reference 
to that quote in Hansard. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. Order, order. The 
member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, I know that 
those people who have been watching and observing the 
Legislative Assembly over time will know with a great deal of 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

 

certainty that that has been the direction that has been espoused 
by their leadership. That has been the direction that has been 
espoused by the member for Swift Current. 
 
They will have heard a few weeks ago the member for 
Rosthern, the very same member who moved this motion, talk 
incessantly about 60 years of socialism, 60 years of public 
enterprise, 60 years of getting it wrong — oh, if we only could 
have done things differently, what a much better province we 
would be. I don’t agree with that point of view, Mr. Speaker, 
but that has been very clearly the point of view that they have 
expressed. 
 
So they have said we needed to have gone in a completely, 
fundamentally different direction. That’s what they have said. 
That’s their direction — agree or disagree — but at least it is a 
direction, Mr. Speaker. It might offer some comfort to people 
on that ship or the people of the province that here is somebody 
who knows where they’re going, they have a clear direction. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker — now, Mr. Speaker — contrary to 
everything they’ve said, everything they’ve said about having a 
clear direction, now they’ve seen the Lord. Which Lord? In 
particular a Bernard Lord, Mr. Speaker. They have seen what 
has happened in the case of the New Brunswick election when 
the people of that province became fed up, fed up with 
skyrocketing automobile insurance rates, that they delivered a 
very strong message to the Progressive Conservative 
government — their soul brothers — Progressive Conservative 
government of Bernard Lord and nearly defeated that 
government in a recent election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have seen, they have seen what this is doing in the 
neighbouring province of Alberta where people are fed up — 
fed up — with skyrocketing automobile insurance rates, causing 
the Government of Alberta to put together a commission to 
review automobile plans in other provinces to see if there’s 
maybe a better way to deliver automobile insurance rates. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, now, notwithstanding the comments about 
60 years of direction, now they want to change direction, Mr. 
Speaker. Now all of sudden they want to embrace public 
enterprise, notwithstanding their comments about how for 60 
years the present government has got it wrong. 
 
Well the only thing that I can say to the people of Saskatchewan 
on that point, Mr. Speaker, is don’t believe them. Don’t believe 
them. Don’t believe them any more than the people of British 
Columbia believed Gordon Campbell who was prepared to 
offer anything and everything to get elected. Don’t believe 
them. They won’t follow through, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take a rocket surgeon to understand 
why it is, why it is, Mr. Speaker, why this issue is being raised 
at this point in time. We all know, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a 
by-election going on in Saskatchewan. This by-election is 
taking place in the constituency of Carrot River Valley and I 
suspect, Mr. Speaker, if the information we are getting is 
correct, that they are also receiving this message very clearly 
from the people in that constituency — don’t mess with public 
auto insurance; it’s keeping our rates down; don’t you dare 
mess with it. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — They feel the heat and you know what, 
Mr. Speaker, they can’t stand the heat. And they are prepared to 
reverse everything they’ve said about 60 years of public 
enterprise; all of a sudden now they’ll embrace public 
enterprise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one question I have. It took political 
realities in other provinces for them to realize the benefits of a 
publicly owned and operated Auto Fund, Mr. Speaker. All I can 
say, it’s just so typical of them. They never have a good word to 
say about Saskatchewan until they’re pressed into a corner and 
they have to say something positive in order to curry political 
favour, Mr. Speaker. That’s the reality. 
 
Ah, Mr. Speaker, I could go on. But this particular motion is 
intended to set the public minds at rest, at ease, because it is a 
complete reversal of their party’s policy as espoused in their 
party platform. 
 
That is the truth, Mr. Speaker. They say, quote: 
 

(They) . . . will allow private insurance companies to sell 
vehicle insurance, above the basic licensing fee. 
 

Or basic registration if you like, Mr. Speaker. Well the basic 
registration is only a very small portion of what it is that people 
pay for the licence in this province. 
 
They in a sense would gut, their party policy would gut public 
automobile insurance in this province. They are seeking to 
reverse the public policy. How they can do that, how a group of 
men and women in this Assembly can all of a sudden reverse 
their party’s policy is not entirely clear, Mr. Speaker, but that is 
what they’re trying to do because they are just absolutely 
frightened — frightened of the consequences of the course that 
they have set in their party, in this legislature, a course that sees 
them on the way to selling off public automobile insurance. 
 
Now they’re reversing directly, Mr. Speaker. If you like they’re 
doing damage control, Mr. Speaker. They’re overriding party 
policy, as it was with the Grant Schmidt situation, desperate . . . 
Anything, anything, promise anything to the people of 
Saskatchewan just to get them through this by-election, get 
them through the election so they can unveil their true platform, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion is more illustrative of, not of what it 
says, but what it doesn’t say. It doesn’t talk about SaskTel; it 
doesn’t talk about the fact that the cheapest telephone rates in 
all of North America are right here in Saskatchewan. And the 
public wants to know what is wrong with that. What is wrong 
with that? Why won’t you come out clearly and say, we won’t 
mess with that? Why don’t you do that in this motion, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the public are sending them a very clear 
message: don’t mess with the Crowns, don’t mess with public 
enterprise; your direction is wrong. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to join into the debate on our motion and the 
amendment put forward by the government members when 
we’re dealing with SGI and the Auto Fund. And it’s important 
that we realize what the Auto Fund is — it’s not a Crown 
corporation, it’s a program administered by SGI. 
 
You hear the last speaker from Regina Victoria saying, don’t 
mess with the Crowns, and he gets all red in the face. It’s really 
quite interesting to see how that just really gets under his skin. 
 
But I think there’s a couple of things that we first must look at. 
Mr. Speaker, we have talked about, in our platform . . . and they 
brought it up a couple of times. They brought up our party 
policy a couple of times and they chose to interpret it the way 
they want to. It has nothing to do with the truth. They choose to 
interpret it the way they think they see fit. 
 
And, you know, it’s just continual. Every time we get into a 
point where the government feels pressured, you watch. Over 
the last couple of years and for years prior to that, but I would 
bet any money in the years forward when we get close and 
they’re starting to feel pressure, they start fearmongering like 
you wouldn’t believe, Mr. Speaker. It’s fearmonger, 
fearmonger, fearmonger because, you know, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re scared to debate the issue. 
 
So what they’ll do is they’ll go around and they’ll fearmonger. 
They’ll tell untruths throughout the province to try and get 
people on their side. And we heard it already today. Here’s one 
of the first examples that they have brought forward today and 
they talk about our party policy and what our party policy says, 
and they’ve read it a couple of times. They choose not to 
comprehend the words, I guess, because they fearmonger from 
the time they read it on forward. 
 
It says the Saskatchewan Party government will allow private 
insurance companies to sell vehicle insurance above the basic 
licensing fee. 
 
Let’s interpret that for the member from Saskatoon Nutana. She 
can’t quite understand . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Would the little 
side debate between the two members here, the member for 
Canora-Pelly, the member for Saskatoon Nutana, would you 
kind of . . . I would ask the members to allow the member for 
Indian Head-Milestone to complete his remarks. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Let’s be clear on what this policy stands for 
so that they don’t fearmonger and tell half-truths or no truths 
throughout the province. Because as soon as they get pressed on 
an issue, they start fearmongering and fearmongering and 
misinterpreting what the basic party policy says. 
 
It says that people selling insurance above the basic licensing 
fee is okay — exactly what is done right now in the province. 
Are they saying that from now on we should have no 
Wawanesa, we should have no Co-operators selling automobile 
in this province? Is that what they’re saying? Is that what 
they’re saying? Because that is what is happening in the 

province right now and that is exactly what our party policy 
says. 
 
It says exactly what our party’s policy says but they feel that 
that is . . . They can’t fight on that one because we’re agreeing 
with the way it is right now. We’re agreeing with private 
insurers selling insurance over top of the basic licensing fee. 
But because that’s, you know, a kind of a tough situation for 
them, they start fearmongering and taking half-truths and 
reinterpreting the words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So first of all I think we need to look at the whole aspect of 
insurance and look at our province and look at other provinces 
around us. The member from Victoria got all worked up in 
saying how it’s skyrocketing in other provinces, and we would 
agree. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But it’s interesting how he’ll draw the analogy, how they draw 
the analogy that if we have SGI, and SGI is a Crown 
corporation and the Auto Fund program operated under SGI, 
that we should have all the Crown corporations — in fact 
expand the Crown corporations — that we can’t touch or even 
look at the Crown corporations. The way they’re doing business 
in the year 2003 and the way they’ve done business in the year 
1980 and the way they did business in 1960 cannot be changed. 
It cannot be looked at and it could not be changed. 
 
They are so ideologically bound that Crown corporations . . . 
the Crown corporations, that the way they see them and 
interpret them are the only structures that can operate in this 
province; that there is no other alternative, even though their 
government presently is looking at restructuring some of the 
Crown corporations and the way they do business. 
 
We hear it all the time in Crown Corporations Committee that 
they’re not quite so in love with the Crown corporations the 
way they are because they’re looking at changing some of the 
structures on them. Just exactly what we’re saying. We’re not 
ideologically bound like this NDP government is, that the way 
the Crown corporation is in the year 2003 is the way the Crown 
corporation is going to be for the next 20 and 30 years, Mr. 
Speaker. We look at it at a more pragmatic viewpoint. 
 
And we look at the Auto Fund and we say the Auto Fund is an 
area that is working quite well because for once the government 
isn’t asking the Auto Fund to pay a whole bunch money back 
into the General Revenue Fund. They’re not distorting the 
performance of the Crown corporation by asking it to put a 
bunch of money into the General Revenue Fund, like it might 
be with SaskTel or SaskPower or SaskEnergy, where they have 
to pay so much back into the General Revenue Fund regardless 
of how much they make. 
 
The Auto Fund is isolated from that. The Auto Fund is a 
stand-alone that doesn’t have to pay dividends into the GRF 
(General Revenue Fund). And perhaps that’s why it’s working 
well. 
 
They want to muddy the waters and talk about other issues, but 
if you look at the Auto Fund itself and how it’s structured, it 
seems to be working very, very well. They want to take the 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

 

argument and the debate off of that issue because they realize 
that, oh my heavens, the Saskatchewan Party is agreeing with 
us; we must change our direction somehow and try and muddy 
the waters. 
 
That’s not what it is. If you look at our motion and you read our 
motion, and then you read the amendment, there is so very little 
difference. But of course they cannot follow along with our 
motion. They’d hate to agree with the Sask Party. 
 
They talk about compulsory. We’re talking about the very same 
thing — owned and operated. We have no problem with 
compulsory. That’s the way the Auto Fund is run right now. We 
have no problem with that. Have we ever stood up on this . . . 
on any venue and said, oh we don’t want compulsory 
insurance? No, we haven’t. 
 
The amendment is very, very similar to what our motion is. But 
unfortunately they can’t support a Sask Party motion; that just 
wouldn’t look right. They’d have to, they’d have to amendment 
. . . have to put it into their own words because that is so much, 
so much more palatable for them. 
 
But it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. As soon as we start getting 
close and we . . . soon as we start finding some common 
ground, they say, oh there can’t be. Because that’s not the . . . 
They like to paint the Saskatchewan Party as evil and about to 
destroy all the Crown corporations, when they see that we’re 
really a lot more pragmatic and we operate on what is good for 
the province as opposed to some of the areas that may need to 
be changed. 
 
But when we talk to . . . when we talk of SGI and we talk of a 
lot of the Crown corporations, they will always stand up and 
say, oh they’re so against the Crown corporations; they want to 
make the Crown corporations look bad. Quite frankly, when the 
Crown corporations do business in the province and stick to 
their business in the province, they do a great job. They do a 
wonderful job, and SGI is no exception. It’s when they start 
investing all over the province or all over the country and into 
United States that they start running into trouble. 
 
I think it was a former minister of Finance that talked in her 
book about the wheelers and dealers in the NDP caucus. That’s 
when they get into trouble. When you talk about a wheeler and 
dealer with 26 or $28 million that he had to spend on potatoes, 
somebody else’s money — it’s always a lot easier to spend 
somebody else’s money — and what are the consequences? 
 
Well you know I think we’ll see what the consequences are if 
the Premier — the fellow sitting in the Premier’s seat, never 
elected as Premier — the fellow sitting in the Premier’s seat 
screws up his courage and calls a general election because that’s 
when we’ll see what the ramifications are of a wheeler-dealer 
spending 26 or $28 million of taxpayers’ money on potatoes 
and absolutely lost it. That’s when we’ll find out the 
ramifications of an NDP government that want to be in the 
filmmaking business, that want to . . . don’t mind how much 
money they lose. They want to be wheelers and dealers. They 
want to be wheelers and dealers not with their own money, but 
with taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s when, if we ever get to an election, if the Premier ever 

screws up the courage to call an election, that’s when that 
government and those members will be judged. And they’ll be 
judged on their record, which is a brutal record when it comes 
to being wheelers and dealers. When you start talking about 
bringing it back to the motion and the amendment it’s . . . we 
are on common ground here. I know the NDP can hardly stand 
it so they start fearmongering about a party policy because we 
are standing on common ground. We agree that the Auto Fund 
does a wonderful job for our drivers in the province, and it just 
feels so uncomfortable for them that they start misinterpreting, 
telling half-truths, or no truths about our party policy, a party 
policy that is only stating what happens in the province right 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be supporting the motion and 
unfortunately, or fortunately enough I guess, if the NDP want to 
put it in their words, and I will be supporting that as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well of course you know, Mr. Speaker, the 
problem we have here is that we have the opposition getting up 
and they say oh, we’re the best friends of government insurance 
— we’re the best friends of government insurance. 
 
But the problem with that, Mr. Speaker, is that everything that 
those members say in this House is recorded in a document 
which is called Hansard. And what we have seen up until 
recently . . . And I remember the members opposite questioning 
my colleague, the minister in charge of SGI for the last two 
years, and all we have seen from them is criticism of SGI. 
 
We had the member from Rosthern up on his feet saying that 
SGI shouldn’t even be able to investigate fraud; it had too much 
power. We had the members over there saying SGI and the 
Auto Fund had . . . we’re investing all the money wrong. And 
nothing was good about SGI. Why? Because SGI is run by the 
Government of Saskatchewan and according to those members 
there, the government cannot run anything. 
 
Now today they come into this legislature and they say I mean, 
get this, it’s ridiculous. They say, we, the right-wing, extreme 
Saskatchewan Party are the friends of government insurance. 
 
And the member from Rosthern says you can’t trust, you can’t 
trust the NDP with SGI. Well I’ve got news for the member 
from Rosthern. SGI was brought in by the New Democratic 
Party in the 1940s, Mr. Speaker, over the opposition of people 
like that. 
 
And suddenly those people come into this legislature and they 
say that we need to elect them to protect people so that SGI will 
be kept, something they’ve always opposed. 
 
Now what is changed, Mr. Speaker, what is changed? I’ll tell 
you what has changed, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll tell the public 
who’s listening to this what has changed. They saw their 
right-wing cousin, Bernard Lord, the Premier of New 
Brunswick beat up and almost go down to defeat because of 
what private auto insurance, which they’ve always supported, is 
like. 
 
And the people, the people, Mr. Speaker, have seen — even in 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

papers like The Globe and Mail — they have seen articles that 
say government insurance is better than private insurance; it is 
better for the people, it is better for the consumer, it is cheaper. 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? The people know it. The 
people know it. 
 
And so what they are doing, Mr. Speaker — and the public will 
see through this — they’re saying we see a parade. We see a 
parade of people across the country that know that government 
auto insurance is better. And you’re know what they’re trying to 
do? They’re trying to get in front of the parade. Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’ll tell you what their phony tactics are going to bring 
them, Mr. Speaker, when they get out in front of that parade 
when the election comes, they’re going to be trampled by the 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the reason that they’re going to be 
trampled by the people, Mr. Speaker, is that they have been 
getting up in this House for the last number of years criticizing 
SGI. They have been on their bed of privatization. They want 
people to have to pay high insurance rates to private companies 
and, Mr. Speaker, they are not going to get away with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — They are not going to get away with it. 
They’re not going to get away with it, Mr. Speaker. And they 
laugh, Mr. Speaker, because they’re nervous. They know . . . 
They know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the public doesn’t have to take my word for it. The public 
can go to Hansard. It’s on the Internet, Mr. Speaker. And they 
can go through question period for the last two or three years, 
and they can see that those members have got up day after day 
relentlessly and attacked the minister in charge of SGI and 
attacked SGI and tried to undermine SGI the last few years as 
they have done throughout their history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now they have the gall to come before the people and say 
elect us to defend government insurance? Mr. Speaker, it’s like 
electing Colonel Saunders to take care of the chickens in the 
chicken coop. It’s absolutely ridiculous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say to those members over 
there, Mr. Speaker, who have made a career out of telling the 
people that the government cannot run anything . . . That’s what 
they always say. And they say that we should sell off the Crown 
corporations to their rich friends, and that the people should 
have to pay higher rates to their rich friends who they want to 
own the Crown corporations. And the New Brunswick example, 
and a comparison of the auto insurance rates across this 
country, Mr. Speaker, proves that the privatization agenda of 
the opposition Saskatchewan Party is not in the public interest, 
Mr. Speaker. It is not in the public interest. 
 
And this party, this party has been defending government 
insurance and public enterprise in this province for 60 years, 
Mr. Speaker, and we don’t need to take a back seat to these 

people who have done nothing but try to undermine the Crown 
corporations, including SGI, for the last 60 years, Mr. Speaker. 
The public knows that when it comes to things like public 
health care — which they now say they support. Public health 
care was brought in over their opposition, Mr. Speaker, and 
everybody knows it. 
 
The public knows that they have been opposed — up until the 
recent New Brunswick election — to government insurance. 
But I want to say this too, Mr. Speaker. It’s a good thing that 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana got up and proposed an 
amendment to their resolution, because do you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? Their resolution also shows that they don’t support 
public government insurance because their resolution doesn’t 
say we should keep SGI, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t say that and 
the people need to know that. 
 
The resolution says they encourage that the Auto Fund 
continue, but what about the rest of SGI? Today they’re saying 
that they support the Auto Fund, which we know from what 
they’ve said in the last two years and beyond is not true. But 
they don’t say, they don’t say, Mr. Speaker, anything about 
house insurance that we get from SGI, any other insurance that 
we get from SGI. They don’t mention that at all, because there’s 
absolutely no doubt even from what they say that they want to 
privatize that, Mr. Speaker, because they want people that have 
to buy house insurance and business insurance in this province 
to be in the same position as people are in other parts of the 
country who have to buy private auto insurance because they 
want to sell off the public insurance company to their rich 
friends, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they can deny it all they want, but Shakespeare had a 
saying, Mr. Speaker, and it was this: he said, methinks thou 
doth protest too much, Mr. Speaker. And the reason they’re up 
denying that they want to sell SGI is because that’s exactly 
what they want to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 17(2) we now have up to 10 
minutes of questions and comments. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question 
is for the last speaker, the Minister of Industry. And it’s a pretty 
simple question, Mr. Speaker. In light of the fact that the 
government and opposition completely agree on the importance 
of maintaining public auto insurance, in light of the fact that we 
agree with him, why is he so angry, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’ll tell you what makes me angry, Mr. 
Speaker. It makes me angry when someone can stand up one 
day and condemn SGI, and come into this House the next day 
and say I’m the best friend of SGI. And it makes me angry, Mr. 
Speaker, because it’s as phony as a $3 bill. That’s why it makes 
me angry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, although the motion deals 
with one aspect of public enterprise in Saskatchewan, my 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

 

question would be for the member for Rosthern who moved the 
motion. What assurance can he give the people of 
Saskatchewan that the Saskatchewan Party will never 
deregulate the electric industry or otherwise privatize the 
electrical industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all that’s a 
ludicrous question in view of the fact of where that particular 
motion went. But I will tell the NDP member something over 
there, what he wants to know about the people of 
Saskatchewan. We just had an election fought on auto insurance 
in the Maritimes, an election fought on the auto insurance in the 
Maritimes. And there’s a very key point that has been missed. 
 
After that election was over — fought on their auto insurance, 
as they’ve just talked about in their speeches — did their NDP 
folks out there get one more person sitting in the House? Not 
one more, Mr. Speaker. They basically sent all of them 
skedaddling and said the NDP view of their auto insurance in 
that particular province was null and void of any intelligence. 
They didn’t send any more of them back. They kept one, Mr. 
Speaker, one — just a token NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the member for Saskatoon Nutana. Can that 
member give us her assurance that she will continue to push the 
current government to maintain the Auto Fund as a low-cost 
provider of auto insurance? 
 
The reason that the minister . . . I’m asking the member that 
question is that the investment track record that she has 
supported with the Crown corporations have lost the province 
of Saskatchewan millions and millions of dollars including 
SGI’s loss of over $10 million in Coachman Insurance in 
Ontario. These losses — this was just in the last year — these 
losses, Mr. Speaker, endanger both SGI and its administration 
of the Auto Fund, Mr. Minister. Can she assure us that she will 
push for proper investments in Saskatchewan and not 
money-losing foreign adventures? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — There’s a number of questions in that diatribe 
but what I can say to the member is that yes, I will continue to 
support a compulsory, publicly administered by Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance Auto Fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I also will say to the member is that the Crown sector in 
this province has delivered over $1.6 billion in revenues to the 
people of this province to help pay for health and education. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I will answer the question; then I’d like to 
ask the members a question. 
 
Thank you very much. This is to the member from Rosthern. 
The member from Rosthern, when I was speaking, certainly I 
think I heard him indicate that the Saskatchewan Party 
government will allow private insurance companies to sell 
vehicle insurance above the basic licensing fee. And he 
indicated, when I was speaking, that this is already allowed in 
the province of Saskatchewan. So if it’s already allowed in the 
province of Saskatchewan, I would like an understanding of the 
definition by the Saskatchewan Party of the basic licensing fee. 

Mr. Heppner: — I think the answer lies exactly in what is 
happening now in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have 
Mennonite Mutual, we have Wawanesa, we have a number of 
other companies doing that exactly. And if you listen to the 
question carefully, it says over and above — over and above — 
the basic. That happens right now. That plan, Mr. Speaker, was 
instituted by the NDP sitting right over there, so the question, 
Mr. Speaker, was redundant and ridiculous. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Toth: —Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a fair bit of debate on this 
motion this afternoon. I’m just going to ask the Minister of 
Justice if he’s prepared to allow his members to now stand in 
their place and vote on this motion? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. This is a private members’ 
debate. I will allow the member from Mount Royal or anybody 
to answer, but not as a minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as the member should know, Mr. 
Speaker, unlike the members opposite, the position of members 
on this side of the House is well known. 
 
We have taken a consistent position throughout the decades, 
Mr. Speaker, to support Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
Our party implemented Saskatchewan Government Insurance; 
we don’t need the members opposite telling us that we should 
have government insurance. What we need is for the members 
opposite to apologize for their attacks on the concept of 
government insurance in this House, in this session, and in the 
years previous which have . . . Their criticisms have been 
proven to be incorrect across the country; they know it and 
they’re backpedalling, Mr. Speaker. That’s what’s happening 
here and the people should know that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
member for Rosthern. The member for Rosthern, in his 
remarks, went on at some length about SaskTel and all the 
supposed failings of SaskTel. A recent survey of telephone 
utilities throughout North America, that was shown in The 
Globe and Mail by an American firm, showed that the cheapest 
telephone rates in all of North America are right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question for the member would be: what assurance can he 
give the people of Saskatchewan that a Sask Party won’t mess 
with SaskTel to ensure that the telephone rates will in fact 
remain the cheapest in North America? Can he give us some 
assurance that he will not privatize and sell off any portion of 
SaskTel that might cause those rates to go up? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the debate today is on Auto 
Fund. That member may not want to keep it on the Auto Fund. 
 
What I want to see, Mr. Speaker, is to see if the NDP has the 
nerve to vote on this. We want a vote. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My question is to 
the member of Saskatoon Nutana. I’d like her to explain, as 
indicated by many members, that there have been a number of 
companies that sell additional insurance beyond the basic 
registration that is included at a licence plate. We have 
companies like Mennonite Mutual, Sask Mutual, and used to 
be, Mr. Speaker, the company of Wawanesa Mutual used to sell 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

that in this province and they have since withdrawn. 
 
Could the member indicate to the people of Saskatchewan why 
Wawanesa no longer provides additional insurance beyond the 
licence plate in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I guess I need a point of clarification. The 
member indicated that he . . . that insurance companies are able 
to provide insurance beyond the basic registration. I just wanted 
to point out to the member that the basic registration for a 
licence plate in the province of Saskatchewan is $58. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to have a clear 
understanding of what a basic licensing fee means, as defined in 
the Sask Party policy. Because registration is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m trying . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m 
trying to answer the question. Now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order please, members. Order. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m trying to answer the 
question. I wanted to know what their definition of a basic 
licensing fee is because that’s important, because registration in 
the province is $58 for a 1998 2.5TL Acura. The insurance is 
$904. So what I’m talking about is are we going to make the 
insurance compulsory because that’s important. Because if the 
insurance is not compulsory and there’s competition, then 
people and the cost of public . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — My question is for the member for 
Rosthern. Why should any person in Saskatchewan believe a 
Saskatchewan Party that has campaigned time and again, that 
has said in this House they would not keep their campaign 
commitment to hold a referendum before privatizing, that is 
ideologically hidebound, that is connected with . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I think the member is 
somewhat off topic here. If the member could . . . Would the 
member put his question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — My question is very clearly on the 
question around the auto insurance and privatization of that. 
Why would any member of this province, any citizen, believe 
or trust the Saskatchewan Party to keep their word? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, if we 
want to know who to believe, let’s just check the reference, the 
history of the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote who 
misled, who told all kinds of stories in this House. After six 
years, Mr. Speaker — six years of doing on that — six years he 
was forced to apologize to this House. 
 
That’s why we’re worried about what the Auto Fund is going to 
do. We’ve seen that. What we want, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I believe time has elapsed and I 
. . . Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, members. Order, order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
And, members, with my apologies in particular to the member 
for Regina South, I erred. I should have simply called the clock 

at the appropriate time rather than allowing the member to 
proceed. I think it would have helped the situation in more than 
one case. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Western Christian College 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Order. And I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone and he does not need to introduce his official. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Actually before we proceed to consideration of 
the Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to seek leave of the 
committee to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce today a group in the Speaker’s gallery — 
a fine looking group — that are here today to see this important 
stage of this Bill be reached. And without any further ado, I’d 
like to introduce . . . These are board members and staff 
members and friends and supporters and students, in some cases 
I believe, of the Western Christian College. 
 
So in no particular order I’d like to introduce them. And when I 
do introduce them, if you could please stand, and if I miss out 
anyone, my apologies, but we’re a work in progress here. 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce Curtis Parker from 
Regina. Curtis is an alumnus of the Western Christian College 
and a board member. 
 
(15:45) 
 
I would like to introduce Lowell Hodgson. I had the pleasure of 
meeting Mr. Hodgson earlier on in this process around the 
Western Christian College Bill and Mr. Hodgson has joined us 
from Red Deer, Alberta — such is his devotion to the cause. 
 
We have with us Jeremy and Jacinthe Frost. Jeremy is from 
North Bay, Ontario, and Jacinthe is from Quebec City. Vieux 
Québec, so bienvenue à Saskatchewan. 
 
We also have Larry and Karen Boswell of Regina. And we have 
Faye Hickman, who’s a diligent staffer with the college and has 
just moved not two weeks ago to Regina from Dauphin. 
 
And last but certainly not least I’d like to introduce Mr. Clinton 
Brazle. Now Mr. Brazle is from Bozeman, Montana, and was 
Chair of the board back in the ’80s when the college was at 
Weyburn. Mr. Brazle is looking forward to his 80th birthday 
next March. He’s still preaching one Sunday every month, and 
he’s got a lot of spring in his step and a sparkle in his eye. So 
it’s good to see you out here today, Mr. Brazle. 
 
I guess with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to . . . just before I 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

 

welcome the guests, I’d like to explain that these folks have 
been out and about in the community, meeting members of the 
business community to herald the coming of Western Christian 
College, to develop contacts, and to spread the good word about 
Western Christian College coming back to Saskatchewan and 
moreover coming to Regina. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to give 
these fine folks a warm welcome to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Western Christian College 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McCall: — I’d just like to say a quick few words to the 
Bill. I’ve had the opportunity to speak to it in committee and in 
different forum, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to say that it’s been a 
great process getting to know the folks from Western Christian 
College. It’s great to see you coming back to Saskatchewan. 
They take possession of the old Canadian Bible College and 
CTS (Canadian Theological Seminary) facility on July 1, 
classes in this September, and it’s an exciting time. 
 
So I’d just like to say that it’s . . . In this process of, you know, 
trying to facilitate the return of Western Christian College to 
Saskatchewan, there’s been a lot of co-operation and patience 
extended by all members of this Assembly. And so I’d like to 
say thank you for that, as the Bill’s sponsor. 
 
And I’d also like to say it’s a good day, and I look forward to 
the first semester beginning very soon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to add to the member’s 
comments and first of all just welcome the guests from Western 
Christian College. I’ve had the pleasure of getting to know a 
number of people through the college through the years, being 
invited by the McMillans down to fundraising efforts when it 
was in Weyburn, and was sad to see it move to Dauphin. But 
we’re pleased to see that they’ve looked at Saskatchewan again. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, what the motion is 
doing, just recognizing the move back and acknowledging some 
name changes, and I thank the member for his informing us 
about the process and the inquiry. And I can assure you that our 
members certainly are not opposed and we’re quite pleased to 
see this motion coming forward and are very supportive. 
 
And so, welcome to the guests and we look forward to the 
moving forward of this motion. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Western Christian College 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 

 
Mr. McCall: — I would move that the Bill No. 301, The 
Western Christian College (Amendment) Act, 2003 be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to go to government business. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
To my immediate left is Bob Ruggles, who is the assistant 
deputy minister of programs division; and to my immediate 
right is Dave Phillips, assistant deputy minister for the 
operations division; directly behind me is Lynn Tulloch, 
executive director for the corporate services division; and 
directly behind Mr. Phillips is Ron Zukowski, executive 
director of policy and assessment division. 
 
And other departmental officials in attendance are Wayne 
Dybvig, vice-president of operations, the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority; Rick Bates, director of communications; 
Al Willcocks, director of forestry ecosystems branch, Joe 
Muldoon, director of environmental protection; Dennis Sherratt, 
director of fish and wildlife branch; Donna Johnson, corporate 
services; and Dave Tulloch, fire management and forest 
protection. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials again here today. We 
have a number of questions on a number of different topics and 
areas, so I’d like to just get into it. 
 
The first question concerns Cypress Hills Park. What is the 
long-term plan for the park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I want to point out first of all that we had the opportunity to 
travel to Cypress Hills last year where we celebrated the 
discovery of Comet Petriew. And of course when you visit 
different parks, you certainly have an appreciation of some of 
the work and some of the effort being undertaken in our park 
system. 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

And I can point out that the long-term plan that we have for 
Cypress Hills clearly is to continue keeping it as a vibrant park, 
all the while being aware that part of the vibrancy of our park 
system is that we have ecological integrity. 
 
And so some of the programs that we are doing, for example, 
would be vegetation management where you’d look at how we 
could anticipate some of the problems we could have with fuel 
management — because obviously trees burn and we want to 
make sure we minimize those risks — as well as we do things 
like vegetation disturbance where we obviously want to 
continue to regenerate the ecological management of all the 
different species of plants and animals and so on and so forth. 
And of course all that work is a work in progress; you’re 
continually moving forward. 
 
We also constantly assess some of the programs we have and 
the general day-to-day improvements, whether it’s 
infrastructure or services and so on and so forth. All the while 
we keep in close communication and contact with our local 
park advisory. 
 
So clearly there’s a wide range of activities within the Cypress 
Hills Park. And these are specifics but we want to make sure 
that we have a vibrant park. And part of the vibrancy of any of 
our park systems is certainly the ecological integrity aspect that 
I speak about from time to time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. To the minister on another topic. 
I’ve had a number of letters and phone calls and discussions 
concerning landfills in small communities. We recently 
received a memo that was sent out to all the ratepayers in the 
RM of Vanscoy and I’d just like to read it into the record. It 
says: 
 

Close your landfills are what we’ve been told by Sask. 
Environment and Resource Management. Only government 
certified landfills may be left to operate under strict 
guidelines. 
 
We may convert landfills to collection sites, but the costs 
are substantial. Our estimate to convert the Pike Lake 
landfill to a collection site, with one year of operation, is a 
minimum of $116,950.00. This would mean a tax levy 
increase from $150.00 to approximately $450.00 per 
household, depending upon your assessment 
 
Last year the cost to operate one landfill and one collection 
site was in excess of $44,000.00. This amount does not 
include capital costs required for the conversion of an 
existing landfill into a collection site. Should we have two 
collection sites this amount would more than double for the 
operation alone. 
 

The question is: 
 

What are the options? 
 
1. Close Pike Lake landfill and everyone use the Grandora 

collection site. 
 
2. Turn Pike Lake landfill into a collection site on a user 

pay basis. If a collection site it may cost up to $3.00 per 

bag. (and) 
 

3. Close both Pike Lake and Grandora and everyone take 
their waste to a certified landfill. (As an example) . . . 
Saskatoon landfill or (a) Lorass landfill in Martensville. 

 
4. The communities organize to have someone collect their 

garbage and take it to a certified landfill. (and) This 
could become an opportunity for a small business for 
someone in the community. 

 
The note is: 
 

It is everyone’s responsibility to recycle. Please do your 
share. It only takes minutes. It helps the environment . . . 
cuts costs. 
 
Rumour has it that the school mill . . . may take a 
significant jump this year, which will affect all of us. The 
Federal Government has reduced their financial 
responsibilities to the Provinces, and the Provincial 
Government in turn has reduced their assistance to our 
local Municipal Governments. We have to raise operating 
costs from somewhere and that is where the ratepayer fits 
in. We are in a jam. People want services but no one wants 
to pay for it. 
 

(16:00) 
 
Then it asks for submissions and comments to the RM. 
 
That opens up a number of questions and concerns. One of the 
concerns that was highlighted to me was concerning . . . was the 
cost of closing the landfill. And I know the Centenary Fund 
does . . . is available for certain items. 
 
So I guess initially, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to ask the 
minister and his officials exactly what Pike Lake in particular or 
other communities can do to cover the costs of closing their 
landfill or covering the costs of setting up a transit site; and how 
does the Centenary Fund . . . how much money is available for 
these projects; and what can this community do to look after 
this problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I’d point out first of all is that we have, don’t have the 
information as to where Pike Lake fits in the sense of whether 
they are part of a regional landfill partnership. We’ll get the 
information to the member as soon as we can. 
 
And very quickly I would point out that one of the things I think 
is important here is that we have roughly 600 landfill sites 
dotted throughout the province. People know that we should be 
doing something to manage these landfills because they are 
certainly an environmental challenge for all of us. 
 
We allow approximately $485,000 from the Centenary Fund 
now that is going to support some of the regional landfills 
throughout the province. So some of the money that is available 
is to help decommission some landfills or convert them to 
stations where people can drop certain items off. And it will 
certainly be managed as well as can be given the fact that 
there’s a lot of distances and a lot of costs involved. 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

 

Right now we have seven regional authorities and we anticipate 
more are coming forward. And the whole plan here, as you are 
aware, is to try and see if we can reduce the number of landfills 
throughout the province, reduce the amount it costs to manage 
these landfills, to also reduce the amount of garbage that is 
going to the landfill. So we’re able to, in the overall point, to try 
and reduce the cost of solid waste management. 
 
In that sense, what I would point out is the Centenary Fund and 
all the different work being done by the RMs and the 
municipalities that are involved in trying to get some of these 
problems sorted out is that . . . And I think that the 
municipalities are the ones doing the majority of the work as the 
RMs are just starting to look at this whole issue of regional 
waste management. They are actively involved. 
 
They also explain to people that the handling of waste 
management, the solid waste management, is never going to be 
zero. There’s always a cost attached to it. 
 
We could try and reduce and reuse and recycle as much as we 
can, but I think the premise of the partnership that we’re trying 
to establish through the centenary funds is, number one, is to 
have as many regional landfills as possible to reduce the 
number of 600 separate landfills — that’s reducing the cost — 
and to give as much financial support as we can under the 
premise that people have to know that operating landfills and 
solid waste management, you can never reduce and reuse and 
recycle to the point where it doesn’t cost you any money. 
 
So we try as hard as we can to reduce those costs. Ultimately 
the RMs and the municipalities, towns and villages, they have 
to . . . And they’ve told us that we’ve accepted the fact that 
there are costs attached to solid waste management. Let us work 
together to bring down those costs and move forward in making 
sure that we have a better operation and maintenance of our 
landfills. 
 
And that’s basically the premise that we’re undertaking when it 
comes to the issue of regional landfills that you spoke about. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. You mentioned the 600 landfills. I 
was wondering how many of them are certified? And I guess 
the question is how many more will be certified in the future? 
And in the context of the regional authorities, I assume the . . . 
and I guess I’ll ask the government how many landfills do they 
expect to have when the transition is done and the 
decommissioning is finished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Just to point out that we don’t generally set a target for the 
amount of landfills — that we want to have a reduced amount 
from 600 to 100, say for example. 
 
What we typically do is we’ll sit down with the regional waste 
authority and generically they may have one, two, or even three 
major landfills that they operate within their operation or 
operating area. So it’s typically one to three major landfills in 
an area that encompasses a number of communities. 
 
One of the examples I’ll use is the REACT (Regional Authority 
of Carlton Trail) model in Humboldt, where they have 26 
municipalities and they have one landfill. Obviously that’s one 

of the shining examples in the province. We want to continue 
building on the success of REACT to make sure that people 
understand the value of us co-operating and working together 
when it comes to solid waste management. 
 
We do have roughly 2 or 300 landfills that are licensed. There 
are different degrees of licences given, you know, the 
relationship and discussions with the regional waste authorities. 
 
But one of the things that is very important in this partnership 
approach is that we not create any undue economic hardship on 
some of the partners that are out there — that they don’t see a 
dramatic, overnight increase to some of the costs that they’re 
trying to contain. I think that’s one of the things that we want to 
stress when we sit down with the regional waste authorities. 
 
And we also look at things when they select a site, that we work 
with them and look at things like does this affect underground 
water, is it near a river, how’s the soil compact — is it good, is 
it sandy? These are some of the things that we give them advice 
on. 
 
But clearly over a period of time that we work very closely with 
the regional waste authorities. We try and minimize the number 
of landfills. We have patience. We have conditions in terms of 
where they build them. And of course they want to manage 
them quite well. 
 
So for us to say we’re telling our regional waste authorities that 
we want this — the amount of landfills in the province to be 
down to 100 — that would be unfair of us to impose those kind 
of conditions. 
 
Although we all want to achieve that, what we want to achieve 
first is be patient, to be thorough in some of our work, and work 
with the regional waste authorities to try and reduce the 
numbers as quickly as we can and as economically as we can. 
And this is the whole partnership bond that we’re under when it 
comes to the establishment of regional waste authorities. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you to the minister. The number of 
problems around what is developing right now is, as landfills 
are closed and the cost of transferring waste is higher and 
higher, there are circumstances where people are dumping their 
garbage quite literally in the ditch or just burying it in their own 
backyard or in their own land. This is a potential health hazard; 
there’s, you know, concerning rats and runoff into water 
systems. 
 
It gets to a point, I believe — or there’s a possibility of getting 
to a point — where the distance involved in moving waste is 
going to be cost-prohibitive. And there’s just . . . The 
community isn’t going to be buying into it and it’s going to 
create a big problem. 
 
Could you possibly comment on what the department is doing 
to — as far as the cost of this to the local taxpayer — what is 
the department plans to make sure that the system will be 
working properly to the benefit of everyone and be also 
cost-effective? 
 
(16:15) 
 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I guess I’d like to characterize the question as absolutely we’re 
aware of the sensitivity that you’ve expressed in terms of 
people that may not want to go an extra 20 miles or 30 miles to 
have their garbage handled and managed. 
 
First of all I want to point out that burying your garbage in your 
backyard or certainly dumping the garbage in a ditch 
somewhere, these acts, while I believe the majority of people of 
Saskatchewan are responsible stewards of the land, if they are 
occurring, then we would encourage the people to not do that 
any more and discourage that kind of activity. 
 
And if people have evidence of folks that are burning garbage 
all over the place, well that’s contrary to what we all . . . what I 
believe is all our responsibility, that is being proper stewards of 
our environment. So I would point that out burying garbage and 
dumping garbage, I don’t think it’s a common practice in 
Saskatchewan. I believe the Saskatchewan people really look at 
their role as stewards of the land as a very serious role. 
 
However there are those few that wish to disrupt it for the rest 
of us, then we encourage folks to call in the COs (conservation 
officer). And there’s certainly rules and regulations that prevent 
people from doing that, and while we never want to charge 
Saskatchewan people — it’s not in our wish nor is it our desire 
to do that — it’s important that we can’t have that kind of 
activity occurring on a regular basis because that really makes 
the environment suffer. 
 
What we have then for your information is we’ve looked at the 
REACT model. And SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) was the first ones to the plate in the 
sense of having a three-year pilot project with REACT; and we 
put a $1.5 million budget attached to REACT to see how we 
could really begin to manage solid waste on a regional basis. 
And while this pilot project happened over a three-year period, 
there is many very valuable lessons learned from the REACT 
model. 
 
And as a result of the REACT model, the next step of course 
was the centenary funding and trying to expand the success of 
the REACT model to other regions. Again, we believe the 
Saskatchewan people want to be able to see less landfills and 
better management of landfills. 
 
And we never force anything on our partners. We have often 
asked municipalities and RMs to be part of the process. 
 
There is a legal requirement for the RM or for the municipality 
to provide a landfill site for solid waste management. They have 
to do some of these things. 
 
So as opposed to having 600 and not jointly working together, 
we certainly want to encourage that a regional system be set up 
and following some of the leads, some of the examples of 
REACT so they can be applied right throughout the province. 
 
So to make a long story short, we want to discourage burning or 
dumping garbage anywhere. We want to encourage folks to 
learn the lessons of REACT and move on a regional basis. We 
want to make sure that we support them to a certain extent 
through the Centenary Fund. And all the while they explain to 

their ratepayers or land tax payers that the management of our 
solid waste is never a zero sum balance, there’s always cost to 
it. 
 
And what we’re finding is that a lot of Saskatchewan people are 
accepting the challenge. There’s been a lot of great groups that 
have been established, a lot of proactive people. So I feel 
confident about the program overall. And, yes, it would be 
perfect if we could bring down those costs dramatically but of 
course that kind of effort is a work in progress. 
 
And we’ll continue to look at options with our partners to begin 
reducing that, hopefully, over a period of time, to have what we 
all want and that is of course having less landfills throughout 
our province and having cleaner land, water, and air for the 
future generations to benefit from. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, my 
understanding that REACT in Humboldt started out as a private 
initiative and was taken over by the local municipal 
governments and the provinces. 
 
I would just like to ask the minister how much public funds is 
going into REACT? And also just to add on to that question, 
has the government entertained any private bids or private 
partners as far as solid waste management? 
 
I mean, I know there’s a number of private operators in the 
province now but they seem to be shut out of any of the 
regional authorities that the government is involved with right 
now. And I believe there certainly should be a business plan 
done to see if these private operators could do it cheaper than 
the public regional authorities and/or . . . Not necessarily just 
exclude one from the other, but to have a joint operation where 
both could operate in a . . . to keep costs down and be more 
effective. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Just to clarify that the REACT project 
was private in the sense that the local municipalities were 
operating a REACT model. What we simply did was we 
provided them with some dollars, $1.5 million over three years 
as a one-time pilot project to learn how we can do this better. 
And that intelligence-gathering exercise will certainly become 
property of the public in the sense that it would use the practice 
learned from REACT all throughout the province. 
 
So I think in reference to the second question, is REACT 
getting any money now, and the answer is no. We felt that the 
learning process over a three-year period is something that was 
very valuable and it’ll serve that area for a number of years. I 
believe the life cycle or the lifetime use of that particular 
landfill near Humboldt is 100-plus years, if I’m not mistaken. 
And so really I think in that sense it was a private operation and 
they basically took advantage of some of the need that we had 
to find out some specific information as to how we operate 
regional landfill partnerships. 
 
The final point I will make is that, is there room for the private 
sector? As we mentioned earlier, it is not us to determine nor 
will we dictate to the regional landfills how they operate their 
business. We clearly are in a partnership mode with them. We 
want to support them and work with them and learn from them 
and begin to position them better and better as time goes on to 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

 

do a more effective job. 
 
And a lot of these regional waste authorities do have a lot of 
interest in the private sector. They have a lot of discussions. 
That’s completely within their right because they are 
responsible for the solid waste management, and we encourage 
them to look at all the options. 
 
So to make a long story short again, we think that the private 
waste management authorities can look at the private sector as 
many times and many ways that they want. We will simply 
encourage them to look at the best options available to them, 
and again work very closely with them. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you to the minister. Another topic, I 
have a letter from a Janet and Dan Carter from Asquith. I’ll just 
read part of it: 
 

We are interested in installing a geothermal heating system 
in our home and it will (not cut, it will) not only cut down 
on our heating cost by at least 65 per cent but also act as an 
air conditioner in the summer. We are currently using an 
electric furnace as we are on an acreage and not close 
enough to the natural gas line. 
 
Because of the high initial cost of a geothermal unit we are 
looking for sources of funding, grants, loans, etc. We feel 
that this system is not only a way of reducing power 
consumption but is also important environmentally as there 
is no exhaust pollution. In light of the concern over 
greenhouse gases and cutting back on energy uses, we are 
wondering if the government offered any assistance 
programs? 

 
I guess, to the minister, I guess maybe on a specific case like 
this if you could answer a question, but more on a general 
thought on Kyoto and where types of systems like this are going 
to fit in in the whole Kyoto scheme, and what help is this Kyoto 
plan going to give to individuals, or will there be any help to 
individuals to convert in . . . to more efficient systems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
The first thing I’ll point out is that I want to commend the 
individuals that you made reference to. I did miss their names 
and I want to point out that it is that kind of attitude of people 
that have come forward and said, look, we have some options, 
we have some ideas; is there any kind of support for this? And 
they ask some very good questions, and certainly their intent is 
very clear in a sense that they want to look at options that not 
only reduce operating costs of their acreage but certainly help 
the environment out at the same time. 
 
We certainly know that that technology could be advantageous 
to people in Saskatchewan because of the cold winters. We also 
know that we have been very, very active in reference to try and 
engage the public in a sense of saying look, listen, we all have 
to do our part. Little parts here and there certainly add to 
finding the solution overall for Saskatchewan when it comes to 
trying to look at the whole notion of the emission of greenhouse 
gases. 
 
We as a government are quite proud of some of the activity that 
we’ve taken, for example, the Office of Energy Conservation. 

They may have specific information on a geothermal heating 
process. The Saskatchewan Research Council also may have 
additional information for the family that you’ve mentioned, 
that they may want to contact them and get some specific 
information. 
 
(16:30) 
 
We know that the Kyoto Protocol . . . As you are aware, we are 
trying to achieve, you know, greenhouse gas reduction of 6 per 
cent below the 1990 levels by the year 2008 and 2012. We think 
that that is sincerely a challenge that Saskatchewan’s got to 
brace itself for. We want to position our province to be able to 
do their part and be environmentally responsible to the rest of 
the country and to the world in a sense of trying to address and 
arrest this particular problem. 
 
So we’ve encouraged different groups to look at all kinds of 
options. As a province we’ve led everything from the Office of 
Energy Conservation to looking at ag sinks to looking at wind 
power. These are some of things that we have done. And we’ll 
continue looking at the options. 
 
We have 12 conditions we put in front of the federal 
government. You want us to reduce some of these targets, 
here’s some conditions that we can work with. So we are 
acutely aware of what the challenges around Kyoto is all about. 
 
And what I want to again point out to the couple you made 
reference to, is that we think that the biggest players could be 
some of the folks that live on acreages and live on farms, where 
one day I envision many, many farms become environmentally 
friendly where they take care of their own wastes, they have 
their own heating systems, they generate power, they have 
organic farming. Like we see all kinds of benefits with 
agricultural community and they see the benefits as well. 
 
So we want to encourage folks, although it’s early pioneering 
work in the sense of looking at geothermal costs versus what it 
costs to heat your home by power, we want to encourage them 
to continue looking at these options because the technology 
works. It’s a question of affordability and perhaps one of these 
days, if we all do our part, we’ll able to meet some of our Kyoto 
obligations. 
 
But I would encourage them to get the information, do the 
analysis, look for a lot of the information needed from the 
different groups that I made reference to, and to point out that 
SERM at this time doesn’t have any funding that would look 
after some of the needs that they would have when you look at 
the geothermal heating option. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Chair to the minister, on 
another item concerning Pike Lake Park. These people had a 
concern and they wrote to your department and they weren’t 
looked after as far as they were concerned. 
 
And the issue in the park is that there’s a number of households 
there and some people live there year-round, some just on a 
seasonal basis. 
 
And one of the people there backfilled a ravine and caused 
flooding in the spring. And they wrote the minister’s 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

department and . . . well it just says here: 
 

The problem is very serious and I take it from the tenor of 
the minister’s response that the department may choose to 
ignore the problem. Even the park officials were advised of 
the illegal infilling and did nothing. 

 
I just would like to know in general what the department does 
with these cases and specifically in this case possibly I could 
send the letter across to your officials and see if you could 
revisit this situation and address it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would certainly appreciate the letter, and what I would point 
out is two major points. 
 
Number one is that we do take the concerns of every individual 
that do write the department. In reference to some of the issues 
that you’ve raised, we take them very seriously. So by way of a 
copy of the letter I’ll get one of the officials, you know, to work 
on it. 
 
And the second point I’d make is that where resolution could be 
found. we work very hard at trying to find that, you know, that 
happy medium between the complainants. 
 
Often what SERM does not do is not go there and create trouble 
for folks. What they do is they are often asked to come in and 
solve a conflict, or really try to correct some of the problems 
that may occur when two people have two different 
interpretations of a particular property or some issue in some 
park. So in that sense we try and strive to look for a resolution 
of some of the conflict out there. 
 
So I can assure the member that once we get your letter, that 
our officials will follow up and we do take those concerns very 
seriously. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister. I will 
be sending the letter across. 
 
On another case, Mr. Chair, this is a letter from Glen and Grace 
Rayner, Little Bear Lake Campground, Choiceland. I’d just like 
to read the letter into the record: 
 

We are operators of the Little Bear Lake Campground, mile 
62, Hanson Lake Road. We are writing to you with our 
concerns for a policy being implemented by the 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management. 
This policy is asking us to have all our permanent campers 
to remove the storage sheds from their campsites. 
 
We find that this policy would be unfair to our campers, 
some of which have been camping at Little Bear Lake 
Campground for at least 10 years. This is a provincial park 
policy that should not apply to our campsite as we are not 
in a provincial park. 
 
In conversation with David . . . he stated that this policy 
might be reviewed within the next couple of years. 
Removing these sheds would have a negative impact on the 
environment. Our campers come to our campground to 
enjoy nature, fish, and hike. They like to come for extended 

stays. They need the extra storage space that a shed 
provides. It has been suggested that they keep their supplies 
under the campers. But not only would this be unsightly, it 
would be unsafe as storing food under the campers would 
attract wildlife, and storing boat and motor fuels creates a 
fire hazard. Our campground was threatened by fire in 1996 
and we do not wish to increase the chance of this 
happening again. 
 

Could the minister respond in this particular case? And in 
general, what are these campsites to do with these new 
restrictions that are being imposed upon them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again one of the things that I think is 
very important is that the campground in question that you’ve 
mentioned is currently being leased. And we want to work very 
closely with the lessee in terms of putting forward some very 
proactive solutions to some of the requests made by some of his 
campers. 
 
And I guess what I would say is we need to understand that 
there’s two type of campers: one camper that’ll come out there 
and stay out there all summer on a regular basis, and some 
campers that may be intermittent campers where they’ll come 
out maybe once and then come back again a few years later and 
so on and so forth. So we’re kind of dealing with two kinds of 
campers that obviously would go to such places, you know, as 
you mentioned. 
 
One of the things we want to do with our campgrounds 
throughout the province is to make sure that people go out to 
campsites for the wilderness experience. And our policy is not 
to try and create some problems for those campers that go out to 
a site every year, but what we want to make sure is we don’t do, 
is we don’t have our campsites become cluttered with things 
like fences, with storage sheds, and so on and so forth, 
sidewalks. 
 
These are some of the things that people want to do. They want 
to make their site more homey, and you can’t fault them for it 
because we do have a very wonderful piece of land called 
Saskatchewan and people want to go out there. 
 
And I guess one of the things we want to do in SERM is to 
ensure that the wilderness experience is there for all the people 
to enjoy, and the less construction of buildings and sidewalks 
and fences and so on and so forth in some of our campgrounds 
would certainly enhance that wilderness experience that we’re 
all asking for. 
 
So what I would point out is that in the event that there’s some 
consistent evidence that perhaps storage sheds aren’t a major 
problem — because these people that come back to our 
campsite every year are regulars; they’re very good stewards of 
the park; they won’t build unnecessary to clutter up the park in 
a sense of taking away the wilderness experience — that’s 
where we’ve said, well let’s have a look at that for some of the 
lessees that we currently have, some of the campers that are out 
there on a regular basis, and to see what we can do. And this is 
why we have the review that’s going on now, to see if we can 
accommodate some of that. 
 
But understand that what we’re trying to achieve here is a 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

 

balance to enhance and protect the wilderness experience that 
all the people of Saskatchewan have asked us to do when it 
comes to the parks throughout our province, and then I think 
it’s only fair to say that we’re striving to find that balance and 
that’ll take us some time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Another item for the 
minister and his officials. Back in 2000 there was a lot of 
complaints concerning biomedical waste being dumped in the 
Regina landfill. And there was an article and there was some 
. . . much discussion and questions in the legislature. 
 
And I’d just like to inform the minister that I’ve had a number 
of complaints that this problem continues to exist. I’ve had a 
number of calls from people saying that dialysis waste is left 
uncovered — needles, blood, even human body parts or flesh is 
in the landfill not covered. And at the time, the recommendation 
was to have the Department of Environment and Resource 
Management review its medical waste disposal legislation. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister, has the government done this and if 
they have, what were the results of the study and what can be 
done to look after this concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I would point out is that Saskatchewan Health really leads 
this particular file and they . . . a review is underway at this time 
being led by Saskatchewan Health to look at the whole notion 
of how better to manage the biomedical wastes that you make 
reference to. 
 
There’s no question that there’s a lot of leadership on this 
particular matter. In particular the city here, in Regina, they 
follow some national standards when they handled some of the 
biomedical waste. For example, they talk about covering some 
of the waste, storing it in a certain specific area, watching for 
leaks, and that sort of thing. But they also go above and beyond 
the national standards. Like they now, I believe, treat their 
biomedical waste in the sense of making sure that, you know, 
they do all they can to stop the spread of infectious diseases and 
so on and so forth. 
 
So there has been leadership from both Saskatchewan Health on 
this and by a number of players. 
 
And the one that, of course, we wanted to pay special attention 
to is the city of Regina. I know they’re doing some of this work, 
and they follow national standards, and they’re actually 
excelling in certain areas. 
 
(16:45) 
 
And to point out that this is a serious matter and they were 
looking at, in conjunction and co-operation with Saskatchewan 
Health, on how we can participate to make sure that we store 
and take care of our biomedical waste as best we can to reduce 
exposure to the public, and some of the challenges associated 
with that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I look forward to a 
timely release of that study, Mr. Minister. On another issue, to 
the minister, I will just read this letter into the record: 
 

I am a seasonal conservation officer with Saskatchewan 
Environment. This past year the budget for Environment 
was cut drastically and as a result we have lost 17 seasonal 
officer positions as well as 6 full-time officer positions. 
There’s also talk about cutting another 20 full-time 
positions by the end of the fiscal year. It is obvious that the 
NDP government has no clue what goes on in our 
department or how much work we do as conservation 
officers. There is no way one or two people can cover the 
areas we do and take on the workloads we do. If you are 
familiar with our mandate you will know that we are 
enforcing laws from burning garbage dumps to provincial 
park enforcement, fisheries, wildlife, etc. 
 
The reason I am writing this letter is because I am . . . 
would like to know what the government . . . 

 
I’ll just paraphrase here, this individual would like to know 
what the government is going to do concerning seasonal 
conservation officers, and is there any plans to increase the 
amount of officers in Saskatchewan or at least increase a budget 
so that work terms could cover hunting seasons? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would point out one of the most important aspects of 
Saskatchewan Environment is certainly the enforcement and 
compliance division. 
 
I would point out that some of the COs have done a tremendous 
amount of work; there’s no question about that. They have a 
wide variety of tasks, as you mentioned in some of the 
correspondence that you made reference to. And so we would 
certainly concur that the COs have a wide variety of tasks; 
they’re covering many, many miles and they have a lot of work 
that they have to undertake. 
 
I would point out that there’s no question that the six vacancies 
that you mentioned were not filled. And the 17 seasonal officers 
that you make reference to, some of the permanent officers are 
doing additional duties now so there isn’t a lack of service or, 
you know, there certainly is extra work and extra duties that the 
permanent officers have to undertake. But given all the, you 
know, the challenges we have in maintaining our balanced 
budget, it’s something that we have to be constantly diligent on 
in reference to making sure that we have, you know, as least 
disruption in all of our departments when it comes to the 
budgetary process. 
 
There’s also things like, for example, we’re trying to encourage 
a lot of Aboriginal people to join the CO course program. 
There’s attrition. These are all factors that we have to 
incorporate in our budgetary processes. And that I can point out 
that all the seasonal officers last year that were available, you 
know, to be recalled were indeed called back to work. 
 
So it is always a difficult task as you know to the budgetary 
process, to fight and defend no cuts whatsoever. But I can tell 
you that as a result of some of the work that we did do during 
the budgetary process, we were able to save a lot of positions. 
And I wish we could do more. 
 
But basically on what we have in front of us as a department, 
we’ve had some good progress, some good success. And given 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

the resources we have right now, there’s a lot of people doing a 
lot of extra work which translates into some good work being 
done by SERM overall. And a big part of our team are indeed 
the COs as well, and we certainly respect their role. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to get into a bit of discussion regarding some 
of the issues surrounding underground fuel tanks and the 
clearance on sites that allowed those sites to be actually sold. 
 
And in particular one that I think your officials would probably 
be aware of is a site in the community of Glenavon. The 
hotelier there has attempted to purchase a former Esso 
dealership . . . not dealership but service shop. And I believe it’s 
either two or three or four years ago, the fuel tanks were 
removed. 
 
Now as I understand it, the department has not been willing to 
or from my understanding, give clearance so that the site could 
actually be sold. And as it currently sits, the owner is basically 
walking away from the site. He could probably realize some 
value, but the taxes are accumulating as a result of the inability 
of the Environment to address this issue. 
 
I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, what process the department 
takes in regards to these sites. And I don’t have the particulars 
as to when the tanks were removed, at the time what process 
was taken in removal of the tanks and filling that property up. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, we need to arrive at something fairly 
quick and maybe grandfather, if you will, some of these old 
sites because there’s probably in many communities where 
people could make . . . some of these properties could be turned 
into some value and actually be cleaned up and, rather than just 
deteriorating, could be utilized. 
 
And if the holdup is the requirements we have through the 
Environment and our policy in that regard, I think we need to 
take a serious look at how we implement that and what we can 
do to accommodate a clearance, if you will, given in regards to 
some of these sites so that they can actually, people can 
purchase them and turn them into some economic value. 
 
If you’ve got anything in regards to this property, I’d appreciate 
that. But maybe you could just let me know where things stand 
and the overall policy in that regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I would point out, first of all, is we don’t have specific 
information on the site that you made reference to. But I’ll give 
you kind of a sketch of how we undertake to do some of the 
cleanups of some of the other sites. 
 
First of all that we follow national standards when we look at 
the whole notion of cleaning up some of these abandoned 
service stations. This station I believe is not considered 
abandoned, that there is an owner. 
 
And what we have to be careful of is what we don’t want to do 
is assume responsibility or liability for giving a property a clean 
bill of environmental health, if you will, because there could be 
issues that we would assume all kinds of responsibility for 
health or for cleanup costs and so on and so forth. 

So if this particular property doesn’t follow the national 
standards and we feel that there’s some contamination, that’s 
why you wouldn’t get the sign-off that you made reference to. 
 
We are quite adamant that some of the orphaned sites 
throughout the province, that these have to be cleaned up as 
well. It’s much the same principle as the regional landfills in a 
sense, that they’re dotting all throughout the province and 
people have walked away from these sites and they continue 
contaminating groundwater. And some sites aren’t as bad as 
others of course. 
 
And one of the important components that we’ve undertaken 
this year is to look at the abandoned service station cleanup 
program. And by the end of this year we would have cleaned up 
110 sites, through the Centenary Fund, of abandoned service 
stations. 
 
And these 110 — I believe there’s 400-and-some in total 
throughout the province that have been abandoned — these 110 
were the worst. So by the end of this year we would have 
cleaned up the 110 worst sites that were identified. And 
certainly they’re also analyzed in the sense of making sure that 
they were indeed the worst ones. 
 
So we have national standards. We don’t have a specific reason 
as to why this particular site wasn’t signed off, but there’s 
probably reasons that we don’t want to assume the 
responsibility of giving a clean bill of health if it’s not fully 
cleaned up. 
 
The second thing is that we’ve had good success with the 
centenary program in concert with the industry themselves to 
make sure we clean up some of the abandoned service stations 
throughout the province. 
 
And finally one of the examples we often use is the city of 
Moose Jaw where they approached us and said look, listen we 
got two or three service stations throughout the city. We don’t 
know what level of contamination there is on those sites. What 
we don’t want to do is do a tax enforcement process on that 
particular site, because if we assume it and we find out that the 
costs of cleanup are dramatically greater than the costs of . . . 
that we could possibly get back when you sell the land. So 
make us a deal that if we assume title to it and we dig and we 
find out that it’s so contaminated underneath that we’ll never 
get our money back, that we’ll not be held responsible. 
 
So we agreed to that process and lo and behold the sites that the 
city took back, the abandoned service station within the city 
took back, weren’t as contaminated as they originally thought. 
So they cleaned up those sites and then they sold them and they 
made dollars from the sale and they continued putting that into 
a process where they got other sites cleaned up. 
 
So this is the kind of example the city of Moose Jaw has taught 
all of us to look at, is how we’re able to work co-operatively in 
looking and addressing the whole issue of cleaning up some of 
the service sites that have been abandoned throughout the 
province. 
 
(17:00) 
 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

 

So I would point out that, you know, we have a relationship 
with both SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) on how we begin to identify these sites and get 
them cleaned up. And again the whole notion is to not leave 
them out there contaminating groundwater. The whole notion is 
we clean them up, give them a good environmental bill of 
health, and hopefully somebody else will buy them and operate 
them as environmentally, legally, and certainly to be 
responsible in how they operate these sites so that you can see 
the economic stimulation again start to happen. 
 
So we’re moving down that path and we’re quite pleased with 
the co-operation of folks like . . . or cities like Moose Jaw, and 
to point out to people that partnership and information and 
sharing of all the resources out there is quite important to the 
success of this program as well. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. It now being after 5 
o’clock this committee will stand recessed until 7 o’clock p.m. 
 
The committee recessed until 19:00. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1717 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1718 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1719 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1726 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1726 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Melville Hole-In-One Golf Tournament 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1719 
 Whitewood Regional 4-H Show and Sale 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1719 
 Multimedia Team Wins Awards 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1719 
 Special Anniversaries in Cypress Hills Constituency 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1720 
 Giant Tiger Store Opens in Regina 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1720 
 Delisle Resident Honoured 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1720 
 Native Prairie Appreciation Week 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Support for Beef Industry 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
 Automobile Insurance 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1722 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1723 
 Budgetary Projections 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1724 
 Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1725 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1726 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1726 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1726 
 
 
 



 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Public Ownership of the Saskatchewan Auto Fund 
  Heppner .........................................................................................................................................................................1727, 1737 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................1729, 1736 
  Atkinson.........................................................................................................................................................................1731, 1737 
  Van Mulligen.................................................................................................................................................................1732, 1736 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1734 
  Cline ...............................................................................................................................................................................1735, 1737 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1737 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
PRIVATE BILLS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 301 — The Western Christian College (Amendment) Act, 2003 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1739 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Western Christian College (Amendment) Act, 2003 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1739 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1739 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1739 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1746 
 
 
 


