















































Hansard: April 08, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 439 
 April 8, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me pleasure today to stand and present a petition on 
behalf of producers from the community of Eastend and one 
from the town of Webb on a subject different than the petitions 
I’ve been reading lately. This petition is regarding crop 
insurance increases that the government has instituted for the 
current crop year. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the coffee stains here ought not to be taken as 
editorial comment. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I again 
today have a petition that I will present on behalf of the people 
of my constituency who are very, very concerned about the 
condition of Highway 47. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed, Mr. Speaker, by the citizens of the city of 
Estevan, as well as those in surrounding areas. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition concerned with the sharp rise in premiums for 
the crop insurance for the coming year. And the petition reads, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from the good folks at 
Kindersley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here 

dealing with the high cost of drugs: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Bladworth, Davidson, Elbow, 
and Estevan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition today to present on behalf of constituents concerned 
with the condition of Highway 22, particularly that section 
between Junction 6 and Junction 20. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey, Lipton, and Bulyea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to bring forth a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Parkside 
and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
no. 12, 18, and 19. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

To the Environment minister: which municipal drinking 
water supplies fail to meet with provincial standards of 
2002? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Health minister: how long is the waiting list for 
autism assessments; and further to that, how many patients 
were sent out of province in the year 2002 and to where? 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 21 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Government Relations: of the 
municipalities including cities, northern municipalities, 
rural municipalities, resort villages, towns, and villages 
approved to have projects funded under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program in the year 
2001-2002, could the minister please provide the amount of 
funding each project received? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a similar question regarding the year 
2002-2003. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, 61 students from St. Theresa School 
in my constituency, both in the gallery and on the floor, Mr. 
Speaker, and their teachers, Mr. Barry Wittal and Ms. Joanne 
Nelson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must say that this is a very special school to me 
as well because Mr. Wittal and the teachers at St. Theresa 
educated all three of my children and they did a terrific job. 
And I just want to say to the students, you couldn’t attend a 
better school and you couldn’t have better teachers. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

World Seniors’ Curling Championships 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week this 
Assembly had the honour of congratulating two Saskatchewan 
rinks on winning the junior women’s and men’s curling 
championships. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Canada has just won two more — two more 
world curling titles. And of course I would like to take this 
opportunity to congratulate Tom Reed, the rink from 
Edmonton, on their Senior Men’s Championship. 
 
But I would particularly like to congratulate Nancy Kerr, Linda 
Burnham, Kenda Richards, and Gertie Pick of the Callie Club 
here in Regina who won the Senior Women’s World 
Championship in Winnipeg over the weekend. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the senior women’s team has more in 
common with the junior women than a world championship, 
Mr. Speaker, for like the juniors, the senior women went 
undefeated through the entire week to claim the world title. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure this entire Assembly will join me in 
congratulating Nancy Kerr and the other members of her rink 
on their fine achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Drag Racing Championship 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The sport of 
snowmobiling is growing in Saskatchewan, and part of the sport 
which people are finding very fascinating is drag racing sleds. 
 
The Western Drag Racing Championship was held at Montreal 
Lake in March. This event takes place once a year and is open 
to drivers who are 18 years and older. It is seen as a way to 
feature your stock and your abilities in front of some of the 
most influential people in the industry. 
 
The two-day event is considered an excellent learning 
experience because snowmobile technicians closely monitor it 
to make sure the races are conducted properly. Most 
competitors attended with mechanics and several machines. 
 
Eighteen-year-old Mark Olson of Wadena went with his father 
and raced his brother’s F7 Arctic Cat and his own Mach Z. At 
the end of the first day, Mark had taken first place in all seven 
events he participated in. In the semi-finals and finals, he took 
four first-place finishes, as well as first place in the 800 
Pro-stock event, second in the 1,000 event, and third-place 
finish in the King of the Snow. These finishes earned Mark the 
overall championship at the event. 
 
Two different companies expressed interest in having Mark 
drive for them in the next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating Mark and his success at racing and wishing him 
well in his future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Harvest AAA Champions 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in the House today to congratulate the Yorkton Harvest on 
winning the Saskatchewan AAA hockey championship last 
Thursday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Harvest now advance to the Air Canada Cup Western 
Regionals in Thunder Bay where the experience they have 
gained over the last series will certainly stand them in good 
stead as they go on to win that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To win the title, Mr. Speaker, the Yorkton team had to get past 
the tough and determined Saskatoon Contacts. And by all 
accounts it was a hard-fought series with all the games being 
decided by only a single goal. 
 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

 

The Harvest won the final game in a 2 to 1 victory with Scott 
Woytas and Neil Kodman combining for the first goal, and 
Sheldon Dubnyk assisted with Clayton Geiger — good name 
Clayton Geiger — and Dustin Nehring got the winners. As 
well, Mr. Speaker, Harvest goaltender, Justin Mrazek, he made 
a scintillating, just a scintillating glove save in the dying 
seconds to preserve the win. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all members of the Assembly will 
want to join me in congratulating Coach Hoffman and all the 
young men of the Yorkton Harvest for capturing the AAA 
crown and wishing them well and good luck in the Air Canada 
Cup venture in the next couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maple Creek Baseball Players 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although 
Saskatchewan weather conditions during this past week might 
have suggested otherwise, utmost in the minds of two young 
constituents of the Cypress Hills constituency are thoughts of 
spring training and baseball. 
 
Maple Creek students Amanda Bacsu and her brother, Kirk, 
have accumulated amazing histories in their short lives. Both 
have played baseball since a young age and have competed at 
many levels. Parental support has been instrumental to this 
success and will continue as these young people pursue 
competition at provincial, national, and international levels. 
 
Amanda was chosen to represent Saskatchewan on the 
provincial girls team twice in the last three years at the Western 
Canadian Championships. Her next quest is to attend the 
Canadian Championships to be held in Windsor, Ontario this 
summer. 
 
Her brother, Kirk, enjoyed success in 1998 when the Maple 
Creek team won the provincial title. And that same year he was 
asked to assist the Swift Current Indian Peewees at the Western 
Canadian Championships. Now during 2001 and 2002, Kirk 
made the Saskatchewan Selects baseball team and in July 2002 
was awarded the Top Catcher of the Tournament award at the 
Canada Cup in Melville. 
 
Plans for this year include a tryout for the Canadian Junior 
National Team, attending Disney’s Wide World of Sports in 
Orlando, Florida, and the possible opportunity to travel to the 
America’s World Tournament in Netherlands Antilles in July 
2003. 
 
So at this time could you please join me and take a moment to 
congratulate these two on their achievements to date and wish 
them good luck as they continue their careers in baseball. They 
are true ambassadors of the Southwest for Saskatchewan and 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Film Industry in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the words of one 
of their own hopeful candidates, the Sask Party is, and I quote, 

“too easily taken in by simplistic right-wing dogma.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, though I rarely agree with the Sask Party, I must 
say that in this case truer words were never spoken. In keeping 
with the Sask Party’s right-wing dogmatic stance, they are 
opposed to the involvement of the government in business, 
albeit with a few glaring exceptions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Be that as it may, there are endless positive examples of this 
government partnering with business and today I want to 
mention one of them. 
 
In the early 1990s in keeping with our policy of investing 
strategically to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people, we 
invested in the film industry, Mr. Speaker. And here are the 
numbers. In the early 1990s the film industry’s economic 
contribution to the province was $5.2 million. By the year 2000 
that figure had risen to $70 million. 
 
To cite one example, this year Minds Eye Pictures alone spent 
$56 million in production volume. It employs 100 people full 
time — many of them young people, Mr. Speaker — and 
contracts with hundreds more. Furthermore, Minds Eye is but 
one of the . . . of this province’s many successful production 
companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, forging partnerships and making strategic 
investments to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people is a 
good thing. And only simplistic, right-wing zealots would 
disagree. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Broncos Win 
Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Title 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
congratulations to the Humboldt Broncos on winning . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — . . . the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League title. 
I’m sure that much to the consternation of the MLA (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly) from Melville, the Broncos 
trounced the Melville Millionaires in four games straight to take 
the league championship and to advance to the Anavet Cup. 
 
This was the Broncos third trip to the finals in the last four 
years and the teams and coaches are ecstatic with the victorious 
outcome. 
 
Coach Bob Beatty said that defence and goaltending was the 
difference. According to the Humboldt Bronco defenceman, 
Craig Olynick: 
 

Winning the league championship was the goal of the team. 
We worked so hard this year. This was our goal. Now our 
goal is to get to the Royal Bank Cup. 

 
The Humboldt Broncos will play the OCN (Opaskwayak Cree 
Nation) Blizzard in the Anavet Cup with that series beginning 
April 19 in The Pas, Manitoba. And from here the winner will 
advance to the Royal Bank Cup, the National Junior A Hockey 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

Championship tournament to be held in May, the 3rd to the 
11th, in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island. 
 
Congratulations to Bob Beatty and Dean Brockman and to the 
players of the Humboldt Broncos for a job well done, and best 
of luck in the next series. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Reduction in Price for GreenPower 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I rise today to tell the House about another 
example of Saskatchewan’s leadership in an area of renewable 
energy development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Effective April 1, SaskPower is reducing the 
price for one block of GreenPower to $2.50 per month. That’s a 
28 per cent reduction. The new price is possible because of a 
federal incentive to promote wind power development worth 
$2.6 million over the next 10 years. 
 
Buying one block of GreenPower can operate five computers 
and a printer in an office or do 20 loads of washing and drying 
or operate two high-pressure farmyard lights every night. As for 
the environmental benefits, over the course of one year, one 
block of GreenPower reduces greenhouse gas emissions equal 
to the efforts of 200 full-grown trees. 
 
At the end of 2002, Saskatchewan was Canada’s third largest 
wind power producer. And our Throne Speech confirmed that 
SaskPower will add another 150 megawatts of wind power by 
2005. Our government plans to meet about 20 per cent of our 
electrical needs with wind power. 
 
I would urge all members of this Legislative Assembly to go 
green and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by signing up for 
GreenPower for $2.50 a block. And for those people looking for 
Easter gift ideas for your family or friends, I can’t think of one 
better gift than GreenPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North Battleford’s Assyrian Community 
Celebrates Centennial 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, 
people from around the globe settled in Saskatchewan. Today I 
would like to tell you about one group in North Battleford 
which is celebrating their centennial this year. 
 
The Assyrians were living in Persia, today called Iran. They 
were persecuted because of their Christian beliefs. Dr. Isaac 
Adams, an Assyrian who had been trained in Scotland, arranged 
for the group to emigrate to the North-West Territories. Much 
of the journey across Asia was on foot, travelling by night and 
hiding by day. 
 
They arrived in September 1903. The first homesteads were 
taken up on what is now the grounds of Saskatchewan Hospital. 

At the time, North Battleford was a tent city and the settlers had 
to ford the North Saskatchewan River to get supplies from the 
more established community of Battleford. 
 
The Assyrians quickly became involved in community life and 
were successful in farming, business, and sports. They were 
instrumental in establishing the Presbyterian church. Names 
like Yonan, George, Backus, and Odishaw continue to be 
prominent in our community. 
 
This September the Assyrians, under the leadership of Margaret 
Beach and Don Backus, will be holding a reunion. I know all 
members of this House will want to join me in wishing the 
Assyrian community a successful celebration and in offering 
our very best wishes to this small but courageous community on 
achieving this important milestone. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. The minister of Liquor and Gaming has now 
admitted that the NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
spent $6.2 million on mega bingo without a business plan and 
without cabinet approval. Doesn’t that concern the Premier? 
Because that’s a huge amount of money being spent without 
any approval from cabinet. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: how did his government let 
Liquor and Gaming spend $6.2 million without a business plan 
and without cabinet approval? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be pleased to 
answer the Leader of the Opposition’s question. 
 
In 1997, Mr. Speaker, cabinet did approve a gaming strategy 
that included linked bingo as an initiative that could help to 
rebalance gaming revenues and to assist our 1,500 or more 
charities right across this province. And those are the people, 
Mr. Speaker, that do rely on bingo. This was an initiative that 
was in conjunction with what that industry was asking the 
government to do at that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make it 
clear I’m asking my questions to the Premier about the way his 
government is managed because it really makes you wonder 
who’s running things over there. 
 
After months of lobbying, the city mayors of this province 
couldn’t get 6.2 million new dollars out of his government. Yet 
somehow Liquor and Gaming is allowed to blow that much 
money without a business plan and without cabinet approval. 
Yet the Premier isn’t even concerned about it enough to stand 
up and answer the questions. 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier should be outraged at this — that his 
officials, that his government, are spending millions of dollars 
without a business plan and without cabinet approval. So my 
question again, to the Premier of Saskatchewan, is: what is he 
doing about this matter? Why is he allowing millions of dollars 
to be wasted without cabinet approval? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess because 
of the noise of the din the members opposite did not hear my 
response. 
 
In 1997 cabinet did approve a gaming strategy that included 
linked bingo as an initiative that could help the bingos that rely 
. . . the charities that relied on bingo throughout the province. 
So, Mr. Speaker, SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Association) proceeded with the development and 
implementation of a linked bingo game as identified in the 
gaming strategy that was in fact approved by cabinet, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, again I ask the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. Yesterday his Finance minister stood in this 
House and he screamed that he couldn’t fund the College of 
Medicine because they hadn’t gone through the proper budget 
process. Yet somehow the NDP blows $6.2 million on bingo 
without any business plan and without cabinet approval. It’s 
absolutely unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, how mixed up the NDP’s 
priorities are. They have no money for the College of Medicine 
but they have $6 million for bingo — without a business plan 
and without cabinet approval. 
 
So my question again, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan: if he couldn’t fund the College of Medicine 
because they didn’t go through the proper process, how on earth 
did they give $6.2 million to bingo without a business plan and 
without cabinet approval for that new project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps I need to 
speak a little louder and indicate to the Leader of the Opposition 
that cabinet did in fact approve a strategy that included bingo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, linked bingo was initially projected to be cost 
neutral to the government. The game was expected to pay for 
itself, Mr. Speaker. When it became clear that the game was not 
attracting new players overall and therefore the costs would not 
be covered, those costs were incorporated into a budget and the 
minister of the day ended that particular project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now 
maybe the minister of Liquor and Gaming doesn’t understand 
the rules, but I’m sure the Premier knows that section 10(1.1) of 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act states: 
 

The authority shall obtain . . . approval of the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council before making any grant . . . that is 

greater than $50,000 . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t that have applied in this case? This was 
new spending of $6.2 million and it was financed entirely by 
the government. Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that it should have 
required cabinet approval. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for the fourth time to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan: was the Liquor and Gaming Authority within its 
rights to spend $6.2 million on mega bingo without cabinet 
approval or did they violate their own Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you. For the 
fourth time I will say to the Leader of the Opposition, cabinet 
approved a gaming strategy that included linked bingos and 
initiatives that could help people that were relying on bingos. 
 
Now he also quoted The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that Act gives the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority the statutory authority to operate and 
regulate liquor and gaming activities in this province. And you 
know what, Mr. Speaker? They do a fine job because each year 
they generate revenues of over $300 million that goes into our 
General Revenue Fund. They are doing a good job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would just ask the 
students who are visiting us today from refraining in 
participating in the applause. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
March 5 the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy asked SLGA 
officials if the $6.2 million mega bingo project went through a 
tendering process. The officials told her that they would have to 
check on it and get back to her. They never did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did the mega bingo contract go through a 
tendering process and if so, will the minister today tender those 
details of that process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Western Canada Lottery 
Corporation, which looks after all gaming activities in Western 
Canada was the organization that became involved in assisting 
us in introducing the . . . and putting out the tenders for this 
particular initiative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — That, Mr. Speaker, should be taken as a no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the $6.2 million, $1.2 million went to a 
software development contract. That went to a company called 
Wascana Gaming. Mr. Speaker, we’d like to know who owned 
Wascana Gaming and what connections they had to the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as usual we have to answer our own 
questions. Wascana Gaming was run by a person called Virgil 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

Cairns. Mr. Cairns has very strong ties to the NDP over there. 
He has . . . was the NDP constituency president for Regina 
Sherwood. He worked on the Dwain Lingenfelter election 
campaign and then ran for the NDP nomination after Mr. 
Lingenfelter quit. 
 
We know that this mega bingo scheme never had a business 
plan; it was never approved by cabinet. Mr. Speaker, what we 
want to know: was this contract tendered; how was it tendered; 
and how was it decided to give it to Wascana Gaming? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess this is number 
five. Cabinet did approve a strategy for the linked bingo 
initiative in 1997. The Western Canada Lottery Corporation 
was engaged to assist SLGA in tendering out the contract. And 
I’m not sure . . . Is the member suggesting that there was 
something untoward with respect to Western Canada Lottery 
Corporation tendering process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s become 
obvious from that answer, Mr. Speaker, obvious from that 
answer that that little bit of a cabinet statement that’s out there 
allowed the NDP to give those contracts to their friends and 
their political hacks. That’s what that answer said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister table details of the tendering 
process that resulted in $1.2 million contract for a mega bingo 
being awarded to Wascana Gaming? Specifically, the question 
is: how was it advertised; who else bid on it; what were the 
other bids; and on what criteria, Mr. Speaker, on what criteria 
was this contract awarded to Wascana Gaming? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I regret that I sense that there 
are some pretty serious allegations being made by the member 
opposite with respect to the Western Canada Lottery 
Corporation. It’s too bad. They are a well-known, 
well-renowned corporation, Mr. Speaker, that do some good 
due diligence throughout Western Canada in the gaming 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were the ones that were engaged in becoming 
involved in the tendering process. We have confidence that they 
were above-board in their actions, Mr. Speaker. I’m a little 
concerned about those allegations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for College of Medicine 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the member from Melfort-Tisdale and I asked the 
NDP government a series of questions related to the College of 
Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan as to why there 
was no funding for the college in this year’s budget. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in response to our questioning, the Minister of 
Health and the Minister of Finance both indicated that the 
recommendations from the academic health sciences group had 
been received in late February but couldn’t be included in this 
budget process. And both ministers stated they had received no 
financial estimates, no dollar figures for what might be required 
for the college in this budget year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of Finance suggesting for one 
minute that the Academic Health Sciences Network submitted 
recommendations for improvements but no corresponding 
dollar figures? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the 
process of setting up a budget, we talk about our Treasury 
Board process and we talk about our cabinet finalization. I think 
everyone recognizes and certainly the members opposite would 
know that proposals come from departments. The departments 
receive requests, they analyze those requests; they then present 
these requests, in terms of the funding required, to the Treasury 
Board and then finally on to cabinet. 
 
If we have not had an opportunity to look at the numbers or the 
proposal and we haven’t assigned a dollar amount to that, then 
we can’t look at that proposal in this current budget process. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m not too surprised that the members 
opposite would not recognize that from their track record in the 
1980s where they ran nine consecutive deficit budgets, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 
Finance said, and I quote: 
 

. . . we have not yet got a dollar figure from the Academic 
Health Sciences Network . . . 
 

Then he went on to say, and I quote again: 
 

As soon as we have that information, we will bring that 
forward. Right now we don’t have a number to put into 
our budget estimates because we haven’t got that number, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

That’s the end of the quote. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I wish to table today a document dated 
February 25 from Ken Coates, vice-president of academia at the 
University of Saskatchewan. And it was sent to the deputy 
minister of Learning and the deputy minister of Health. It is a 
detailed proposal of recommendations for the College of 
Medicine from the Saskatchewan Academic Health Sciences 
Network and it includes the budgetary requirements for each 
recommendation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Minister of Finance tell this 
Assembly that they had received no numbers, no financial 
requirements from the health sciences network? 
 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when I commented that 
I had not received the proposal in terms of the Finance officials, 
the Finance officials and the Treasury Board has not seen any 
request from the Academic Health Sciences Network. We have 
not seen it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality of the fact is we cannot even put that into the mix of 
budgeting and looking at our estimates until we have had a 
chance to receive that proposal. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
quote from Regina Leader-Post Friday, April 4 where it said: 
 

The university hasn’t settled on a specific financial request 
from government, Coates said. But it was hoping for at 
least a verbal commitment to solving the college’s 
problems in the budget speech. 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we’re saying is that once we’ve had a 
chance, the Department of Learning, the Department of Health, 
has had a chance to analyze the proposal from the Academic 
Health Sciences Network, and that proposal is then brought 
forward to the Finance officials, we will look at it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, yesterday in this 
Assembly, the Minister of Finance lost his temper, and here’s 
his quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is . . . ludicrousity of the members 
opposite. Here we have a Finance critic who says we 
should put a number in when we don’t even know what the 
number is. Is it 4 million? Is it 8 million? Is it 10 million? 
We don’t know that number, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in late February the Department of Learning and 
Health did receive the numbers from the Academic Health 
Sciences Network. And that number needed for this budget year 
was $5.3 million. In fact, the network submitted a four-year 
budget plan with very detailed financial requirements to help 
the college meet the accreditation standards it desires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister say he’d received no 
financial figures from the health sciences network when indeed 
the government did receive that information? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not too surprised 
that the members opposite haven’t been listening to the answer. 
 
I’ve explained to them clearly that the Academic Health 
Sciences Network, which includes representation from the 
departments, would have put forward a proposal. The Finance 
officials and myself, and certainly the Treasury Board, have not 
received a request or have not seen this proposal, Mr. Speaker. 
So how could we possibly budget or put it into our budget 
estimates, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The process is respected on this side, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell 
you what we did put into health care in this budget, Mr. Speaker 
— $2.5 billion. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just take a look at the plan 
that the minister’s just talked about. We have a national 
accreditation program that has indicated to the University of 
Saskatchewan, last April, that they had two years to correct 
their accreditation standards. 
 
This is April, one year later, Mr. Speaker. Now the government 
is indicating they received no plan. Clearly there was a plan 
proposed to this government. That plan was for a four-year 
strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Now the minister can stand there, the 
minister can stand there as one of my colleagues has already 
said, as Rome burns, while the accreditation at the University of 
Saskatchewan Hospital is in jeopardy. 
 
One year from now, Mr. Speaker, we might lose that 
accreditation. Isn’t the minister concerned? There was 
absolutely no mention of the college in the budget and no 
money allocated to help them begin to address the deficiencies 
in accreditation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP government ignore the needs of 
the College of Medicine in this budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I can see that the 
member from Canora-Pelly is getting quite animated. 
 
And I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite in 
their last election platform in 1999 did not mention the College 
of Medicine once, not once, Mr. Speaker. And they have the 
nerve to tell us what we should be doing when we don’t even 
have the final recommendation. We have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, there were only two 
parties in the last election that talked about the College of 
Medicine and supporting the College of Medicine, and they’re 
both over here. None of them are over there. Mr. Speaker, we 
support our College of Medicine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Priorities 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some days, you 
know, I almost feel sorry for the Premier. He’s got one minister 
that knows nothing about . . . nothing but rhetoric that he 
doesn’t mean and he has another minister over there who says, I 
don’t really know what’s going on in my department. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, members. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear that the 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

College of Medicine made a big mistake. Their mistake was 
that they wrote up a business plan. Their mistake was that they 
took it to cabinet. It’s no wonder that they didn’t get any 
funding. The way to get money out of this government is to 
have no business plan and not to take it to cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness, these two 
issues really speak to the priorities of the NDP government. 
They have no money for the College of Medicine but they have 
$6.2 million for bingo. 
 
My question to the Premier of Saskatchewan: when did the 
NDP get so mixed up in its priorities that they put funding for 
bingo ahead of the College of Medicine? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me speak 
to the priorities of this government — the priorities which you 
will see reflected in this budget which is now under 
consideration by this House. Priority: 8 per cent new funding to 
health, $2.5 billion; 5-plus per cent new funding to education. 
 
The priorities of this government, Mr. Speaker, are today what 
they have been, and that is to work with Saskatchewan people, 
whether it’s working with charitable institutions and 
organizations in this province, whether it’s working with 
business people in this province, whether it is working with 
young people in this province. That’s the priority of this 
government, not the priorities of the party opposite who in that 
last election we all remember — and Saskatchewan people 
remember — when it came to the funding of health, what did 
they say? Freeze health funding. That was their party platform. 
Now they get up and say we should spend more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re working with the people of Saskatchewan to 
build quality health care and a quality of life in this province 
like none other in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the Premier 
said that he is spending more money on health care but we are 
concerned because there is no planning for that spending on 
health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, spending more money and not spending it 
according to good planning is a mistake. Now, Mr. Speaker, if 
you read any studies about gambling addiction, you will learn 
that one of the sure signs of a gambling addiction is when you 
start to take money from important areas like your children’s 
university education and start blowing it on gambling. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that ironic? Isn’t that exactly what the 
NDP government is doing? They have no money to fund the 
College of Medicine, a priority for the people of Saskatchewan, 
but they have $6.2 billion to blow on bingo without a business 
plan, without any accountability, without approval from their 
cabinet. Mr. Speaker, it might be time for someone, perhaps the 
Premier, to call the gambling help line. 
 

My question to the Premier, why are the NDP’s priorities so 
mixed up that they put bingo ahead of funding for university? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — There’s no mix-up in the priorities here. 
The priorities are growing the Saskatchewan economy, 
expanding the Saskatchewan economy, providing a quality of 
life like none other in Canada in health care, education, 
infrastructure . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’ll tell you where the priorities are 
mixed up in this legislature. They’re mixed up across the 
House. Mr. Speaker, we come into this legislature, we’re 
dealing with an issue here today that’s — what? — 3, 4, 5, 6 
years old. I don’t know what. 
 
How come, Mr. Speaker, I ask and the people of Saskatchewan 
ask, how is it that this opposition is not asking us about the 
11,600 new jobs . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — How come this government is not asking 
us about 10 consecutive balanced budgets? Nine credit 
upgrading? Mr. Speaker, how come this opposition is not 
talking about the new daycare spaces for child care? How come 
this opposition isn’t asking us about the new support for 
disabled people in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I wonder about that, Mr. Speaker. How 
about this opposition asking about the $61 million dedicated 
this year to the renovation and construction of new hospital 
facilities? 
 
I’ll tell you whose priorities are mixed up. Their priorities are 
political. They will say, they will do, anything in their search to 
get elected. Our priorities are good government for the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 13 – The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 13, The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 14 – The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 14, The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

 

and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of government and respond to written 
questions no. 50 through 53 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 50, 51, 52, and 53 
have been submitted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Agriculture Support Programs 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
most of rural Saskatchewan is well aware of, it’s been well over 
a year now since the federal government announced that it’s 
going to redesign the entire agriculture policy for the country. 
And in June of last year, Mr. Speaker, a preliminary agreement 
was introduced and signed by the majority of the provinces. 
And that agreement at that time, Mr. Speaker, was a fairly 
lengthy and it was a fairly ambitious outline of what goals the 
government hoped to achieve and guidelines with which they 
would follow in order to design a new agriculture policy 
framework for the entire country. 
 
There were five envelopes in that agreement, Mr. Speaker, or 
pillars. And for today I wish to concentrate what I would like to 
say to one of those pillars, and that is the risk management 
component of the agreement. 
 
Under that component, Mr. Speaker, the only money 
commitment that was made by the federal government to the 
risk management was $1.1 billion for each of the next five 
years, and beyond that there were no details to the agreement, 
Mr. Speaker. There was no set allocation of the funds to each of 
the provinces, and there was no set design of a specific program 
that could be examined by the provinces or the industry leaders 
to see how the program would work in their region or in their 
area of interest. And all of those details were supposed to be 
negotiated in the following months and were. And they were 
negotiated with the federal government, the industry leaders, 
and the provinces who chose to sign the agreement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And there was concerns I believe by, you know, sort of 
throughout the whole, entire nation with the initial agreement. 
And I think that a lot of those concerns, both sides of the House 
can agree on. 
 
The federal minister said that the new APF (agricultural policy 
framework) is all about making the agriculture industry more 
profitable, but there is no indication in the initial agreement that 
that will indeed be the case, and there is nothing in the 
agricultural policy framework that will mitigate the price. So, 

therefore, it has nothing in it to address trade injury that’s 
affecting the producers quite seriously in this province and in 
other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was also serious concerns that the new program will not 
be adequately funded. There is concerns about the allocation of 
only $1.1 billion for the entire nation. And as this minister 
should well know — because you know we have the same 
difficulty here in our province with the crop insurance program 
— it is virtually impossible to enhance programs in any 
meaningful way without adding more dollars, Mr. Speaker. And 
the federal government has refused to do that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, since I was elected in 1999, we have always 
been constantly lobbying the federal government to address the 
impact of trade injury. It has been an ongoing, going process. 
And the Minister of Agriculture has said that it’s never 
happened, but I was actually talking about his government. So I 
think he should be very, very careful because he’s being very 
touchy. When I said we, I was meaning the province of 
Saskatchewan. So maybe he would like to perhaps be a little 
quieter and listen a little more carefully. 
 
Now the problem with that continual lobbying, of course, is the 
lack of interest by our eastern government and they have not 
addressed this issue. We have basically achieved zero amount 
of funding for that portfolio and I have no doubt that we will 
have to continue that process of lobbying the federal 
government for dollars for . . . to address the trade injury 
problems. 
 
But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we need to negotiate what is 
on the table right now to ensure the money available is in a 
program that is designed properly. Any new program needs to 
meet the needs of our producers in this province in the best way 
possible. And it has to be a program, quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, that the producers of this province know what it is, 
that they can understand it, and they can support it. And that’s 
extremely important, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about a 
new long-term program. 
 
Now there has been a tentative program that’s been introduced, 
but sadly the details of that program are a moving target. And 
the rumour has it that how it looks on any given day is directly 
dependent on who the federal bureaucrats are that have talked to 
the . . . or who they’ve talked to most recently. They keep on 
changing the program and the details are evolving. And there’s 
absolutely nothing that stays the same from one month to the 
next. 
 
They have named it the new NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) or the super NISA but in fact it will be nothing like 
NISA as we know it. The only reason that I can even think of 
that the federal government is calling it NISA is because in 
2001, Mr. Speaker, Ipsos-Reid prepared a NISA review report 
for the Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and it showed that 
overall the NISA was a very well-liked program across the 
entire nation. And the report did offer some recommendations 
of how it could be improved, but overall it said that it was an 
extremely well-liked and well-received program. 
 
And I’m sure that the federal government thinks that if they just 
call a new program new NISA or super NISA, and use the word 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

NISA, that the producers will look at this program favourably. 
But in all honesty, Mr. Speaker, it would be more rightfully be 
called CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) with a premium 
because that is more what it is like. It is nothing like NISA as 
we know it. 
 
This program, Mr. Speaker, has been very hastily put together. 
It’s been slapped together quite frankly with no comprehensive, 
independent analysis performed to even give an indication of 
how it will work. 
 
And it seems unfathomable to me, Mr. Speaker, that they’re 
going to roll out a program that is going to affect the entire 
industry, an industry that accounts for one in every seven jobs 
in our country. They’re going to roll this out across the entire 
nation with no data to back up whether or not it’ll even be 
effective. 
 
Why are we so afraid, Mr. Speaker, to test this program against 
actual farm scenarios? Or better yet, why are we not running a 
pilot project first in each of the provinces and in each of the 
different sectors to see if this program will even remotely work 
for our country? Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, what we know 
about the new NISA leaves us with more questions than 
answers. 
 
What is going to be the administration cost of this program, Mr. 
Speaker, both for the government and for the producers? We all 
know that AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) and 
CFIP were so complicated that the producers had to pay 
hundreds of dollars . . . thousands of dollars in the entire 
province just to fill out the applications. 
 
And we also know that the administration to the government 
levels for both of the programs were well over budget. There 
was millions of dollars spent, and we have to have some 
concerns here that this might be another gun registry fiasco 
where the federal government’s rolling out a program with no 
thought as to what it’s going to cost to administer, and millions 
and millions of dollars that could possibly be in producer’s 
hands is going to be spent on administration alone. 
 
How will the new NISA, Mr. Speaker, be tied to our crop 
insurance program? Will the claim from one program cancel out 
the claim from another even though the producers are going to 
be required to pay two premiums? I have yet to hear an answer 
for that question, Mr. Speaker, and yet it is so vitally important. 
 
Will the producers be forced to be in both programs? And if so, 
is there an advantage to that, for them to be in both programs? 
Is there an advantage, Mr. Speaker, of going to production 
margins, which is what the federal government is talking about, 
rather than gross margins? Do we know if there’s an advantage 
to the producers for that, or is that another hindrance that’s 
going to make the program less effective? 
 
Mr. Vanclief, the federal minister, Mr. Speaker, has done a lot 
of talking about how this will stabilize the industry but are we 
not, in many cases here in Saskatchewan, going to stabilize a 
margin that’s too low for the farm families to live on? Is that 
going to stabilize the industry in Saskatchewan? Will this 
program not require a total wreck before it can be triggered, and 
how does that stabilize the industry in our province?. 

The latest rendition that I’ve looked at of the program, Mr. 
Speaker, requires a producer to have 26 per cent upfront in 
order to participate in the program. How in the world is that 
going to be affordable to the producers of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, especially considering that they have suffered now, in 
many, many areas in our province, two years of a drought? 
 
How are the producers of this province, Mr. Speaker, supposed 
to plan their risk on their operations when the design of the 
program is changing like the rainbow flavour of the week? Is 
the new program going to be predictable, adequate, and 
bankable? Well the designing of it has definitely not been 
predictable and there is nothing, quite frankly, right now for the 
producers to base a business plan on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the industry leaders in this province and across the 
entire nation have been very vocal in their request for the 
federal government to extend existing programs so that this can 
be designed properly. It undoubtedly has been the most unified 
and strong voice that has ever come from our agriculture 
industry. The avalanche of individual farmer e-mails 
demanding a delay has overwhelmed Parliament Hill 
communications system on March 17, and actually temporarily 
shut down the computers in 301 Member of Parliament offices. 
 
The motion today that I will be putting forward, Mr. Speaker, is 
a plea for the provincial government to actively and assertively 
lobby the federal government to extend the existing programs 
for one more year in order that the risk management component 
of the APF can be adequately designed with the industry leaders 
of our country. Surely the minister must have some grave 
concerns about how this program is unfolding — beyond the 
fact that it will be inadequately funded, and beyond the fact that 
it does not address the trade injury payment, and beyond the 
fact that the 60/40 split is an enormous burden for our province. 
 
The minister must have a lot of questions about what is on the 
table and how it’s being planned. Even though he said on 
March 11, and I quote, the minister said: 
 

What’s left for us to negotiate? So what is it that we will be 
holding out for? 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I just went through a few questions and 
they’re just a few to the number of questions that are out there: 
that’s what’s left to negotiate; that’s answers that producers 
want to know; that’s answers the industry wants to know; and 
that’s things that he has to look into before he solidifies a final 
agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he must know that as this program sits it will be a 
disaster for our province. It is a huge concern. And it’s not just 
he that will be standing alone lobbying against this final, final 
program. On March 31, Progressive Conservative Agriculture 
critic, Rick Borotsik called it the biggest April Fool’s joke 
perpetrated on Canadian farmers. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Canadian Alliance Saskatchewan MP (Member of Parliament) 
David Anderson said, the country was entering a policy 
vacuum. 
 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

 

In Toronto, Ontario, Agriculture minister, Helen Johns said, the 
launch of the APF under such controversy is bad news for 
farmers. 
 
On Parliament Hill, Canadian Federation of Agriculture 
Vice-president Laurent Pellerin said, it was an insult to farmers 
that Ottawa was refusing to extend existing programs for a year 
to satisfy farmer complaints about the design. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is going to be so vitally important to the 
producers of this province and it’s going to be vitally important 
to the province as a whole. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I wish to 
move the motion, seconded by the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood: 
 

That this Assembly recommends to the federal government 
that current agriculture support programs be extended for a 
minimum of one year to allow the agriculture policy 
framework to be fully developed and a complete set of 
details made available to producers. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, certainly 
look forward into entering into this debate calling for the delay 
of implementation of the federal agriculture policy framework 
for one year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we look at some of the issues that are facing 
Saskatchewan agriculture and our agricultural producers, there 
are a number of global forces that our producers will have to 
contend with and are already contending with. And it’s 
important that we have well-thought-out, well-designed 
programs there to help our producers in times of production and 
revenue downturns. And I think it’s increasingly important, and 
we needed some of those programs in the past. And in the 
future, I think it’s doubly important that we have those 
well-designed programs. 
 
About a year ago, Mr. Speaker, we were debating the effects of 
the new US (United States) farm Bill that was being signed, the 
richest farm Bill in the history of US ag policy, some $190 
billion of support to the US farmers and its impacts on our 
Saskatchewan farmers. That Bill hasn’t gone away. In fact this 
will be the first production year that we will see the full effects 
of that US farm Bill. We don’t know the full extent of the 
effects on Saskatchewan agriculture but they will be massive, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will see massive increases in the pulse crops in the US 
because of the heightened subsidies levels to crops like lentils 
and peas, and chickpeas, Mr. Speaker. Those are the very crops 
that our farmers in Saskatchewan have been depending on to 
pay the bills over the last few years. If we see those large 
increases, Mr. Speaker, we will most likely see price declines. 
 
Another area where our farmers are seeing increased 
competition is from the European Union. In recent months 
we’ve seen the European Union return to export subsidies on a 
selective basis, something that we haven’t seen in the last 
couple of years. And it makes you wonder why they would use 
those subsidies in a time of contraction of global grain supplies. 
They’ve been using them to buy market share to help subsidize 

unproductive regions of the European Union. And they’ve done 
it in the past and I’m sure they will continue to do it in the 
future. 
 
One of the most challenging events, Mr. Speaker, that our 
producers will be facing in the upcoming years is the increased 
production in some of our competitors of grains and oil seeds. 
Brazil is often referred to as the sleeping giant in agricultural 
production, Mr. Speaker. They have vast resources that are just 
now starting to come on stream. We look at this year’s 
projected soybean crop from Brazil and it’s going to be a record 
production. And that’s just the tip of the iceberg. 
 
Our farmers have seen in the past year or two and will continue 
to see an increasing evidence of competition from the former 
Soviet Union countries, an area of the world which not many 
years ago was one of our major customers for our products. 
Now they are our competitors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with all those global forces that are coming to play on our 
producers, Mr. Speaker, it’s imperative, as I’ve said, to have 
those support programs there. 
 
Not only in challenges from our competitors, Mr. Speaker, but 
we also . . . in the production area we’ve seen over the last few 
years an increase in weather extremes that impact negatively. 
We just have come through two years of back-to-back drought, 
as an example. And therefore it’s important that we have a 
superior production insurance, Mr. Speaker, and not detract and 
lower the levels of coverage and the options that producers 
have. 
 
So we’ve heard from this Minister of Agriculture over the last 
year or so that the new agricultural policy framework is going 
to address a number of issues and provide the type of coverage 
and security for our producers that they will need in the future. 
And when it comes to the area of risk management, we’ve been 
told by this Minister of Agriculture and the federal Minister of 
Agriculture that the cornerstones of those risk management 
areas will be a super NISA and an enhanced crop insurance. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re wondering whether . . . what these 
programs are, what they’re going to look like, as are all the 
producers in Saskatchewan. Back on March 11 when our 
minister finally got around to signing the framework agreement, 
he said that his government will be bringing forth an enhanced 
crop insurance and that the program details will be out shortly. 
 
Well that was March 11, Mr. Speaker. Here we are, it’s April 8 
— almost a month later — and as far as I know I don’t think 
any of the producers have received any of the program details to 
date. They may be in the mailboxes. I checked . . . The minister 
is shaking his head. I checked my mailbox last night and our 
program details certainly weren’t there. And I’ve asked some of 
my colleagues and they haven’t received anything. 
 
What’s the holdup with this? If these programs were in the can 
and they were being designed, the producer should have their 
information shortly or should have had it a long time ago, Mr. 
Speaker. As far as the overall details and knowledge at the 
producer level of this new policy framework, it’s just not there. 
The farmers, the people who are going to be impacted by this 
new ag policy just don’t know hardly anything about the details. 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

I sat in on a seminar that SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) had arranged for their convention 
delegates dealing with the APF. And most of the producers just 
shook their heads and rolled their eyes and said well, we don’t 
understand it; what we do understand, we don’t like. And what 
they were saying is give us some time to become familiar with 
the program, understand it, make suggestions for change and 
improvements, and we think that probably it should be delayed 
for a year or so that . . . first of all, so that the program could be 
adequately designed. Because when they ask questions of the 
official with Agriculture Canada about program details, more 
often than not the answer is, well those are administrative 
details that need to be worked out yet. But yet both the federal 
Minister of Agriculture and this provincial Minister of 
Agriculture are bound and determined to implement this new 
program on April 1. 
 
There’s a whole range of questions and my colleague from 
Watrous touched on a few. There’s a whole area of the 
environmental envelope of this agreement, that were questions 
like pesticide use, reduced pesticide use, certified operators to 
apply pesticides, sprayer calibration. One might interpret that 
part of this agreement, are we going to have sprayer police that 
are going to be going around and checking farmers’ sprayers or 
seeing if they have the proper qualifications. People have been 
safely applying pesticides for 20, 30, and 40 years, and now 
they’re going to have to have a certificate so that they can go 
and do what they’ve done for a good part of their life, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so farm groups including the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture, the Grain Growers of Canada, APAS (Agricultural 
Producers Association of Saskatchewan), the Ontario corn 
growers are saying let’s delay the implementation of this 
program for a year and so that, for all the reasons I mentioned 
earlier, that we can . . . they can learn about it, understand it, 
and make improvements. 
 
I concur with their ideas and their questions. What’s the rush? I 
think they’re very skeptical. They feel that there is probably a 
lot in this ag policy framework that both levels of government 
really don’t want producers to know about because, Mr. 
Speaker, there was limited farm group involvement in the 
design of this process. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we rush . . . as this Minister of Agriculture 
rushes us forward down this track, the NDP will go . . . what 
will their legacy in agriculture be? Well I’ll tell you what it will 
be. They will be the party that were in power when we saw the 
death of two of the most popular programs in agriculture — that 
being GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) and NISA, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So therefore I wholeheartedly support the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I’ll be moving the following 
amendment, and that is to remove all words after “Assembly” 
and replace with the following motion. 
 
I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake: 

That this Assembly commend the government and the 
Minister of Agriculture for successfully negotiating a new 
national agricultural policy framework that moves away 
from the Fredericton formula to a demand model that will 
provide broader safety net programs for Saskatchewan farm 
families. 

 
I have a few words to say in favour of this amendment, Mr. 
Speaker. First I want to remind the members of this Assembly 
of the reliability of the source of the original motion, the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Now sometimes, Mr. Speaker, memories are short in politics so 
just for a moment let’s take a trip down memory lane. Let’s go 
back to the first days of this first session of the twenty-fourth 
legislature of the Saskatchewan government. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
talking about December 1999, the last month of the last century 
of the last millennium. I remember it well, Mr. Speaker, 
because it was my very first experience in this Chamber. 
 
We had a special session to discuss and debate the injury being 
done to Canadian farmers in general, Prairie farmers in 
particular, and in particular by trade subsidies provided to 
farmers by the US and European Union governments — in 
violation of international treaty I might add. We had formed a 
coalition of the three Prairie governments and the three 
opposition parties to go to Ottawa and to demand federal action 
to protect our farmers. This was clearly a federal issue, we all 
agreed, and only the federal government and the federal 
treasury were able to respond properly. 
 
The feds of course wanted the provinces to chip in, as they 
always do. I’m not sure if it was 60/40 or 50/50 at the time, but 
without question that’s their common negotiating tactic. All six 
partners in the coalition resisted that tactic and felt that it was a 
federal issue, but then something happened. I said all six, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but really I think you can make that five of the 
six. The coalition was just nicely formed when the Sask Party 
broke ranks and told the feds that Saskatchewan had lots of 
money and could pay the shot. 
 
That same December, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party demanded 
that we have an emergency debate on farm security. It had to 
happen; it was an emergency, they said. Well everyone but the 
Leader of the Opposition, from a rural constituency, seemed to 
think it was an emergency. But as I recall, I don’t believe that 
the Leader of the Opposition even bothered taking part in the 
debate. 
 
(14:45) 
 
So I mention this bit of history, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it 
marks the beginning of what has come to be known as the Sask 
Party agricultural policy, speak loud, carry a big stick, or as 
some of my colleagues on this side of the House have been 
saying recently — twist and shout. That’s their policy, proclaim 
their support for the Saskatchewan farmer but don’t suggest 
anything concrete. Time and time again this is what we’ve seen. 
 
I’m sure that my two colleagues in this debate will have some 
other examples that they might want to put forward in this 
debate but my first memories are usually the sharpest ones and I 
would think that that’s probably true for everyone. 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government, under two excellent 
premiers and two outstanding ministers of Agriculture, is proud 
to support our agricultural industry and our farmers. Agriculture 
accounts for 10 per cent, about 10 per cent of our gross 
domestic product. It’s a significant employer and it is still the 
core of our way of life here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We, on this side of the House, are committed to a strong and 
vibrant agricultural industry. It goes without saying, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we’ve faced two consecutive years of drought, in 
addition to more than two years of unfair international trade 
practices. The provincial crop insurance program paid out over 
$1 billion in claims for the 2002-3 crop year. 
 
The current crop insurance program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
might not be perfect but after a year like last year I think 
farmers have come to count on a reliable crop insurance 
program. One can certainly appreciate its importance in 
providing stability not only to agriculture, not only to the 
agricultural sector, but to the entire rural economy. 
 
And our crop insurance program is getting better. New options 
to help farmers insure non-traditional crops are being added. 
Last year we added the forage rainfall insurance program to 
assist the growing livestock industry. This year we improved on 
these programs to help provide producers with improved 
coverage, and it is in this context that our Minister of 
Agriculture has been negotiating with the federal government 
and his provincial colleagues for a new agricultural policy 
framework. 
 
Now the minister resisted signing in order to get a better deal 
for our farmers. In recent months Saskatchewan has consulted 
diligently with members of the agricultural industry on the 
proposed agricultural policy framework initiated by the federal 
government. We held off signing because we were determined 
to get a better deal for our farmers. As the minister has said in 
this House, we have to get a better deal. 
 
Our tough negotiating strategy on the agricultural policy 
framework has resulted in improved crop insurance program for 
our farmers. We fought hard for a system where federal funds 
available for risk management programs are allocated based on 
demand or program use and not on the size of the industry in 
the province. And that’s the way that it was under the old 
Fredericton formula. 
 
The minister has told us that now is . . . now it is in the best 
interests of the province to sign on to this national framework. 
By signing on to the APF, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll be . . . we 
will help to provide an element of stability to our producers. We 
have committed to be a full partner and to fully fund the APF 
for the next five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, provincial and federal funding combined will 
enable our industry to compete on a number of fronts — 
through solid business risk management program, sound 
environmental planning and programming, through enhanced 
food safety and quality, through renewal of skill improvements 
and technology adoption, and through investments in science 
and innovation. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will continue to press the federal 

government to do more to help Western Canadian agriculture. 
That’s why we signed the APF. That’s why I will be supporting 
the amendment. 
 
Now the resolution put forward by the member from Watrous, 
as I said, is not a policy but really it’s a wrench in the works. 
It’s not a solution; it’s a delaying tactic. And in the process it 
reveals once again her complete misunderstanding of how our 
federal system works. 
 
We’ve negotiated a good deal for Saskatchewan farmers. The 
Sask Party wanted us to sign an earlier version which was more 
favourable to Ontario and Quebec, less so for us. The Minister 
of Agriculture resisted and got a better deal for Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the feds are sort of funny. They have a hard 
time contributing their share to farm support programs in the 
West at the best of times and I can assure you they certainly 
will not kick in their share if the agreement is not . . . was not 
signed. 
 
So Sask Party logic — and I use the term loosely — says sign 
the bad agreement, hold off on the better one. I might live in the 
city, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but that sure doesn’t make any sense 
to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this . . . or Deputy Speaker, this government 
commits more than 4 per cent of its budget to agricultural 
programs — roughly $430 for every man, woman, and child in 
the province. It’s the highest per capita expenditure of all the 
provincial governments in Canada. And the federal government 
contributes just a little more than 1 per cent of its budget to 
agriculture. 
 
And our investment in agriculture is paying off as we move to a 
more sustainable, diversified economy that includes more 
processing, more specialty crops, more value added, more 
organic production, and more research and development. 
 
Proud to have grown up in a rural community, proud to be a 
representative of government, and therefore I’m proud to move 
the following amendment to the resolution. 
 
I move, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake: 

 
That this Assembly commend the government and the 
Minister of Agriculture for successfully negotiating a new 
national agricultural policy framework that moves away 
from the Fredericton formula to a demand model that will 
provide a broader safety net program for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m absolutely thrilled to second the motion by the 
member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
You know the APF agreement is an important step, in my 
estimation, for our industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The APF 
outlines a national approach to advance our agricultural 
industry. 
 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

The agreement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only covers 
programming in the areas of business risk management, but it 
also provides for programming in the areas of environment, 
renewal, food safety and food quality, and science and 
innovation. These are all, in my estimation, very important 
areas to help position our industry to meet the future challenges 
that it will face, and to take advantage of the opportunities that 
exist in agriculture. 
 
The existing framework agreement expired March 31, 2003. By 
signing on to the APF we ensured that our producers did not see 
any interruption in agricultural safety net coverage, and our 
signing gave us the scope to enhance the crop insurance 
program for 2003 and into future years. 
 
The APF agreement, and in particular the business risk 
management chapter of APF, has some good features from the 
Saskatchewan perspective. The federal business risk 
management funding will be used for two main national 
programs: first of all, a revised NISA program to provide both 
stabilization and disaster protection; and secondly, a crop 
insurance program to provide protection against production 
losses. Now both of these programs will have national 
parameters. 
 
The federal government has indicated that the goal here is to 
treat farmers in similar circumstances in the same manner. We 
support that goal, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Allocation of federal 
funds will be on a demand-driven basis so that the federal funds 
to producers are based on their participation in the national 
programs and not based on the size of the industry in the 
province. 
 
This should result in Saskatchewan receiving about 10 to $12 
million more — I repeat 10 to $12 million more — than our 
current allocation in the first year and possibly even more than 
that as a demand-driven allocation is fully implemented. 
 
The federal government has allocated sufficient funding for the 
crop insurance program that will allow for some enhancements 
to the current programming in Saskatchewan. Some of these 
enhancements were announced this year — as an example, yield 
coverage updating and improved forage coverage levels — and 
there is the scope to make more improvements in two future 
years. 
 
Now while Saskatchewan would have liked to have seen more 
federal dollars for business risk management programs, the 
federal government has been very clear that this is all that there 
is for now. The federal government has committed $1.1 billion 
per year for business risk management programming and they 
have committed to two years of $600 million per year in 
transition of bridge funding. 
 
The federal minister has also made it very clear that provinces 
must sign on to the APF in order to get federal funding for 
programs for the 2003 production year, including crop 
insurance. Clearly, running a Saskatchewan-only crop insurance 
program is simply not an option. We simply do not have the 
capacity to fund a provincial-only program with the level of 
protection needed by our farmers and producers. 
 
So based on that information and the advice provided by our 

farm leaders, Saskatchewan signed on to the APF agreement, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now the 1.2 billion or the 600 million per 
year of transition funding is really trade injury compensation, 
however the federal government will not call it by that name. 
 
While Saskatchewan has signed on to the APF, that doesn’t 
mean that we are going to give up the fight on trade injury. We 
will continue to push the federal government to level the 
playing field internationally through substantial reductions in 
the use of trade distorting subsidies by other countries, namely 
the United States and the European Union, or by providing 
compensation to our producers until they negotiate a level 
playing field. 
 
While Saskatchewan has signed on to the APF which commits 
us to the funding and to moving forward on finalizing the APF 
programming, we have not yet signed the implementation 
agreement with the federal government which will outline the 
details of the new programming. And nor has any other 
province signed an implementation agreement yet — no other 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The federal government and the provinces are continuing to 
discuss some of the details on the APF programming and 
continue to work on the legal text of the implementation 
agreements. 
 
There are a number of farm organizations in Canada, most of 
whom are members of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, 
who have raised concerns about the proposed redesign of the 
NISA program. 
 
The new NISA program is scheduled to replace the existing 
NISA program and the existing Canadian Farm Income Plan or 
CFIP, as it’s more commonly known, program starting with the 
2003 production year. 
 
These producer groups say that they want to see more analysis 
completed on the revised risk management programming to 
ensure that it is an improvement over the existing set of 
programs. 
 
Now last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Minister Lyle Vanclief — 
on the insistence of the CFA (Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture) — agreed to have a third-party independent 
assessment completed on the proposed program and the existing 
programs. This work will be completed in a timely manner by 
three, highly qualified, independent individuals who will make 
their report public. It’s my understanding that the report is to be 
completed by April 17 or later this month of this year. 
 
Farm organizations and other stakeholders will be able to look 
at the results of this assessment and then consider their position 
on the proposed programs. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan 
will be watching this independent review very carefully and we 
will be discussing the results with Saskatchewan farm leaders. 
 
Throughout the process though, Saskatchewan has consulted 
with a group of farm leaders in this province and we will 
continue to consult with them to ensure that we get the best 
possible — I repeat, the best possible — deal and the best 
possible programs for Saskatchewan producers. 
 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

 

Producer groups have also raised the issue of whether there is 
enough time to implement the new NISA program for 2003. 
Now in 2003 Saskatchewan producers will continue to apply for 
and receive — I repeat, and receive —benefits under the 
existing NISA program for the 2002 stabilization year, as well 
as benefits under the CFIP program for the 2002 claim year. I 
think that’s worth repeating, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 2003 
Saskatchewan producers will continue to apply for and receive 
benefits under the existing NISA program for the 2002 
stabilization year, as well as benefits under the CFIP program 
for the 2002 claim year. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Now benefits for the 2003 new NISA program would not 
normally flow to producers until the spring or summer of 2004 
after producers have completed their 2003 tax returns. 
However, the federal government has assured the province that 
the federal administration is positioned to deliver the changes to 
NISA in a timely and coordinated manner if they proceed with 
the changes for the 2003 year. 
 
Our goal has always been to get the best deal for Saskatchewan 
farmers and we have made our decisions around the APF based 
on this philosophy — that’s getting the best deal for 
Saskatchewan farmers that we can possibly get around the APF. 
Our decision on whether to support the proposed programs will 
continue — I repeat, continue — to be based on that strategy. 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I 
second the amended motion with the following amendment: 
 

That would commend the government and the Minister of 
Agriculture for successfully negotiating a new national 
agricultural policy framework that moves away from the 
Fredericton formula to a demand model that will provide a 
broader safety net program for Saskatchewan farm families. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very timely now that we’re coming 
into our seeding programs for farmers and that they’re thinking 
of safety net programs and the crop insurance programs that 
they’re going to have in place to help look after their situations 
that they’re going to . . . that are going to arise this summer. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think would be a good time now with an 
election in, you know, the near future, that we kind of review 
this NDP government’s record with agriculture and how 
they’ve dealt with farmers for the last 10, 12 years. 
 
And let’s . . . just a reminder, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let’s go 
back to the different Ag ministers that we’ve had in this 
province and the programs that we’ve had. And we start off and 
the first name I think of — when I was newly elected, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and actually was farming at that time when we 
lost the GRIP program, Mr. Deputy Speaker — was Berny 
Wiens. 
 
And I remember Mr. Wiens saying that this had to be done 
because it was good for the province of Saskatchewan. Well 
they cut the GRIP program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’re well aware of what I’m talking 
about is that it cost every farmer in this province thousands and 
thousands of dollars? 
 
It would be like having fire insurance on your house, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, your house burning down, and SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) or Wawanesa or one of 
those companies coming along and saying, well for the good of 
the people we’re not going to pay you that insurance. Because 
that’s exactly what happened when they cancelled the GRIP 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
many farmers — many farmers — in Saskatchewan have never 
recovered from the loss of that program because it was at a time 
when we needed that program most. That program wasn’t ideal, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it was certainly better than anything 
we’ve seen since. 
 
The next Agriculture minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
brought us a new program was Mr. Upshall. And we have to 
remember too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I speak, where are all 
these NDP Ag ministers? Long gone. And I think it will be 
something that the present-day Ag minister should really keep 
in the front of his mind because I’m afraid very shortly he’s 
going to be joining that crowd. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remember going 
down east when Mr. Upshall was Ag minister and we ended up 
with the AIDA program. And partly we ended up with the 
AIDA program because that minister and that government 
would not stand behind the farmers of Saskatchewan. They 
would not put any money on the table. 
 
In fact, when asked by the federal government, will you stand 
behind your farmers, I remember Mr. Upshall saying, if it costs 
us any money, no we won’t. And that was his response, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and look where it got Mr. Upshall — out of 
politics in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Then we go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
the next Ag minister we had was Mr. Lingenfelter and I don’t 
have to remind the Deputy Speaker where Mr. Lingenfelter is. 
He went to brighter pastures and went to Alberta, along with a 
bunch of our young kids, probably went on the same bus for all 
I know. 
 
The program we ended up with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was CFIP 
and it again, how long did it last? About two years, because it 
wasn’t made for Saskatchewan. It wasn’t good for the farmers 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, it was such a bad program, the rest of the country didn’t 
even like it and yet it was designed for an Ontario and Quebec. 
It was designed by Ontario and Quebec. 
 
And do you know why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because once 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

again this NDP government and the current day Agriculture 
minister stuck his head in the sand and said, I’m not going to 
the table; I’m not taking part because we don’t care about 
farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, guess where we are again today? 
Once again, we have an Ag minister that will not get to the 
table, will not represent farmers in Saskatchewan, will not go to 
Ottawa and say, look, this government that I represent, this 
NDP government, we’ll stand behind farmers. The reason he 
won’t say it is because they’ve never done it in the 10 years, the 
12 years that they’ve been in power, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
have absolutely no intention of getting behind farmers now. 
 
I find it amazing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that for the first 10 
years, 10 years that this NDP government’s been in power, they 
neglected agriculture in this province, would not . . . put very 
little into our programs that we had for farmers. And now when 
a drought comes they blame all the woes of the province on 
agriculture and the farmers and ranchers in Saskatchewan. 
 
But of course we know the Finance minister’s going to solve 
that problem because farmers are going to have a tremendous 
bumper crop and are going to grow the economy in this 
province by 6.8 per cent. 
 
Well I don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. None of the other 
countries in the western world are thinking of being anywheres 
near half of that, but in this province they’re going to do that on 
the backs of one crop, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would suggest 
instead of thinking that they’re going to balance the books or 
only have a $500 million deficit, they ought to lower the taxes 
and let some of the farmers keep some of that money and 
maybe they could prosper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, our present-day Ag 
minister all the way through this new program has hid, has not 
been at the table, and said to start with, I’m not signing on to 
anything. 
 
I want to read you a little clip, interview by Barry Wilson, Mr. 
Speaker, how our present-day Ag minister does not even 
understand how the programs are designed. And I quote: 
 

After signalling in late August that he was ready to sign the 
APF deal agreed by seven other provinces, Clay Serby now 
says the province has some conditions. (Doesn’t surprise 
me, of course.) First among them is that the province be 
guaranteed a greater share of the federal dollars and the 22 
per cent share it gets under the existing Fredericton 
formula. (Fine.) It is absolutely crucial that Saskatchewan 
be guaranteed a share before we sign. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what he was signing at that point was to get 
a chair at the table to have input into the program and maybe for 
once represent the farmers in this province. And the minister is 
laughing because I know he doesn’t get it. He never gets it 
when it comes to looking after farmers in this province. And 
once again, do you know what we’re going to end up with, Mr. 
Speaker? We’re going to end up with a program that does 
nothing for Saskatchewan farmers. 

Mr. Speaker, why in the world can we not design a program in 
Saskatchewan by that minister and that government, if need be 
— and they better do it quick because they’re not going to be 
there long — design a program in this province for our farmers, 
take it to Ottawa, and say to Mr. Vanclief and the federal 
Liberals, this is what we need in Saskatchewan. Not wait for 
them to design a program for Ontario and Quebec and then say, 
well it’s no good here so we’re not taking part. 
 
The present-day minister should have done this long ago. The 
past minister should have done this long ago. And they haven’t 
learned a thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And do you know who 
pays the price? The people that pay the price are the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, but also the business people of Saskatchewan 
that rely on farmers. And in the end the province of 
Saskatchewan is hurt by this government not backing our 
farmers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The Agriculture minister, Mr. Speaker, 
should probably have listened to the Premier, because I quote 
from what the Premier had said here — I believe it was in May 
2002 — and I agree with the Premier. And this is a quote. He 
says: 
 

The reality is Ottawa can come here and spend some time 
on our province and then leave, and then they don’t have 
the same kind of influence. When you’re in their backyard 
and you’re able to provide the kind of details we need to, it 
seems to me it has far more impact. 
 

It seems to me the Premier had it right; he just forgot to pass the 
message on to our Agriculture minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time is running short, but I think what this 
proves once again is that every program that we’ve had for the 
last 12 years, Mr. Speaker, has proved to be a failure. And why 
is it a failure? It’s a failure because we have a government that 
doesn’t care about agriculture. I guess if we had a farm right in 
the middle — the centre of Regina possibly — they would pay 
some attention to it. But that isn’t the way it is. 
 
And taking a bus trip once a year — and hurrying for bathroom 
stops, jumping back on the bus — in rural Saskatchewan 
doesn’t give you the understanding you need of agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a song Stompin’ Tom’s got out. It’s called 
Margo’s got the cargo. Do you know something, Mr. Speaker, 
there was more agricultural intellect in that song than I heard 
from both speeches by the members on the other side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And do you know, Mr. Speaker, we change 
agriculture programs in this province far oftener than we change 
our herd bulls. We never get it right. That government does not 
understand agriculture, Mr. Speaker. That government as long 
as they’re in power are not standing behind the farmers in this 
province. 
 
It’s time for an election. It’s time to get a premier that’s elected 
by the people of the province. It’s time for a Sask Party 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

 

government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when the . . . I’m really 
pleased, Mr. Speaker, to join the debate this afternoon. And it’s 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Saltcoats 
stands up and says he’s run out of time, he has run out of time 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — You know when Mr. Schmidt’s made sure 
that he’s run out of time; even his own constituency doesn’t 
support him. And so clearly, Mr. Speaker, he’s run out of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to begin my comments . . . And I 
listened very carefully to the members opposite about, their 
diatribe about what in fact they know about agriculture. And on 
this particular piece, Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a couple 
of comments. 
 
The members opposite should know that we’ve been, along 
with the provinces across Canada and the federal government, 
at tables talking about the agricultural policy framework for 18 
months — all the provinces. Every province in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, has been working on the agricultural policy 
framework. 
 
And what have we been talking about, Mr. Speaker? Well 
we’ve been talking about a new safety net program and we’ve 
been talking about four other pillars, Mr. Speaker, within the 
agricultural policy framework. And speaker after speaker today, 
including the member from Watrous and the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood and now the member from Saltcoats, 
said, you know, we should be extending this thing for one more 
year because we don’t know what’s in the document, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well how is it that they wouldn’t know what’s in the document, 
Mr. Speaker? Because for the past nine months the agricultural 
policy framework and the structure of the document has been 
publicly known by Canadian farmers all across the land. People 
know what’s in it. And the only people who don’t know what’s 
in it appears to be the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, right 
here in our province. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, and I said to the members opposite just a 
while ago, the member from Watrous and the member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood said, well we don’t know how much 
money’s in the fund. Well we know how much money’s in the 
fund and we know exactly how much has been allocated to it 
and all the farmers in Saskatchewan who are involved in farm 
organizations know how much is in it, Mr. Speaker. They know 
that Saskatchewan’s portion is going to be this, Mr. Speaker — 
that Saskatchewan’s getting $153 million of federal money for 
production insurance, matched 60/40, Mr. Speaker, by the 
province at 100 million. And we’re already in. All producers 
know that except the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
We know that the NISA contribution, Mr. Speaker, from 
Saskatchewan will be, under the new program, $130 million. 
And we’ve got our money in this year to match that portion, 

Mr. Speaker. And we know how much, Mr. Speaker, is in the, 
in the . . . We know, Mr. Speaker, how much is in the transition 
sleeve. We know exactly what the funding is as all do — as all 
do — all other provinces in Canada except the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, who say, we don’t know how much 
money’s in the fund. Well we know exactly how much is there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also know how much is in the transition pool, 
in every one of the transitions pools, in all the other pillars. 
We’ve set aside for Saskatchewan our share of $18 million. It’s 
in the budget. It’s there, Mr. Speaker. It’s ready to roll out on 
the other pillars. 
 
The federal government’s putting in an additional $25 million 
when and if we sign the implementation agreements, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s what Saskatchewan’s share would be. And 
every province in Canada knows what their share of the 
implementation agreement will be on the other . . . (inaudible) 
. . . except the Saskatchewan Party says, we don’t know what 
that is, Mr. Speaker. And I say, where have they been? 
 
(15:15) 
 
All they need to do, Mr. Speaker, is just call up their friends in 
Ontario or call up their friends in Alberta who are saying today 
that they’re prepared to sign the implementation agreements. 
They’re Conservatives as well, Mr. Speaker, and they know 
how much is in the agreement. All they need to do is give them 
a call and they’ll tell them that they’re prepared, in those two 
provinces they’re preparing to sign the implementation 
agreements because, Mr. Speaker, they know that there isn’t 
any more than the $1.1 billion. 
 
And I was very interested, Mr. Speaker, to hear them say, well 
this is a hasty agreement that we’ve put together. Well we’ve 
been working on it for 18 months, Mr. Speaker, and they say, 
well this has been hasty. The federal government and all the 
provinces of all different stripes have been putting this together 
and they say this has been done in too fast a fashion. 
 
And farm groups and farm organizations have been at the 
meetings with the federal government and we’ve been 
interchanging and dialoguing in this province. Every five or six 
weeks I meet with farm organizations and we have the 
conversation, and then we travel off to Ottawa and to Toronto 
and into parts of Alberta and we have the conversations about 
what should this look like. And at the end of the day, Mr. 
Speaker, the agriculture policy framework is well articulated. 
It’s well known by farm groups and organizations. 
 
The issue, Mr. Speaker, is that farm groups and farm 
organizations and provinces, on most cases, don’t like the 
agreement. Why? Because, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t enough 
money in the farm safety net package. And we’ve been saying 
that all along. There is not enough money to restructure farm 
policy in Saskatchewan and in Canada today, and we should be 
trying to get a larger chunk for the money. 
 
Now what did the member opposite from Saltcoats say a minute 
ago, Mr. Speaker? Well, he said, well we didn’t like CFIP; we 
didn’t like CFIP and we tried to get CFIP killed, and we tried to 
get AIDA killed. 
 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

And what’s their motion say, Mr. Speaker? That we should 
leave the farm programs exactly like they were for another year, 
so that we should leave CFIP in place. That’s their motion. We 
should leave CFIP in place, Mr. Speaker, for one more year. 
 
So here they are arguing for the better part of three years, Mr. 
Speaker, in this House, saying that AIDA and CFIP doesn’t 
work, and the very first time they have an opportunity to stand 
up in the House and make a motion on agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 
what do they say? We should keep the same old show for one 
more year because we didn’t like it. So we should leave it 
exactly the way it was, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I say, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
member from Wood River says, what’s our program? Well I 
can tell the . . . (inaudible) . . . what the member from Wood 
River is. 
 
We have an enhanced crop insurance program in this province 
today, Mr. Speaker, with 150 million federal dollars going in, 
matching 100 million, Mr. Speaker. We’re putting additional 
money into renewal, Mr. Speaker, today which we lead the 
country in. That’s our plan, Mr. Speaker — to put more money 
into renewal, Mr. Speaker. And we’re putting more money 
today into a NISA program, if in fact that’s what it’s going to 
have at the end of the day. That’s our program, Mr. Speaker, 
nationally, where all provinces support it — Conservatives and 
Liberals and New Democrats from all across the country, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s who supports it. 
 
And who do they quote, Mr. Speaker? They quote the Canadian 
Alliance Party on a regular basis about farm policy in this 
country, Mr. Speaker. Or they quote Mr. Anderson, Mr. 
Speaker. And the other day she quoted Mr. Hilstrom — the 
member from Watrous. 
 
Where do they get their farm policy from, Mr. Speaker? They 
get their farm policy from the Canadian Alliance, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s the same guy, it’s the same party from whom the leader 
represents, Mr. Speaker, who was against subsidies forever, Mr. 
Speaker, voted in the House of Commons to be against 
subsidies, Mr. Speaker, and today they have the audacity to 
stand up here and say we support, we support today, Mr. 
Speaker, subsidies in Canada. What a joke. What a joke, Mr. 
Speaker, that the member of the opposition will be leading that 
campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member, Mr. Speaker, from Saltcoats said, you know 
what? Who believes the 6.8 projection because it’s tied to the 
farm economy, Mr. Speaker. Who believes that? Well you 
know who believes it? Farmers in Canada and Saskatchewan 
believe it. Farmers believe it. Farmers in Saskatchewan say on a 
regular basis, can we grow more than 14.1 million tonnes in this 
province? Can we do more than that when the provincial 
average on a regular basis has been 25, 25 million tonnes, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Everybody in Saskatchewan believes in agriculture that we can 
grow an average crop in this province, except who? The 
Saskatchewan Party. They don’t believe that we can grow an 
average crop in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Farm groups and 
farm organizations and farm leaders all believe that we can 
grow a crop that’s average at 25 million tonnes, except the 

Saskatchewan Party. And on a regular basis they get up in the 
House and they say, well how are we going to get to the 6.8? 
Because you know what, we’re not going to grow five point . . . 
25 million tonnes, Mr. Speaker. It goes to show, Mr. Speaker, 
about what little knowledge these people have of agriculture. 
 
It was demonstrated again today, Mr. Speaker, where you have 
today, Mr. Speaker, a group of men and women who are 
absolutely bankrupt when it comes to the debate about 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and it’s demonstrated best, it’s 
demonstrated best, Mr. Speaker, in the recent, in the recent 
written questions that were provided by the leader . . . by the 
opposition. 
 
And this is the question that they write to the government to 
ask, Mr. Speaker. This is what it writes. And it’s the member 
from Watrous. She asks the government the following question 
which was answered by us — to the Minister of Agriculture, 
Food and Rural Revitalization: how much money did the 
province of Saskatchewan receive from the 600 million 
transition fund announced by the federal government in 2002? 
 
That’s the question, Mr. Speaker. How much money did the 
province get from the transition fund, Mr. Speaker? Anybody in 
Saskatchewan knows, Mr. Speaker, that the province never got 
one penny of that, never got one penny; that all of that money, 
Mr. Speaker, went to producers in Saskatchewan, went to 
producers. The members opposite don’t even know that the 
transition fund isn’t paid to the province’s treasury; it’s paid to 
producers, Mr. Speaker. They don’t even have a clue about 
where in fact the money at the end of the day is paid for, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Transition fund today, Mr. Speaker, is paid to Saskatchewan 
producers and it was paid at 33 per cent, of which we 
negotiated, Mr. Speaker, at the table from 22. This government 
and this Premier and this minister were responsible for the 
changing of the formula, Mr. Speaker, and today the members 
opposite are saying, you know what, we should leave this intact 
for yet another year and we shouldn’t sign an implementation 
agreement. 
 
Well I’ll want to know, Mr. Speaker, from those members 
opposite, are they prepared, Mr. Speaker, to see a rollback of 
the Fredericton formula, Mr. Speaker, because this is what 
they’re advocating. Are they prepared to leave an additional $20 
million on the table of federal money and are they prepared to 
leave an additional $50 million of federal money on the table? 
Are they prepared to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to enter 
the debate this afternoon. I’ll be speaking in favour of the 
motion, which I’d like to now read: 
 

That this Assembly recommends to the federal government 
that the current agriculture support programs be extended 
for a minimum of one year to allow the agriculture policy 
framework to be fully developed and a complete set of 
details made available to producers. 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

 

Specifically what I’d like to speak on with regards to the APF is 
the first pillar with regards to risk management. 
 
The first problem that many producers in my area are having, 
Mr. Speaker, is with regards to the name change or the 
misnomer of the super NISA program. The NISA program in its 
current form has been very successful and it’s been producer 
friendly. Producers have been . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Sixty-five minutes of the 
seventy-five minute debate has now elapsed. We will now 
proceed to a 10 minute question and comment period, up to 60 
seconds per member. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with amusement that I heard the Agriculture minister state that 
this side of the House is bankrupt in agriculture knowledge. 
That is rather humorous and if he wants to play a quote with 
words, I’ve actually got a quote where he says that he is in 
favour of the Fredericton formula. So if we want to play with 
words and use them out of context that would be rather 
interesting. 
 
But my question, Mr. Speaker, is for the minister . . . or for the 
member from Saskatoon Meewasin. If, you know, she has such 
knowledge of agriculture — she’s going back to 1999 and 
referring to her briefing notes — can she please list the five 
pillars of the agriculture framework and give a brief explanation 
on each of those pillars. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
not, in the time allotted to me, able to accommodate the 
member. However I think that it would be most appropriate for 
her to stand in the House and tell us why it is that earlier the 
member said that we ought to sign on and get to the table, and 
then now more recently has changed her mind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. My question is to the member for Watrous. I’ve been 
quite interested to follow some of her views on agriculture and I 
was wondering if she could perhaps articulate for us what 
exactly the member for Watrous’s position is on crop insurance 
in particular and how that can play an important role for 
stabilizing farm incomes. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — It’s rather humorous that the member 
opposite would ask for a question on my viewpoint on crop 
insurance because I don’t think we’ve ever said we don’t 
support crop insurance. But it has to be affordable and it has to 
have coverage that’s meaningful to the agriculture producers of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — And that is something that I can’t say that 
this government has ever done. So to talk about supporting 
farmers and agriculture, these members of the House have not 
supported agriculture, they have not kept their crop insurance 
program so that it is . . . (inaudible) . . . and if he thinks that 
there is . . . that it’s the best crop insurance program in the 
country, he should check the neighbouring provinces because it 
by far outleagues ours. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a question for the member from Meadow Lake. My 
question, Mr. Speaker, is: could the member please comment on 
this new or super NISA program? Will it require accrual 
accounting of all our farmers in the province? And what kind of 
cost will the individual producer incur having to move from a 
cash-based accounting to accrual-based accounting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer to the question is absolutely 
it requires accrual accounting. Mr. Speaker, if the member 
doesn’t know that, he should do a bit more research on this 
issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would say as well, in signing on to the APF, Mr. Speaker, 
our Minister of Agriculture and our government I believe 
negotiated the best possible agreement that we could possibly 
negotiate with an additional 10 to $12 million coming here to 
Saskatchewan and the potential for even greater amounts of 
money in the coming years, unlike those members opposite and 
that member from Kindersley who advocated some time ago 
that we should sign early, early, early and we would have lost 
all of this revenue that we now have coming to Saskatchewan. 
 
So I again support the motion and congratulate our minister for 
having negotiated the agreement that he negotiated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask the 
member from Last Mountain-Touchwood about the Fredericton 
formula. Because the Fredericton formula today under the 
current agreement gives Saskatchewan 33 per cent of the pool 
on the demand driven program. By not signing this agreement 
over the next . . . the implementation agreement, what will 
happen, Mr. Speaker, is that we will lose our advantage in the 
33 per cent. 
 
Does the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood support the 
notion that Western Canadian farmers and provinces should be 
losing their advantage of the 33 per cent of which we have 
negotiated now in Western Canada over the last several 
months? Would he not be supporting that position? 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Minister of Agriculture 
for the question. The Minister of Agriculture contends that if we 
don’t rush forward and sign the implementation agreement, we 
are going to lose all that federal money. Well I don’t think 
that’s going to happen. 
 
The other day in the House, the minister said, and I believe I 
understood him very clearly, that the province of Alberta has 
signed the implementation agreement. And yet today he says no 
other province has signed the implementation agreement. I 
wonder what it is. 
 
It just seems that this minister seems to spin whatever he thinks 
is appropriate for the day, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think that we 
would lose 1 cent by delaying it for another year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m looking at a brochure that was sent to the 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

farmers of the province here recently and in fact it arrived in the 
mailbox last week. And it uses phrases like, work is under way, 
would be — that sort of thing. And one of the questions that I 
would ask the minister is, what is the date on this brochure? 
Because by reading it you would think that it probably came a 
year ago, explaining the basic concept of the program and that 
sort of thing. 
 
And one thing that is of interest, that caught my eye, is that it 
says an investment component will be introduced in 2006, and 
that’s under the business risk management. I wonder if that 
Minister of Agriculture actually knows anything about this 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I was listening carefully to the member 
when he was giving his statements. And it looks like he’s 
finally found his mailbox because he couldn’t find his mailbox, 
he said, because he hasn’t got the crop insurance . . . said he 
hasn’t got the crop insurance forms yet, because they went out 
on Saturday, Mr. Speaker, to producers. 
 
And now that he has found his mailbox, he’s also found the 
brochure that the federal government has sent out, Mr. Speaker, 
because that . . . what he is reading from is the federal 
government mail out talking about what, in fact, the agricultural 
policy framework is all about, generically, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, if you want a special, if 
you want a special kind of audience, Mr. Speaker, on the 
agricultural policy framework, I would be happy to spend some 
time with him and provide him with full detail and will even 
take that information that the federal government has sent out, 
Mr. Speaker, and try to interpret it for him so that he could take 
that information and share it with the rest of his colleagues so 
that we might then get a fairly responsible, a fairly responsible 
question on agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and to some degree a 
question or two or maybe some farm policy even from that side 
of the House. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a member . . . I have a member? I have a question for the 
member from Kindersley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is as follows, Mr. Speaker. My question is as 
follows. That member has always been a strong advocate of the 
privatization of corporations, Mr. Speaker. I want to know, 
given the fact that Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 
lost nearly a billion dollars last year, is that member in favour of 
the sale of Sask Crop Insurance Corporation? Is he in favour of 
the privatization of that corporation? 
 
That corporation has partnered with producers. Apparently 
they’re against partnering with anyone in Saskatchewan and 
especially if you lose money. Is he going to sell the Sask Crop 
Insurance Corporation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — To whom is the question directed? I ask the 
member. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The question was directed to the 
member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for his 
question. 
 
First and foremost, before we get into the details of the answer 
of what would and would not be sold, we state unequivocally 
that we would not be raising crop insurance premiums 52 per 
cent in the year after three consecutive years of drought, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have never contended that we would sell the 
crop insurance program. We have contended that we would 
improve it, make it farmer friendly, and make it, Mr. Speaker, 
so that farmers could have confidence in their government. Not 
like the 16.2 per cent return the NDP received in the 
constituency of Kindersley less than six months ago, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Ag minister is somewhat confusing us over here a little bit with 
his comments. I want to go back, I want to go back to last fall in 
one of the comments that that minister made, because he just 
said that if we don’t sign on this program now we’re going to 
lose funding from the federal government. That’s totally 
contrary to what he said last fall. And I quote, an interview 
done by Barry Wilson: 
 

Serby expects Saskatchewan farmers to get their fair share 
of the federal dollars whether the province signs or not. I 
don’t see that it makes much of a difference. 

 
What are we to believe, Mr. Speaker? What the Agriculture 
minister is saying today or what he was saying the other day? 
He keeps changing his mind. What is it? Is it today or is it last 
fall? What are we to believe, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, clearly if we did not 
sign the agricultural policy framework, we would have not 
received the funding, Mr. Speaker, to fund our crop insurance, 
Mr. Speaker. We would have not received the money. Because 
we stood, we stood with farm organizations and producers 
across this country and said, you know what, we’re going to 
hold out for the money. So we held out for the money and we 
held out for the formula . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the members for their participation in 
the debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Value of Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving a motion to 
the effect that this Assembly affirm the value, the value to the 
people of Saskatchewan of our Crown corporations; and make 
the point that these Crown corporations provide essential 
services throughout the province, create jobs for Saskatchewan 
people, contribute to the social, cultural, and recreational life of 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

 

Saskatchewan communities; and to point out that our Crown 
corporations have generated in the neighbourhood of $1.6 
billion in contributions to the General Revenue Fund over the 
past eight years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would it be necessary that members of the 
Legislative Assembly would want to take the time in the House 
to essentially affirm the value of the Crown corporations? The 
reason we do that is that so much of the debate that takes place 
in the House takes place in question period, and so much of that 
debate tends to focus on negative aspects of things that the 
government is involved in, including the Crown corporations. 
And I guess that’s the nature of opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The nature of opposition is to criticize the government and so 
when you have something as large as the government, which is 
a enterprise that involves in excess of $6 billion, when 
something goes wrong in one small aspect of that enterprise 
then the opposition tends to focus on that small part of the pie 
and then people might be forgiven if they think that’s the only 
issue that the government is involved in. So from time to time 
it’s important — and we do have an opportunity on private 
members’ day — to put forward motions and to reflect more 
broadly on the contributions that are made to our province, to 
our economy, to our way of life by various aspects of 
government activity. 
 
In this case what we want to talk about is the Crown 
corporations and the value that these Crown corporations 
present to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Before getting into some of the contributions that the Crowns 
make, I would like to, for a minute, talk about the historical 
context which has lead us to today’s Crown corporations. When 
Saskatchewan was established, we found very quickly that in 
our towns at that time, that by 1891, there are three towns in the 
then North-West Territories: Regina, Moose Jaw, and Prince 
Albert. 
 
They, for example, had private generating plants for electricity. 
But within a few years, by 1905 when the province was 
founded, these private generating plants had become part of a 
municipal Crown electrical utility. So even then, at the turn of 
that century, Mr. Speaker, we saw private activities or private 
utilities becoming municipally owned electrical utilities. 
 
Similarly with the telephone service. The first exchange was 
established in Regina in 1887, and by 1908 the provincial 
government had established the Saskatchewan telephone system 
with a combination of 18 telephone exchanges. Also, the 
territorial government, that is the north-west territorial 
government, was selling hail insurance before Saskatchewan 
became a province in 1905. So there was in Saskatchewan, at 
the very outset, a reliance on publicly owned utilities — in that 
case, municipally owned utilities — as a way of generating and 
then distributing the power, and also to provide for a more 
effective telephone system than had been the case with private 
utilities. 
 
This type of development and municipalities becoming 
involved continued on through the ’20s and ’30s. We saw a 
major shift to establishing far more integrated and far more 
encompassing Crown corporations to deal with these utilities in 

the 1940s following the election of the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) in 1944. That would be the 
government of Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker, that was central 
to establishing the centrally integrated provincial Crown 
corporations, and they did this during their first term in office. 
 
And I guess that’s in part what led members of the opposition to 
refer to Mr. Tommy Douglas as Tommy the commie in some of 
their remarks, Mr. Speaker — those remarks that were uttered 
by the member for Kindersley in this Legislative Assembly, and 
remarks that were wildly cheered by members of the 
opposition. To think, Mr. Speaker, that the person who was that 
key, that central, and who has been recognized over the years 
not only as a man of principle but also a man of action — a man 
of principle action — would be referred by members of the 
present-day opposition in such disparaging terms. To refer to 
him as Tommy the commie, Mr. Speaker, I think is a reflection 
as to how far to the right the opposition has swung in our 
province. 
 
I remember in 1982 when Grant Devine was elected, in part of 
his campaign he said that he was the true inheritor of Mr. 
Devine’s legacy because he shared, or in his view shared, some 
attributes that Mr. Douglas had and therefore people should 
vote for him because he best reflected the kind of vision that 
Tommy Douglas had for Saskatchewan. 
 
That the opposition has now swung so far to the right that they 
would utter in this Legislative Assembly, for the people of 
Saskatchewan, extreme views to calling . . . that, if you like, 
Father of Saskatchewan in many ways, Mr. Speaker — a 
premier and later a leader of a federal party in Ottawa, who was 
greatly respected not only for what he did here but the 
principles that he was espoused — that he would be called 
Tommy the commie . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. We have in the 
past established a protocol in this Assembly that we should not 
be using and referring to people as Fascists or as Communists 
or any similar names. And I remind the member of that. 
 
I do not recall the previous quotation, but at anything from now 
on, let’s try to avoid that kind of thing. I think it is demeaning 
in the legislature to be able . . . to refer to members in that 
fashion. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m just simply 
referring to Hansard and I would . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the member just to 
continue with his remarks and accept the ruling. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it was in 1944, Mr. 
Speaker, that the CCF was elected. And then in 1945 they 
organized, one year after election, Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance, which to this day continues to provide very good 
insurance coverage for the people of Saskatchewan at very good 
rates. 
 
The Saskatchewan Transportation Company, in 1946, to 
provide an integrated transportation service between the various 
communities in Saskatchewan that were not being well served 
by the sporadic service being provided by private individuals in 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

those years. Saskatchewan Telephones as a province-wide 
system in 1947; the Saskatchewan Power Corporation in 1949. 
There were other smaller ventures in fish marketing, forestry, 
mining, and so on. Many of these corporations have of course 
succeeded — SGI, Telephones, SaskPower, STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company). Some of course did 
not. 
 
And I think that continues to be the truth today that not 
everything that government does succeeds wildly beyond its 
expectations, wildest expectations. But there are, at the end of 
the day, I think — or it’s fair to say — that at the end of the day 
that many of the government’s initiatives do succeed and do 
meet their objective of providing good service for the people of 
Saskatchewan at reasonable rates for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I might say too, that the developments in Saskatchewan are not 
dissimilar to the developments that occurred in the other Prairie 
provinces and some of the other provinces in Canada. I know 
that Manitoba for example saw the development of Manitoba 
Hydro, which is a publicly owned utility, over the years. We 
had the Manitoba Telephone System, which was a publicly 
owned system until it was sold off by the Filmon Conservative 
government a few years ago, was a publicly owned system. 
Alberta as well saw the development of the Alberta Telephone 
company which was a publicly owned system until it was 
privatized by the Conservative government in Alberta. 
 
The utilities, the electrical utilities, were never really developed 
as a single-integrated utility in Alberta, but there is a very 
strong presence by the municipalities in Alberta in terms of the 
provision of power for their customers in their particular 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the trend in Saskatchewan is not unlike the trend that we saw 
in the other Prairie provinces and some of the other provinces. 
Ontario, for example, never did see a publicly owned telephone 
system as such covering the province. It does or did have . . . 
I’m not sure what kind of system they have any more, but they 
did have Ontario Hydro which is a publicly owned system, 
which not only generated or produced its own power but 
distributed its power to customers across Ontario. I understand 
that has undergone a change. BC (British Columbia) as well 
saw the . . . BC Hydro, which is a publicly owned system. Some 
of the Maritime provinces also had publicly owned systems, 
Mr. Speaker, and I believe Quebec Hydro is an example again 
of a publicly owned system. 
 
(15:45) 
 
In Canada we have chosen to do things a little bit differently 
than our neighbours to the south in terms of a collective 
community response to our needs through Crown-owned 
utilities, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s fair to say that our 
approach has been a good approach. It’s an approach that I 
think to this day enjoys the strong support of the people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think that if one were to ask the people of Saskatchewan how 
they view their Crown corporations and the services they 
provide at the rates that they charge, I think most people — and 
not all — but most people would tend to view our Crown 

corporations in a positive way, and I think in the main, not for 
many of the reasons that are advocated here, but in the main 
because these Crowns provide services at rates that the public 
perceives to be among the lowest of all rates in Canada. 
 
Auto insurance, for example auto insurance rates, people 
recognize that rates for the coverage they receive are the lowest 
in Canada. There may be the odd sort of rural area where the 
risk of accidents is so low that insurance can be sold at very low 
rates that might compete with Saskatchewan as a whole, but I’d 
be hard-pressed to identify those, Mr. Speaker. But in the main, 
people appreciate the fact that they have good automobile 
coverage at very low rates. 
 
Power and natural gas, telephone services. Saskatchewan 
continues to have the lowest rates in the country for . . . among 
electricity and natural gas and phone services across Canada. I 
think it’s fair to say that these rates have been kept low while 
enhancing and extending the service. 
 
SaskTel is an example. Our rates are very low. But if you look 
at the reach of those services for all of the people in 
Saskatchewan — not just people in our cities but for all the 
people in Saskatchewan, including very importantly our rural 
customers and the kind of service that rural customers can have 
— and then you look at the service they have compared to rural 
customers in other parts of North America, at the prices that 
they pay in Saskatchewan, I think it’s fair to say that rural 
customers in Saskatchewan are fortunate and I think are 
supportive of the services being provided by our Crown 
utilities. 
 
This, I might say as an aside, Mr. Speaker, is one of the grave 
concerns that people in rural Alberta are expressing given a 
vigorous round of deregulation of the environment in which 
their utilities operate because they perceive that not only are 
they paying higher prices for the utility services they get, but 
also are receiving poorer service from the various corporations 
that provide the services in the area of electrical and telephone. 
 
So this is a matter of some concern to rural people in Alberta. 
It’s the subject of discussions at their counterparts of our rural 
municipalities’ conventions. It’s also something that factors into 
their political conventions. I understand the government is 
taking some heat from their constituents for the changes in rural 
service. 
 
I understand that a number of the members of the government 
caucus in Alberta, Conservative members, are looking for ways 
to try to improve the service that are being received by their 
rural customers by now again re-regulating some of the 
deregulated service that they voted in and that they put into 
place — so we’ll see where that goes. But I can tell you that 
there is some unease, as it were, in rural Alberta and in urban 
Alberta too with some of the rate issues that have been put into 
place in Alberta in the last three years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the values that the Crown corporations 
present to the people of Saskatchewan are the fact that Crown 
corporations contribute to the economy in Saskatchewan. There 
are many people that are employed by Crown corporations that 
if it weren’t for the fact that we have these Crown corporations 
might not in fact . . . we might not in fact have those jobs in 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
There will always be, there will always be in any utility, people 
that we need to provide the various services. It might be 
someone that works on the telephone lines. It might be 
somebody in the electrical utility who maintains and looks after 
the power lines. It might be somebody from SaskEnergy that is 
responsible for hooking you up or disconnecting you. It might 
be any kinds of jobs that any utility, whether they were 
privately owned in Saskatchewan or publicly owned, that would 
be provided here. 
 
But it doesn’t necessarily follow that if you have private 
corporations that necessarily those corporations would be 
headquartered in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And so it’s 
interesting to note that of the more than 9,500 people that are 
employed all across Saskatchewan, there are almost 4,000 . . . 
3,700 head office jobs in Saskatchewan as a result of those 
Crown corporations, well, having their headquarters here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it doesn’t necessarily follow 
that if those Crown corporations were to be sold off that we 
would retain those jobs. 
 
In fact we have seen over the years where we’ve had 
Crown-owned entities that have been sold off where it was 
indicated that, oh well, simply because we have a change in 
ownership doesn’t mean that the head office jobs won’t stay 
here — Sask Oil being a very good example of that; that we had 
a corporation called Sask Oil. 
 
Sask Oil was sold by the Devine Conservative government in 
the 1980s, probably at the instigation of the, probably at the 
instigation of the member for Swift Current who was a key 
adviser to the Devine administration in a department called the 
Department of Public Participation, I believe it was called. The 
idea was . . . It was essentially a department of privatization but 
they euphemistically called it the Department of Public 
Participation because their idea was to sell off 
government-owned enterprises to the public, and he was a key 
adviser to the government that resulted in this sale of Sask Oil 
to private interests. 
 
And of course we were all assured that Sask Oil’s head office 
jobs would be retained here. But over the years that corporation 
made its case that they could not continue to survive in 
Saskatchewan unless, increasingly over the years, those head 
office jobs were moved to Calgary where the oil industry is in 
the main located. 
 
So for those who say that, well selling off Crown corporations 
would have no material impact on the economy of 
Saskatchewan because, you know, there always will be 
somebody who will be needed to hook up the power or 
somebody that needed to hook up the electricity, or if you have 
a problem with your telephone line there always will be 
somebody to repair that. 
 
Well that may be true; that may well be true. But they’ll tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, there’s no reason for a corporation, a private 
corporation say, headquartered in Calgary, that buys up our 
telephone system to keep head office jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. Or if some organization in BC buys up our 
SaskPower, there’d be no reason necessarily for them to keep 

head office jobs here in Saskatchewan. Now they would have to 
keep people who provide the services on the ground, but they 
don’t have to keep the head office jobs. 
 
And that, again, that’s . . . my understanding is that’s pretty 
close to 3,700 jobs, and that’s a lot of jobs in our economy, Mr. 
Speaker. And those are the direct jobs and those jobs also 
support many other indirect jobs. If you have a job in the 
economy, that job will support other jobs as well, Mr. Speaker. 
What do I mean by that? Thirty-seven hundred employees, 
3,700 families — 3,700 families create demands for X grocery 
stores, create demands for X numbers of teachers, create 
demands for all kinds of products and services in our 
communities. And if those 3,700 jobs weren’t there then we 
would see a reduction in those other jobs as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the point I wanted to make is that in talking about the value 
the Crown corporations present to our economy, is that Crowns 
make a major contribution to Saskatchewan’s economy. Again, 
more than 9,500 people are employed by Crown corporations 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
Crown corporations too support more than 12,000 
Saskatchewan businesses every year through their policy of 
buying goods and services from local suppliers. They spend 
about $2 billion every year on local purchasing and systems 
improvements. They also donate more than — when we talk 
about the impact they have on the social and cultural and 
recreational life of the province — they donate more than $5 
million each year to local charities, community projects, and 
events. I think one would be hard pressed to not find a 
significant recreational or cultural or community project in 
Saskatchewan that isn’t supported in one way or another by one 
of Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. 
 
Now that’s something that all major corporations do, they try to 
provide support for local charities. They try to provide support 
for local community projects. But I can tell you if those 
corporations aren’t headquartered in Saskatchewan, it’s fair to 
say that there would be far less support for those kinds of 
activities in our communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again jobs, and the jobs that are provided by the 
Crown corporations is not something that people think about 
when they think about Crowns because in the main they think 
about the service they get and the rates they provide. But I did 
want to reflect on that because the jobs that are provided by 
Crown corporations, although they may not directly affect 
people in our province, at the end of the day I think they will 
indirectly affect just about everybody, everybody in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They also affect us in another way and that is these Crowns not 
only contribute in the sense of providing good service at 
reasonable rates and contributing to our economy, these Crowns 
also contribute to the General Revenue Fund of the province. 
 
And what do I mean by that? Well the General Revenue Fund is 
the source of all of the funds that the government uses to pay 
for health in our province, which is about $2.5 billion this year; 
for all of the educational expenditures in Saskatchewan that the 
government makes, which is in excess of a billion dollars. All 
of the highways funding comes out of the General Revenue 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

Fund. The funds that go to municipalities to support policing 
comes out of the General Revenue Fund. The funds that are to 
go to support people with disabilities in Saskatchewan comes 
out of the General Revenue Fund. All of the government’s 
spending comes out of the General Revenue Fund and the 
Crown corporations have, since 1995, returned about $1.6 
billion to the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And that is worthy of applause, Mr. 
Speaker, because that is a lot of money and that is very 
welcomed by the government as the government tries to 
manage its way through some years of grave drought that has a 
big impact on government revenues. And it is very helpful that 
we have that revenue source from our Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker, to assist us to meet our obligations in the areas of 
health and education which, I think, as the Minister of Finance 
was explaining earlier today, have seen significant increases in 
this budget even though we’ve come through a year of extreme 
drought and all that presents in terms of impact on the 
government budgets. It’s revenue from entities such as the 
Crowns that help us to maintain our commitment to support 
worthwhile public services in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak for a minute about the fact that 
because these services, utilities, are provided through Crown 
corporations as opposed to private corporations, it means that 
the public has access to information about how those 
corporations are run — which is far different than any 
expectation they might ever have with respect to private 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What do I mean by Crown corporations? I mean that these are 
corporations that at the end of the day are administered on 
behalf of all of the people of Saskatchewan who might be 
viewed as the shareholders in those corporations, administered 
by the government of the day. And so in a sense the government 
of the day is the active or participating shareholders on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan. And as such, our expectations 
about . . . Because these are Crown or public entities if you like, 
our expectations about what these Crowns should be providing 
in the way of information for their shareholders, it’s much 
higher than would be the case for a publicly traded private 
company as an example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Annual reports and financial statements. All Crown 
corporations are required by law to publish annual reports and 
financial statements. The government also publishes summary 
financial statements which provide an overview of all 
government financial activities including those of the Crowns. 
These reporting standards, Mr. Speaker, and practices, have 
improved, I would say, substantially since 1991 when the 
present government was first elected. And we were elected in 
part because there was a concern about the . . . on the part of the 
public that the previous government had not treated with respect 
the public’s right to know how it is that the various Crown 
entities were being managed, Mr. Speaker. And we set about to 
change that, and we have made, I believe, significant 
improvements in those reporting standards and practices. 
 

And that’s not to say that we couldn’t be making more. And I 
would remind people that the Minister of Finance indicated in 
his budget speech that we would be looking at making 
additional changes in the way that we budget in Saskatchewan 
so that the people of Saskatchewan not only will have a 
complete view as to how Crown activity has gone in the 
previous year, but now will also have a better idea as to how 
Crown revenues and expenses will impact the provincial budget 
of the day — that is to say, future spending, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that’s a welcome improvement. That is something that I 
know that members of the government side, backbenchers, have 
argued for over the years. We don’t do that publicly, Mr. 
Speaker, like the opposition can. But I can tell you that 
government members, backbenchers, have worked diligently to 
get the government to take the point of view that that kind of 
summary financial planning should be part of budgets in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I want to recognize the role played by government 
backbenchers, Mr. Speaker. And that’s not something that 
backbenchers would necessarily do in a public forum — 
disagree with their government — but it is something that we 
do in our own circles and in our . . . and we have our own 
opportunities for doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I again just want to make the point that these annual reports and 
financial statements are made available. The Crowns are 
required to publish these by law and they do so, Mr. Speaker, 
and that those reporting standards and practices have improved 
— and, in my view, significantly — since 1991, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also there is a Provincial Auditor. The Provincial Auditor is an 
independent officer of the Legislative Assembly who reports to 
the people, to the public, through the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Provincial Auditor works with private accounting firms to 
make sure the books of the Crowns are in order. I think it’s fair 
to say that not only has the Provincial Auditor’s capacity to 
work with these private auditing firms to look at the books of 
the Crown corporation, not only has that been enhanced over 
the years, I think it’s fair to say that the independence of the 
Office of the Provincial Auditor has been strengthened since 
1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And that’s important because if the 
public, if the public are to have confidence, confidence in the 
financial reports, in the financial reports and activities of Crown 
corporations that are published, then they want to know that 
there’s someone independent who’s able to look at those books 
and to report to them as to his or her view on those financial 
statements. And then a key part of that is to ensure that that 
office not only is independent but that that independence is 
strengthened over the years, Mr. Speaker. And again, that is 
something that has been, in my view, substantially improved 
since 1991, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are also various other opportunities for people to get 
information about how our Crowns are operating. There is, or 
was, of this Legislative Assembly a Crown Corporations 
Committee which is a committee of members from both sides 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

 

of the House where detailed reviews of Crown corporation 
activities are conducted and again by members from both sides 
of the Legislative Assembly. And in that committee, the 
presidents and the chief operating officers of the Crown 
corporations are brought in to answer questions by members of 
the Legislative Assembly, questions based on the annual reports 
that these Crowns put forward, questions about comments 
raised by the independent officer, the Provincial Auditor, about 
Crown corporation activities. 
 
And members take their job seriously and they, I think it’s fair 
to say, do vigorous questioning of those individuals, Mr. 
Speaker, so as to get a full appreciation of what kind of activity 
those Crowns have been involved in. They even stray into 
current issues of the day, Mr. Speaker, to try and get an 
understanding as to how Crowns are involved in those issues. 
And then, if members are not satisfied with the answers they get 
or they believe that those answers provide the need to ask the 
government about policy issues or decisions that are made by 
the government with respect to these Crowns, then of course 
members are in a position to ask questions in question period 
about the activity of those Crowns as well. 
 
And I don’t think there’s a person in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that doesn’t understand that members of the 
Legislative Assembly do, can, will, have, continue, will always 
be asking questions of the government about the government’s 
handling of the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s something that would not happen with respect to 
private corporations, Mr. Speaker. Opposition members can’t 
come into the House and say, I want to know about what Esso 
is doing about the price of gasoline at the pumps. 
 
Well the government has no control over Esso. The government 
doesn’t own Esso. So members of the opposition don’t ask here 
about how it is that the government is handling Esso, because 
we don’t handle Esso. 
 
But the members can and the members do ask questions about 
the rates of Crown corporations, the activities of Crown 
corporations, the investments of Crown corporations, all kinds 
of questions about Crown corporations. 
 
And those issues then tend to become the things that are 
reported on for the public, and we accept that as a government. 
We think that’s an important part of having open and 
transparent government, and to have an accountable handling of 
Crown corporations in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and we 
wouldn’t have it any other way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I tell you, Mr. Speaker, on any given 
day there may be questions raised about the conduct of Crown 
corporations, or some investment by a Crown corporation, or an 
activity by a Crown corporation that in the short run we don’t 
find embarrassing. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, too, that notwithstanding these 
transitory issues that are raised, we on this side of the House 
take the point of view that we strongly, strongly believe in open 
and transparent government, and in accountable government, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, the government 
also has put into place something called the Saskatchewan Rate 
Review Panel to conduct independent reviews of rate change 
requests from Crown corporations so that if SaskEnergy wants 
to increase its prices — and those things do occur; none of us 
like it but those things do occur — then in addition to 
everything else, Mr. Speaker, they have to appear before a 
Saskatchewan Rate Review Panel. And those panel holds public 
meetings to which the public, at the end of the day, also has an 
opportunity to make their comments known. 
 
SaskTel, of course, is regulated by the federal government’s 
Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission, also known as the CRTC. So if SaskTel wants to 
increase its rates it has to appear before a federal regulatory 
body, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, if people want to know more about these Crown 
corporations and what it is that they do, people can go to the 
Internet and go to www.cicorp, so that’s c-i-c-o-r-p.sk.ca, so 
that’s www.cicorp.sk.ca and that Web site has links to many of 
the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, which describe their 
activities, which describe all of the things that they do, a bit of 
their history, Mr. Speaker. And if people don’t have the 
Internet, I think that if they could write any of their members of 
the Legislative Assembly, a member of the Legislative 
Assembly would be more than pleased to provide them the 
information that is available on those Web sites or answer any 
other questions that people might have about Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that I’m very concerned about, 
because I think they potentially can impact our Crown 
corporations, and that is the question of deregulation that’s 
sweeping our country as it has swept through much of the 
United States. What do I mean by that, Mr. Speaker? For 
example, in the area of electrical utilities, in Saskatchewan we 
have a regulated public system in which we have public control 
over prices and generating capacity. 
 
Now that’s not to say that we can influence all of the factors 
that influence prices, Mr. Speaker. For example, we cannot 
dictate the price of coal. We cannot dictate the price of natural 
gas which are used to generate electricity in Saskatchewan. So 
if the price of natural gas goes up or if the price of coal in 
Saskatchewan is increased because of whatever demands there 
might be, then SaskPower, which uses that natural gas or uses 
that coal to generate electricity and they have to pay more, then 
yes, the customers have to pay more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as I mentioned, there is a rate review panel which can 
assess whether or not the increase that’s being applied for by 
SaskPower is a reasonable one. Unlike Esso which . . . or a 
gasoline company, major gas companies, they can increase the 
price of gas if they want or decrease it and they don’t have to 
justify that to anyone, Mr. Speaker. But in a regulated public 
system these utilities do have to justify at the end of the day the 
prices that they hope to charge to their customers. 
 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a deregulated jurisdiction, the basic idea is that 
anyone can generate power and sell it for whatever price a 
buyer is prepared to pay for it. And the basic idea is that like 
any other market item, supply will be produced to meet demand 
and then you have competition and competition will keep the 
prices down. 
 
(16:15) 
 
I’m not sure that theory, which comes from right-wing circles 
and comes from groups like the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker, that that theory is working out as well in practice as 
those who support the theory would like to see. 
 
There have been many attempts across North America to 
deregulate the electrical systems and it has not been wildly 
successful in my view, or in the view of the people that live in 
various jurisdictions in North America. 
 
The people of California, for example, is one that many people 
in Saskatchewan will be familiar with because of the coverage 
that was in the media during the course of the last number of 
years about brownouts in California, wildly escalating rates in 
California, Mr. Speaker, that caused grave concern for electrical 
customers, the consumers in California. And people in 
Saskatchewan will know about that. 
 
They will also know that Alberta has gone the same route, Mr. 
Speaker, of electrical deregulation. Essentially anyone that 
wants to can set up a electrical generation and sell it into their 
electrical grid and it’ll be sold to and sold through something 
called the Alberta power pool, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’m not sure that the people of Saskatchewan are as wild 
. . . or the people of Alberta are as wildly enthusiastic as the 
planners of this system had anticipated, Mr. Speaker, because in 
part it seems to have meant a larger-than-ordinary increase in 
electrical, in electrical costs in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. It seems 
that electrical costs are about 60, 70 per cent higher for most 
consumers in Alberta than when deregulation was first put into 
place. 
 
The kind of increases in electrical capacity that they were 
hoping for in the sort of unfettered market economic approach 
to electrical production have in fact not turned out in Alberta. 
Reports that are put out by Hydro Quebec and Manitoba Hydro 
which survey electrical prices throughout the country, they 
suggest that electricity prices in Edmonton and other Alberta 
communities have gone from being among the lowest in Canada 
to the most expensive in Canada. 
 
And, you know, at the end of the day you hope to see 
governments do things that has a practical bearing and do things 
that will benefit the greatest number of people in their 
jurisdiction. And you don’t like to see governments do things 
that are, you know . . . I guess the proper term is too strictly 
illogical, that you do things because you believe in something. 
That it should work that way; never mind that it doesn’t 
practically work that way. But you don’t want to see 
governments do that. And that seems to have been the case in 
Alberta where the right-wing people seem to have gotten 
control of the government and convinced the government of the 
day to go in this way of deregulation. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would be very interested to hear in this 
debate what it is that the members of the Sask Party have to say 
about this. They will likely point out that in Saskatchewan, oh, 
we’ve already deregulated and so what are you talking about? 
Well there is some limited deregulation. 
 
If we want to, for example, sell surplus power in Saskatchewan 
— and sometimes we do have surplus power in Saskatchewan 
— to communities outside of Saskatchewan, well then we have 
to open up our transmission lines to people being able to sell to 
communities inside Saskatchewan. In the main, that’s benefited 
SaskPower and the people of Saskatchewan. And SaskPower’s 
been able to generate revenues through that process, which has 
allowed it to keep electricity prices down for the people of 
Saskatchewan even while they’re being ratcheted up for our 
neighbours to the west, Mr. Speaker. So in a very limited way, 
there has been a benefit. Now I might point out that those lines 
are still owned by SaskPower for the benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So we’ve seen some limited deregulation and I know that the 
members of the opposition will talk about, oh, we’ve already 
seen deregulation. Well not really, Mr. Speaker, and we would 
like to hear their views on the wider question of deregulation 
and how they would approach the production and the sale of 
electricity in Saskatchewan in the years to come, Mr. Speaker. 
We look forward with great interest to what comments the 
opposition might have to make about that. 
 
This deregulation, Mr. Speaker, is a . . . is in my view an 
experiment, an adventure that’s fraught with great difficulty. 
And we’ve seen this in Alberta, not only for the people who are 
the electrical customers but also some of the businesses in 
Alberta. 
 
I was able to visit the Lethbridge Ironworks a few months ago 
with some of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, to talk to people who 
run the Lethbridge Ironworks and their experience with 
electrical deregulation and how deregulation means that their 
prices have gone up and that an extraordinary amount of their 
time is now spent in trying to find, on any given day, where it is 
that they can buy the cheapest electricity to keep their plant 
going. This is a company that’s operated in Lethbridge since 
1898 and they depend very greatly on electricity; it’s a major 
input cost for them. 
 
They looked at extreme measures such as moving production 
from days to nights — as opposed to having people work from 
8 to 4 during the day to produce the goods that they produce, 
people would then start at midnight when the electrical rates 
were cheaper in their deregulated environment. And to their 
credit they didn’t do very much of that because they are a 
family-owned company and they understand that families do 
not work well when the, when workers have to work throughout 
the night hours, Mr. Speaker, to put bread on the table. 
 
But that, I think, is some of the problems that deregulation is 
creating for individuals in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated we would very much like to hear 
from the opposition what their views are on deregulation, and 
also more generally on the position of Crowns. 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

 

I might say that the opposition has presented a confusing 
picture of Crown corporations. It’s almost as if on the one hand 
they’re sending out a message to their right-wing supporters 
that they wouldn’t for a moment continue on with the kind of 
Crown corporation activity that we see in Saskatchewan and 
that they would move to change that — as has been the case in 
the part of right-wing governments in Saskatchewan. The 
Devine government too made some significant changes in the 
area of Crown activity, and I do remember a very significant 
debate taking place in Saskatchewan over their attempts to sell 
SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, that the public strongly opposed. 
 
We still get, you know, yes on the one hand they seem to be 
sending out messages to their right-wing support base that they 
would make drastic changes, drastic changes in Saskatchewan’s 
economy because it’s through those drastic changes that they 
see Saskatchewan being able to make a drastic impact on 
whatever, supposedly in their view, is troubling Saskatchewan 
economy . . . which, you know, at the end of the day 
Saskatchewan economy is not doing all that badly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again this last month we saw an increase of 11,000-plus jobs 
over the same period of the previous year. Oil activity is up 
tremendously over the previous year. Welfare caseloads 
continue to drop in Saskatchewan. So there are a lot of things 
that are good about Saskatchewan’s economy, Mr. Speaker. But 
they, of course, they don’t believe that. They think that they can 
make huge, drastic changes in our economy so . . . And they 
seem to be indicating that Crown . . . changes to how we 
approach Crown corporations would be a major part of that and 
somehow they seem to be signalling that. And you have people 
like the member for Arm River who makes statements about, 
given time and the right opportunity, that they would sell off 
Crown corporations. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did he write that in the paper? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Sell off Crown corporations? Well 
that’s what he wrote in the paper, Mr. Speaker, that they would 
sell off Crown corporations, the major Crown corporations. So 
he says that, you know, he said here in the paper, he agreed the 
province should sell off its Crown corporations. And he noted 
that the Sask Party — that is the Saskatchewan Party, the 
former Conservatives — has always talked about getting rid of 
the Crown corporations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that seems to be one message that they send 
to their right-wing supporters about how they need to do that, 
and that’s been a major part of their economic platform. But on 
the other hand they have members who are saying, oh no, we 
wouldn’t touch a thing. We wouldn’t do anything. We love the 
Crowns. Maybe make a few changes here and there, but we 
really wouldn’t touch them. 
 
So I might say that it’s a confusing picture that comes from the 
Saskatchewan Party. And their own right-wing supporters will 
be interested to know where it is that their party, the 
Saskatchewan Party, clearly stands when it comes to the 
question of continued public ownership of the Crown 
corporations. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve gone on at length here about the 
value of Crown corporations to the people of Saskatchewan and 

at this point, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the contribution by 
other members in this debate. I know that members on this side 
of the House will speak positively about the value of Crown 
corporations in our province, in our society, in our economy. 
And we certainly look forward to the contribution by members 
opposite so . . . because they now do have an opportunity to 
clearly articulate where it is that they stand on the important 
questions, Mr. Speaker, of continued Crown ownership for our 
utilities and the important question of deregulation and what 
impact that might have on Crown corporations. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That this Assembly affirm the value to the people of 
Saskatchewan of our Crown corporations which provide 
essential services throughout the province, create jobs for 
Saskatchewan people, contribute to the social, cultural and 
recreational life of Saskatchewan communities, and which 
have generated $1.6 billion in contributions to the GRF 
over the past eight years. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think this is an important 
debate that is going to become more evident to the people of 
Saskatchewan in the months ahead because we have certainly 
heard, over the past several months and years, in the 
Saskatchewan Party that should they form the majority 
government in the province of Saskatchewan that they would 
not be unopposed to privatizing Crown entities in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in 1986 when I became a member of this Legislative 
Assembly, we came to understand what privatization meant for 
our citizens when their forebearers or forefathers and mothers, 
the Devine Conservatives, came into this Legislative Assembly 
and brought several Acts before this House where they were 
going to privatize major Crown corporations in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And let me give you some examples. 
 
Their predecessors, the Devine Conservatives, privatized the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and I can tell you that 
members on this side of the House that were in opposition in 
those days spent hundreds of hours on their feet opposing the 
decision to privatize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
PCS. And why did we do that? We opposed that privatization 
because we did not want that Crown entity to leave the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the one thing I learned as a young child, one 
of the things I learned as a young child in this province, 
growing up in this province, is that when wealth is created in a 
province or in a community, you do everything that you can to 
make sure as much of that wealth stays in your community in 
order to support services and to support citizens. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, their predecessors privatized the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, allowed the shares to be held by 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

people outside of this province. Any revenues or wealth that 
was created in the form of dividends went to people mostly 
outside of Saskatchewan. The board of directors, most of the 
people on the board, came from outside of the province. The 
decisions were made for the good of the shareholders, who 
weren’t necessarily the citizens of this province. And therefore 
we now have basically a shell of a corporation with its head 
office in Saskatoon. That’s point number one. 
 
In terms of their . . . What they do here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the head office jobs, if you compare the numbers 
of head office jobs in Saskatoon today, compare that to 1987, 
you will find a significant difference. That’s point number one. 
 
Point number two. Then the predecessors, the Devine Tories, of 
which many of these people worked for or were associated 
with, decided to privatize SMDC, Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation. 
 
Now fortunately for the province, the majority of uranium in the 
world is located here. And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that if you 
look at the companies that are located here, many of those head 
office jobs are here. They are not elsewhere. 
 
But one of the things that disturbed us at the time, and my 
colleague for Cumberland was the critic for SMDC, was that 
there was $1 billion, $1 billion worth of gold in the ground that 
we were concerned was not going to be the property of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now gold has not yet been developed, but should gold ever be 
developed in Saskatchewan, I can tell you this, that the 
dividends from that gold will not be owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan in the form of dividends that come through the 
Crown Investments Corporation, but they will go elsewhere. 
 
Then let’s talk about SaskEnergy. The brilliant minds in the 
Devine government decided that they were going to privatize 
SaskEnergy — the brilliant minds. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
stopped them dead in their tracks and they knew that we rang 
the bells in this Legislative Assembly for over 17 days, I 
believe, and guess what? They created a little committee and 
the thing went away and we came into the House after the 
general election in 1991 and gave them a thorough thumping, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And these people, they have petitions in the legislature day in 
and day out and day in and day out. Well guess how many 
signatures we got on that SaskEnergy petition? Guess how 
many signatures? It wasn’t 10; it wasn’t 20; it wasn’t 30; it 
wasn’t 40. How many hundreds and how many thousands did 
we get on a petition? We got over 100,000 signatures on a 
petition to deny the Government of Saskatchewan, the Devine 
Tories, of which many of these people are associated with, and 
we defeated them in the polls in 1991. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . Oh, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift 
Current says he was too busy doing whatever he was doing. But 
I can tell the member that I think he was the ministerial 
assistant to Mr. Gerich during those heady days when they were 
busy privatizing the various resource Crowns in the province. 
 
Now let’s talk about Sask Oil and Gas. Now we had a little 

company called Sask Oil and Gas that provided dividends to the 
Crown Investments Corporation, and those dividends were used 
to pay for important public services, like in health and 
education. 
 
And these people over here decided that they were going to 
privatize SMDC. And guess what? And we predicted this was 
going to happen. That SMDC which became Wascana Energy, 
that we would get to the point where those jobs and head office 
would not be located in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, what we predicted in the ’80s came to be, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these people like to think they’re the big 
business people. They know all about the stock market, they 
know all about wealth creation, and they are the heady business 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. And business is 
apparently represented in the legislature by the members 
opposite. They know how to make a buck — they think, they 
say. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I remember very well — and it may even 
have been the member from Cannington, it may have been him; 
and certainly Mr. Boyd from Kindersley, which apparently he 
thought he was a big-time business person — when it came to 
the heavy oil upgrader in Lloydminster and, Mr. Speaker, the 
Devine government decided to invest in the heavy oil upgrader 
in Lloydminster, along with the Government of Alberta, which I 
think was Tory at the time, and the Government of Canada, 
which I think was Tory at the time. So we have three 
governments involved in the construction and ownership — 
partial ownership — of the heavy oil upgrader in Lloydminster. 
 
And what the members opposite were saying to us when the 
whole thing was kind of going apart and the price of oil was 
down, they said get rid of your share of the heavy oil upgrader. 
Don’t let the taxpayers of this province be on the hook because 
of that bad little deal which their predecessors, the Devine 
Tories and the Mulroney government and I think it was the 
Getty government, got themselves into the 1980s. 
 
And we decided we weren’t going to do that. What we decided 
that was that we were going to buy some of those shares of the 
Canadian government, Mulroney’s shares, and the Alberta 
government, I think it was Mr. Getty — we were going to buy 
their shares. And guess what happened? Their busy . . . The 
big-time business people over there telling us what we should 
be doing with the heavy oil upgrader, and guess what 
happened? We made a whole pot of money for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I listened very carefully to the member from Kindersley 
who likes to call us the socialist hordes — the socialists. And 
apparently he comes from a socialist background according to 
what he said in his, I think it was his Throne Speech, that we 
are the socialist hordes that don’t know how to run anything. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say we do know how to run, we do 
know how to run things. I would say that there is probably more 
people on this side of the House that read the financial pages in 
our various financial magazines than anybody over there. 
 
I don’t even think they read The Globe and Mail financial pages 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

 

every day. Well I know that there are people on this side that 
do. I know that there are people that subscribe to various 
financial journals, trying to understand what’s happening to the 
market. I know that for a fact. And in fact, Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
think you might even do that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say this: that if you look at what’s 
happened in this province in the last 10 years, we have seen 
more than $1.6 million . . . billion dollars to return to the people 
of Saskatchewan through dividends from Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
And where has that money come from? Well, Mr. Speaker, it 
has come from Crown entities that are owned and controlled by 
the people of this province. And when those Crown entities 
make money, where do the dividends go? Do they show up on 
the Toronto Stock Exchange, or the New York Stock Exchange, 
or the Canadian stock exchange? No, they don’t. They show up 
over at CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
in the form of dividends that are then paid to the Gross Revenue 
Fund to pay for things like health, education, transportation, 
municipal government, the environment, and so on and so forth. 
 
Those dividends don’t go into my personal pocket as a 
shareholder or the members opposite. And I’m sure some of us 
do have private holdings of individual stocks in this legislature. 
And we know that if the company makes money, we will get 
paid a dividend on our share. That is when a company is owned 
by private shareholders. 
 
But in the case of Saskatchewan, we have Crown corporations 
like SaskEnergy, SaskTel, SGI, SaskPower that pay their profits 
into Crown Investments Corporation which then pays those 
profits over to the people of Saskatchewan in the form of a 
dividend. And we can pay for our health, education, and social 
services. And I think it was 300 million last year, and I believe 
it’s 200 million this year — I may be incorrect — but it’s a lot 
of money, Mr. Speaker. And I know it’s about the size of the 
health budget increase. Health spending is going up by $186 
million. Well I can say with some certainty, that money could 
have come from the dividends paid by our Crown corporations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have Crown corporations that employ 
people. Now if we had, let’s say, AT&T or Bell Canada owned 
SaskTel, do we think those head office jobs would be in 
Saskatchewan? Do we think the technical support jobs, the 
computer jobs, would be here in Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think maybe the maintenance jobs would be here. I 
think maybe some of the supports to make sure the lines are 
operating would be here. But I’m not sure the president would 
be located here or the vice-president or the executive director. 
There might be a little manager here, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
I know. 
 
I also know if you watch telcos across the world in the last 
decade — across the world — and look at what’s happened to 
the share price of those telephone companies across the globe, 
you will note that they’re in the tank. They haven’t made any 
money. 
 
Now I can report to the people of Saskatchewan that SaskTel 
has made money. And it’s made money while providing 
high-speed Internet when many of those international telephone 

companies won’t provide high-speed Internet into some parts of 
Toronto and Calgary and Vancouver and Edmonton. Well guess 
what? High-speed Internet is in Moose Jaw and Saskatoon and 
Regina and P.A. (Prince Albert) and North Battleford and 
many, many other small communities and villages. 
 
I know that SaskTel has cellphone coverage. And I also know 
that many of those telcos that aren’t making any money, Mr. 
Speaker, haven’t got telephone coverage in the form of cell 
coverage in areas of those private telephone companies, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I can say to the people of Saskatchewan, our Crown 
corporations employ over 9,000 people. They have head office 
jobs that are located right here in Saskatchewan, and those 
individuals pay taxes and buy goods and services right here in 
Saskatchewan and support our business people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — The other thing I know, Mr. Speaker, is that 
those Crown corporations do $2 billion worth of purchasing 
from business right here in Saskatchewan. Now I’m not sure if 
those Crowns were privatized whether the shareholders in New 
York City or Toronto would want to buy those goods and 
services from Saskatchewan people. What do you think, Mr. 
Speaker? Do you think they would? I don’t think they would. I 
don’t think they would. 
 
Let me give you another example. Now the members opposite 
try and do this little game where, oh, something lost a little 
money and that means that Crown corporation is bad — it is 
bad. 
 
Well let’s talk about that, Mr. Speaker. If you are a shareholder 
in a private company, those private companies make 
investments and as any shareholder knows, you have winners 
and you have losers. The trick is to have more winners than 
losers. The trick is to make sure that the winners make a lot 
more money than any money you might have in the form . . . or 
a loss in the form of the loser. That’s called business, Mr. 
Speaker. And for the members opposite not to understand that is 
shocking, Mr. Speaker. It is shocking, Mr. Speaker. Because 
any business person . . . Ask any business person. You will 
make a decision that ends up being a loser. The hope is the 
other side of your business makes more money so it balances 
off the loss, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And those folks over there don’t understand it. Unless they 
don’t want to understand it because their game plan, their game 
plan, is to so destroy the images of Crown corporations in 
Saskatchewan that it’ll be all ready to privatize should they ever 
become government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know this: 80 per cent of the citizens — 
obviously including some people who support the Sask Party — 
80 per cent want our Crown corporations to remain in public 
hands. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2003 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And, Mr. Speaker, the Crown that they try to 
discredit the most is SaskTel. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? 
We have competition in Saskatchewan in long-distance rates. 
And guess what, Mr. Speaker? Ninety-three per cent of 
Saskatchewan citizens have SaskTel as their long-distance 
carrier. How many of the opposition have SaskTel? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they want to try and discredit SaskTel. They 
would like to see nothing other than SaskTel privatized. But let 
them understand, 93 per cent of the citizens that have 
telephones in this province, and long distance, use SaskTel. It’s 
not Sprint, it’s not Rogers, and so on. And guess why they do, 
Mr. Speaker? Because they want jobs here. They know Rogers 
and IT&T and Sprint don’t have jobs here, not like SaskTel. 
 
They want to support their telephone company — their 
telephone company. And that’s not ideological, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s not an NDP thing or a Liberal thing, it’s not ideological 
at all. It’s about supporting SaskTel in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to what the member 
from Arm River had to say. Now . . . and I also, you know, go 
on to the Sask Party Web site every once in a while just to see 
what kind of policy they’ve got going for them. Well, for the 
people of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Party Crown 
corporation policy is as follows, regarding privatization . . . 
Now I ask you, does the NDP have a policy on privatization? 
No, we don’t. But these ideologues over here have a policy on 
privatization. And what’s their policy say? 
 
The Saskatchewan Party policy of . . . oh it’s of privatization, is 
set out as follows . . . And for people who want to get on to 
building Saskatchewan a new century, their Web site, it is 
CC9701. First point: 
 

Privatization will be considered if it is demonstrated that 
continued government ownership is no longer in the best 
interest of taxpayers. 

 
Well, you know, I asked my colleagues, I asked the people of 
Saskatchewan, what does that mean? Who decides whether it’s 
in the best interest of Saskatchewan taxpayers? Is it the 
Saskatchewan Party? Is it the citizens of Saskatchewan? Who 
makes this decision? Do they make the decision in some little 
backroom like they did under the Devine Tories to privatize? 
Do they make the decisions? 
 
Or is it the . . . Or is it the Executive Council of the Sask Party? 
You know, that committee that decided that Grant Schmidt 
shouldn’t have his nomination. Sixty-one people decided he 
shouldn’t have his nomination when 1,200 people went out to 
the nominating meeting in Langenburg and decided that Mr. 
Schmidt should be their candidate in the next general election. 
Is that who’s going to decide? 
 
The second thing they say is: 
 

Privatization of a Crown utility will be accomplished 
through an initial public share offering made available first 
to . . . (citizens) of Saskatchewan. 

 
Well I ask you, how does that work? How do you have a 

publicly . . . an initial share offer that’s only made to the 
citizens of Saskatchewan? How do you get on to the Toronto 
Stock Exchange? How do you get on to the New York Stock 
Exchange? This thing doesn’t work. Third thing: 
 

All net revenues from the sale of any Saskatchewan Crown 
asset will be applied directly to Saskatchewan’s debt. 

 
Well we’ll see about that. Four: 
 

Any legislation required to pursue privatization of a 
Saskatchewan Crown Corporation will contain clauses 
requiring the corporation’s base of operations and head 
office to remain in Saskatchewan. 

 
Well let me tell you how that works. Here’s how it works. 
Here’s how it works. So you have a . . . Let’s use the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan which has shares sold on the 
Toronto Stock Exchange and the New York Stock Exchange. 
And the shareholders get to the point of view where they don’t 
want to be hidebound by some sort of little piece of legislation 
that says you have to have your operation here. They won’t 
accept that. They won’t accept that. And they might even say, if 
you want us to do business in your province, you’re going to 
have to relax that. That’s how that works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But these people over here don’t understand how it works three 
years or four years or five years or six years down the road. But 
I can say with certainty that our government has had some 
experience with the kind of aftermath of their privatizations in 
the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing I want to say is that the 
Conference Board of Canada rated our Crown corporations as 
amongst the best-governed corporations in Canada. That really 
does say something about how we have set up the governance 
structure. And, Mr. Speaker, you know what? You know what, 
Mr. Speaker? A vast majority of the board members of our 
Crown corporations are citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I ask you this. When you’re on a board — let’s use PCS as 
an example — and you’re an international shareholder and you 
may come from the United States of America and you’re sitting 
on this board, do you really think those shareholders think about 
how we’re doing down here in Saskatchewan when they’re 
representing those shareholders? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do know this — that when you are a representative on a 
board of directors of a company, whether it’s a Crown company 
or a private company in the province of Saskatchewan, you do 
think, you do think about what the people in your home 
province care about — care deeply about, Mr. Speaker. That I 
do know. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other point I want to make as . . . for the 
citizens is that our Crown corporations have helped restore 
Saskatchewan’s financial position. There’s no doubt about that. 
No doubt about that. When we came to government in 1991 we 
had close to $15 billion in debt. In debt. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Moody’s . . . and they’re chirping over there, you know, 
obviously you know . . . and you throw the dog a bone and it 
yelps — you might have hit him. That’s what I can say about 



April 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

 

the people opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Members of the 
Assembly, it’s my duty to ensure that the member who’s 
speaking, in this case the member for Saskatoon Nutana, has the 
ability to speak without undue interruption. And I think we’re 
getting a little, a little too noisy on both sides of the House. So 
I’m wondering if we could have order, wondering if we could 
have order, and let the member for Saskatoon Nutana complete 
her remarks. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, Crowns have helped restore Saskatchewan’s 
financial position and Moody’s investment service has reviewed 
Saskatchewan’s finances and has commended CIC for 
rationalizing and restructuring its operations and investments in 
the Crown corps and reducing the province’s guaranteed debt 
exposure. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s something to be 
proud of and we should be congratulating those Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out that the Crowns in our 
province every year invest over 400,000 . . . or $400 million to 
expand and improve services, and by doing that they create 
thousands of construction jobs for our tradespeople right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the most important thing is that our Crown 
corporations benefit our citizens by providing some of the 
lowest overall rates for public services in Canada. Mr. Speaker, 
Crown corporations deliver services to areas where other 
companies wouldn’t go because of high infrastructure and 
operating costs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, no taxpayers’ money has gone into Crowns 
since the Devine PC (Progressive Conservative) years when the 
government of that day — when the government of that day — 
stripped equity from the Crowns and thus forced them to 
borrow. 
 
Now the members opposite don’t like that. And if they weren’t 
so sensitive about the Devine government, I don’t think they’d 
be yipping and yapping the way they are. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
reality is — the reality is, Mr. Speaker — that they have their 
associations with the Devine Conservatives. There’s no 
question about that. In fact the member from Estevan, who I can 
hear over the din, I think she was Grant Devine’s constituency 
assistant, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s who she was, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it’s true. It’s true. 
She was Grant Devine’s constituency assistant so she knows all 
about Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to make this point and this is 
important. Let’s take the Crown dividend paid last year and I 
believe it was $300 million. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 300 million 
helped pave 700 kilometres of highways. Because if you look at 
the budget for highways, that’s what about the budget for 
highways was, Mr. Speaker. Every dollar earned by Crowns 
that is surplus to the reinvestment and debt-servicing needs is a 
dividend dollar. And that’s money that goes into our provincial 
revenue or our gross or our General Revenue Fund which is 
important, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I could go on for some time on this issue but 
I’m sure we’ll have many opportunities to debate the roles of 
the Crown in the Legislative Assembly and it’ll be really 
curious to hear what the members opposite have to say about 
that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................439 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................439 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................440 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................440 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................440 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Seniors’ Curling Championships 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................440 
 Western Drag Racing Championship 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................440 
 Yorkton Harvest AAA Champions 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................440 
 Maple Creek Baseball Players 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................441 
 Film Industry in Saskatchewan 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................441 
 Humboldt Broncos Win Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Title 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................441 
 Reduction in Price for GreenPower 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................442 
 North Battleford’s Assyrian Community Celebrates Centennial 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................442 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Mega Bingo 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................442 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................442 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................443 
 Financial Support for College of Medicine 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................444 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................444 
 Government Priorities 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................445 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................446 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 13 – The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................446 
 Bill No. 14 – The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................446 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................447 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................447 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Agriculture Support Programs 
  Harpauer ...........................................................................................................................................................................447, 457 
  Hart ....................................................................................................................................................................................449, 457 
  Jones...................................................................................................................................................................................450, 457 
  Sonntag ..............................................................................................................................................................................451, 457 
  Bjornerud ..........................................................................................................................................................................453, 458 
  Serby ..................................................................................................................................................................................455, 457 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................456 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................457 



 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Value of Crown Corporations 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................458 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................465 
 
 
 
 


	Government Priorities
	Government Priorities

