















































Hansard: May 14, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1077 
 May 14, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of the people in my constituency who are really 
concerned about the high cost of education tax on property. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employees. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Englefeld, 
Wadena, and Watson. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon again on behalf of citizens in Moose Jaw and district 
concerned about the lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Moose Jaw and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again today I’m 
pleased to present a petition on behalf of the constituents of 
Cypress Hills and constituents from the communities next to my 
constituency. This has to do with the government’s reluctance 
to renew Crown grazing leases. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatories to this particular petition are from 
the communities of Claydon, Frontier, and Climax. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
deplorable and nearsighted lack of a hemodialysis unit in the 
city of Moose Jaw. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 

district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of people from the Estevan 
constituency who are very opposed to the huge increases in 
crop insurance premiums. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Benson. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Saskatchewan 
who are concerned about the land lease agreements that might 
be terminated by this government and that the lessees will not 
have the first option to renew. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Lake Alma, Weyburn, 
Goodwater, Alida, and Colgate. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise again with a petition from residents of 
southern Saskatchewan who have a concern about the huge area 
that has no access to adequate health services. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
Rockglen and Scout Lake. 
 
I so present. 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of farmers concerned with the rapid 
increase in the crop insurance premiums. And the prayers reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the best farmers in the province, 
from Eatonia, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents that are concerned 
with the condition of a section of Highway 22, that section 
between Junction No. 6 and Junction 20. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey and Strasbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the 2003 crop insurance premiums. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, Rabbit Lake, Glenbush, and Medstead. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order a petition presented May 
13, 2003 regarding property and school taxes has been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be irregular and 
therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and are hereby read and received as addendums to previously 
tabled petitions being sessional paper nos. 12, 13, 27, 36, 40, 

90, and no. 100. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
on day no. 44 I shall ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: during the 
month of November 2002, how much money did the 
Government of Saskatchewan spend on the Future is Wide 
Open television ads aired on television stations in 
Newfoundland? 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have just a number of similar questions 
with slight variations on the date and the location. And I’m 
pleased to present all of these questions to the minister. Thank 
you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, seated in the east gallery are 24 
young people from the Four Directions Childcare Services 
centre, which is located on the Muskowekwan First Nation. 
They are accompanied by five chaperones. The leader of the 
adult group is Mr. George Laliberte. 
 
This child care service, Mr. Speaker, is a new facility that has 
been put in place very recently and it deals with troubled youth 
between the ages of 12 and 17, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very 
pleased that they saw fit to come and visit us here today and I’m 
looking forward to meeting with them later. And I certainly 
hope that they — and I know they will — enjoy the 
proceedings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
your gallery is Ms. Laura Fellinger, who’s a student at the 
Faculty of Administration at the University of Regina. She has 
elected to complete the co-operative education option in the 
Bachelor of Administration degree program and is currently on 
a work term with the environmental assessment branch of 
Saskatchewan Environment in Regina. And accompanying 
Laura today are her two supervisors, Monica Krahe and Brent 
Bitter. 
 
And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to welcome Ms. 
Laura Fellinger here today. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well today it’s 
Rosetown Central High, the sequel. And oftentimes sequels are 
bigger than the first one. And at this time rather than 28 
students from Rosetown, we have 33 grade 8 students from 
Rosetown Central High. And as their MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), I am pleased to welcome them to our 
Assembly. I know all of the members will join me in that 
welcome. 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

 

They are accompanied by teachers Ken Boyd, Adele Smith, and 
Alysa Knowles; and by chaperones Cathy Longtin and Heather 
Marlowe. 
 
I have the opportunity to meet with these students after question 
period, and we’re going to get our picture taken and do a lot of 
good things. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask you and all members present to 
welcome the grade 8 class from Rosetown Central High to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as we all know in the 
Assembly here, our Pages are hard-working individuals, but we 
have one Page today who is under a little extra pressure because 
his grandparents and great-grandmother are here. 
 
And I’d like to introduce to all the members three familiar faces 
to our Page, Luke McWilliams, who come from the city of 
Moose Jaw. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Dr. Fred 
McWilliams, his wife Sonia McWilliams, and Luke’s 
great-grandmother, Mary Huly. 
 
And they’ve come because they’re very proud of the work that 
their grandson and great-grandson does to keep the operation of 
democracy going in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’d like us all to show a warm welcome to Luke 
McWilliams’s grandparents. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Wind Power in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, you get a sense that Saskatchewan’s future truly is 
wide open when you look at our government’s plans for wind 
power and the excitement that they’re generating across our 
province. 
 
Three years ago there were no wind power facilities in 
Saskatchewan. But today under our Premier’s leadership there 
are 26 wind turbines generating 17 megawatts of 
environmentally friendly electricity. 
 
This week SaskPower’s development arm, SaskPower 
International, is actively seeking expressions of interest from 
private sector partners to enter into joint venture arrangements 
with SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) as our 
government moves forward with plans to develop another 150 
megawatts of wind generation in our province. The deadline for 
responses, Mr. Speaker, from interested applicants, is June 16, 
2003. 
 
SaskPower International intends to select one or more parties 
for the joint ventures by September 2003, with plans calling for 
the first phase of the wind power expansion to commence as 
early as the 2004-2005 fiscal year. 
 

Mr. Speaker, our government is targeting to have all 150 
megawatts of wind power operational by March 2007, about the 
same amount of electricity as is required for 64,000 homes. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SABEX Awards 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night in Saskatoon, the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce and 
the Woman Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan recognized 
business excellence in Saskatoon and the district. And it was an 
event entitled Celebrate Success. And in particular it was an 
occasion to award the 2003 SABEX (Saskatoon Achievement 
in Business Excellence) awards. 
 
There were four especially distinctive awards, Mr. Speaker. The 
Athena Award, an award to recognize and celebrate women 
entrepreneurs. That winner went to Leanne Bellegarde Daniels. 
The Business of the Year Award was presented to Superior 
Cabinets which was also a SABEX award winner in the export 
category. The 2002 Hall of Fame inductee was Wright 
Construction Western Ltd., a very well-known family business 
in Saskatoon and this province. 
 
Other SABEX award winners were Independent Medical 
Rehabilitation, Pine View Farms, Centennial Plumbing, Heating 
and Electrical, Brainsport, Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority, Black Sun, Norampac, and Rawlco Radio; and 
finally, an award for innovation to Dr. Kailash Prasad. 
Congratulations to all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Last night in Saskatoon, a special gala event 
called Celebrate Success was held to present the annual SABEX 
awards. SABEX stands for Saskatoon Achievement in Business 
Excellence and the winners are 11 of the reasons Saskatoon’s 
economy is thriving and our future is wide open. 
 
(13:45) 
 
I want to point out at the beginning to all members that the 
Business of the Year Award went to Superior Cabinets, the 
local manufacturing company that supplies markets at home 
and in the western US (United States) and Alberta. 
 
I’m also happy to report that two award winners were found in 
my constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. Brian Michasiw of 
Brainsport on Broadway won for Marketing and Rawlco Radio 
was the Strategic Alliance winner for partnering a charity with a 
company. 
 
The other winners were Wayne Salloum of SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) for Community 
Involvement; Centennial Plumbing, Heating and Electrical for 
Customer Service; Black Sun, Inc. for Innovation; Norampac, 
Inc. took the Expansion and Growth Award; Pine View Farms 
owned by the Boldts of Osler won the award for New Product; 
Independent Medical Rehabilitation was the SABEX New 
Business Venture; Saskatoon’s Athena Award for professional 
excellence went to Leanne Bellegarde Daniels; and the 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

University of Saskatchewan Technologies Award of Innovation 
in Research was given to Kailash Prasad. 
 
My congratulations to all of these outstanding Saskatoon 
businesses and individuals who prove truly that our future is 
wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cluff Lake Mine Honoured 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Cluff Lake uranium mine was recently recognized as Canada’s 
safest metal mine during its last full year of operation. Cluff 
Lake, owned by COGEMA Resources, Inc., was presented with 
the prestigious John T. Ryan award by the Canadian Institute of 
Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum at its annual convention in 
Montreal, Monday, May 5, 2003. 
 
Cluff Lake had the lowest lost-time accident rate of any metal 
mine in the country. The mine reported zero incidents in a 
period that included 2001 and the first part of 2002, when Cluff 
Lake was finally mined out after 22 years of operation. 
 

“Winning a John T. Ryan Trophy is a major achievement in 
any year, but Cluff Lake did it while winding up its 
operations and with all the distractions that involved,” . . . 
(stated) Tim Gitzel, President and CEO of COGEMA.” 

 
Mr. Gitzel went on to say: 
 

“. . . Cluff Lake had some of its most productive years ever 
in 2001 and 2002 with zero accidents and reduced radiation 
exposure levels for its workers.” 

 
Saskatchewan’s uranium mines have a history of winning the 
John T. Ryan Trophy. Cluff Lake took the award in 1998, 
Cameco Corporation’s McArthur River mine won in 1999, 
while Cameco’s Rabbit Lake won in 2000. 
 
Congratulations to COGEMA Resources, the staff and 
management of the Cluff Lake mine during that period of time, 
and to the Saskatchewan uranium mining industry which 
continues to set national standards for mine safety and for the 
protection of our environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Orange Zone Challenge 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
was very pleased this morning to join the Minister of Highways 
over in my constituency in Regina South at Campbell 
Collegiate. The Department of Highways and Transportation, 
through the partnership with Campbell Collegiate, has 
encouraged students to enter a contest called the Orange Zone 
Challenge. 
 
This provided students with an opportunity to use their 
creativity to develop a 30-second television commercial, a 
30-second radio commercial, and a print advertisement. These 
are being used to make drivers aware of the need for safety in 
the Orange Zone, which of course are the construction areas. It 

also encourages them to obey the 60 kilometre per hour speed 
limit in that zone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winning submission came from a grade 10 
student at Campbell named Mark Laprairie. His submission 
features an animated example of what can happen when you’re 
speeding through that zone. 
 
Another part of his submission was a very unique fine 
calculator that allows you to figure out how much your fine will 
be depending on how fast you’re going in excess of the speed 
limit. I’ll tell you, I think all of us were a little surprised when 
we saw some of the numbers this morning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are also going to be using the creative material from Katrina 
Bray, who is a grade 12 student at Campbell who developed a 
very unique radio commercial and print advertisement, which is 
really quite remarkable — I think all members will agree when 
they see it. Both of these very effectively develop the message 
about staying the speed limit at 60. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project has allowed students to gain valuable 
experience and has allowed the department to gain creative 
advertising that’ll get the attention of young drivers. 
 
Again I would ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating these young students at Campbell Collegiate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future is Wide Open Promotions 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the past few 
weeks the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have been witness to a 
vast array of promotional gimmicks that this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government has put forward as part of their 
Future is Wide Open campaign. Over and over we’re seeing 
promotional ads on TV and the newspapers and other forms of 
media, at all taxpayers’ expense. 
 
Most recently the NDP have decided to purchase promotional 
items such as T-shirts, toques, and even golf balls. Now the 
Premier has indicated these items will be available to purchase 
but also be presented free of charge to visiting dignitaries or 
CEOs (chief executive officer) from outside Saskatchewan. 
Price for a dozen golf balls, according to yesterday’s 
Leader-Post, will cost $75; or if you qualify, we’re giving it to 
you free. 
 
Now The StarPhoenix has conducted a poll asking people if 
they would pay $75 for golf balls with the Future is Wide Open 
stamped on them — 4 per cent said yes, while a resounding 95 
per cent said no. 
 
I would like to inform the Premier that in the past I purchased 
promotional golf balls — good, quality golf balls — for much 
less than $75 per dozen, out of my own pocket. So I would like 
to present the Premier with the sleeve of my much more 
affordable Saskatchewan Party golf balls. Cost to the taxpayer, 
zero. 
 
And I’m sure the Premier will find that these Saskatchewan 
Party golf balls will go faster and further than the NDP 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

 

promotional golf balls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Bring it here. Speaker’s prerogative. 
 

Canada-Wide Science Fair 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, some of the brightest 
young minds in our province are representing Saskatchewan in 
a forum where ideas are presented and challenged. I take great 
pride and pleasure in announcing that 49 students from 12 
different Saskatchewan regions are currently competing at the 
annual Canada-Wide Science Fair that is being held in Calgary 
from May 11 to 16. 
 
I’m particularly pleased to say that Tamra Knaus and Ross 
Phillips of Lumsden High School, from my own constituency of 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, won their region for their project — 
Where Genomics Meet Cystic Fibrosis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these 49 students have already competed in 
regional science fairs across the province against more than 
1,500 other students and won the right to move on and compete 
against students all across the country. 
 
SaskEnergy/TransGas is the official sponsor of the 
Saskatchewan regional science fair program and further 
honours the talents of some of these students by awarding them 
the SaskEnergy/TransGas Special Achievement Award. 
 
These students and their peers are the future of Saskatchewan 
and, Mr. Speaker, the future of Saskatchewan is as wide open as 
the bright minds of these very talented young people. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in congratulating these 
budding scientists on their achievement so far, and in wishing 
them the best of luck in this week’s competition in Calgary. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Contract Negotiations with Medical Profession 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. Contract talks between the provincial 
government and the Saskatchewan doctors have pretty much 
stalled since the doctors rejected the latest offer from the 
province last weekend. And the frustration level is such that 
some doctors in the province are withdrawing their services — 
Meadow Lake yesterday and Swift Current this afternoon. 
 
However today the Saskatchewan Medical Association has said 
they’ve come up with some possible solutions that may address 
the problem of recruitment and retention of doctors in this 
province. They say the ideas are unique and they want the 
provincial government to seriously consider these options as a 
starting point to any future negotiations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the provincial government reviewing these 

options? And will the government agree to the SMA’s 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association) request that their ideas for 
recruitment and retention will be on the table when face-to-face 
negotiations resume? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes and yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice to get a 
clear answer from this government opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the frustration level of the province’s doctors is 
understandable given that the NDP has ignored issues such as 
retention and recruitment for these many, many years. The 
NDP’s inaction on what is a well-publicized shortage of 
physicians, of specialists, and other health care professionals 
across this province has pushed them to the breaking point. But 
fortunately our doctors are still willing to negotiate. In fact they 
are willing to put new and creative ideas on the table so that a 
settlement can be reached quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SMA is encouraged by the minister’s 
willingness to restart negotiations as early as tomorrow. 
However there are no plans in place, there’s been no 
communications, and no agenda set for the negotiations that are 
supposed to happen tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister communicate to the SMA 
quickly the agenda for the negotiations, the place and time, so 
that they can understand that this is indeed going forward? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, conversations are taking 
place with the SMA on a regular basis and they will continue 
until we resolve this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Our Future is Wide Open Campaign 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. When the NDP first announced their Future is 
Wide Open campaign, the budget was $2 million. But now we 
find out that the NDP have spent well over $1 million of those 
taxpayers’ dollars in the last month and this month, Mr. 
Speaker. In April and May they spent over $1 million on TV, 
radio, print advertising in their pre-election campaign — $1 
million in those two months alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the budget now for the Future is Wide 
Open campaign, and how many more taxpayers’ dollars are the 
NDP going to spend in their desperation to buy support from 
Saskatchewan voters? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there is a song 
that goes, accentuate the positive and eliminate the negative. 
 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And many people have been telling the 
Government of Saskatchewan and chambers of commerce 
actually for several years that what we need to do in 
Saskatchewan is to tell the people of Saskatchewan and to tell 
the people of Canada and the world about all of the great things 
that are happening in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re doing. And just 
referring to a news report on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) on Monday, there was an interview of people 
about this campaign. The opposition has raised it. 
 
The first Saskatoon resident said, just the imagery, it shows a 
lot about Saskatchewan; I think it’s pretty cool. The second one 
said, I like the variety — there’s youth and some older people 
and so on; I like that because it gets to the heart of what we 
really are here. And the third one said, I think they’re good; I 
think any kind of promotion to lift morale in Saskatchewan is 
wonderful. 
 
And what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is telling people about how 
wonderful Saskatchewan is. And we invite the opposition to 
join us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that 
the minister said that it’s about selling Saskatchewan to the 
people because this campaign is designed supposedly to bring 
investment and people to this province — which begs the 
question, Mr. Speaker: why is most of the advertising dollars 
being spent in Saskatchewan instead of outside Saskatchewan? 
In April and May alone they spent over 1 million taxpayers’ 
dollars on a pre-election campaign, of which $600,000 was 
spent in this province, Mr. Speaker, not outside. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this campaign is really about attracting people 
and investments from other provinces and other countries to this 
province, why is the majority of the taxpayers’ dollars being 
spent in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, anyone who has ever been 
involved in sales knows that to sell something you have to feel 
positive about it yourself. And what we have in this Legislative 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker, is evidence that there are at least some 
people in the province who are not aware of all of the good 
things happening in Saskatchewan — people that are not aware 
of the 12,900 new jobs in the last year, not aware that we have 
Canada’s only synchrotron, not aware of our growing 
manufacturing sector. Mr. Speaker, there are people right in this 
Legislative Chamber that are not aware of all of those things. 
They’re all sitting over there. 
 
But what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is following the advice of 
people like the Meadow Lake Progress who says, “Blowing up 
Saskatchewan’s ego — why not?” And that’s what we say, Mr. 
Speaker. Why not be positive for a change? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(14:00) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister is 
quoting from some newspapers. I’d like to quote from a 
newspaper — February 24, 1988, and I quote: 
 

Calvert accuses the PC government of spending precious 
money on advertising programs that should be diverted to 
job creation and stimulating the economy.  

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the money is being spent in Saskatchewan, 
not outside. But there is some, Mr. Speaker, that is being spent 
outside in Mexico. 
 
This morning a friend of mine gave me a Future is Wide Open 
pen and he pointed out that it’s made by the BIC Corporation in 
Mexico. I used this pen in preparing this question, Mr. Speaker, 
which is as follows: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Spanish.) 
 
It writes in Spanish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How much money is the NDP spending on its taxpayer-funded 
pre-election campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
approximately 326,000 Canadians who read The Globe and 
Mail learned about this great province through The Globe and 
Mail coast to coast. This week I have been handed a copy of the 
Maclean’s magazine, the Maclean’s magazine which features 
the Cypress Hills Park as one of Canada’s great eight escapes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This week I was handed a copy of a 
magazine by DaimlerChrysler that features Saskatchewan as its 
prominent story. And last night my research wing on South 
Albert, down here in Regina, tells me — believe it or not — 
Saskatchewan was featured on Jeopardy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across the nation, across the continent, and across 
the province people are excited about the future of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that compares, that compares with the 
member, who has stood on his feet today in this House, and said 
when we initiated this Wide Open Future campaign, this man 
says, this is snake oil. This is the man who would describe the 
province of Saskatchewan as snake oil. He should apologize. 
He should get his leader and his caucus to get on board with the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of McLean Trans-Canada Campground 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Environment. It looks like the 
NDP has weaved its magic once again. This time the 
government has driven an entrepreneur from the town of 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

 

McLean out of business. 
 
For the past eight years Annette Jardine has operated the 
McLean Trans-Canada Campground. The campground was 
leased to Annette by the provincial government and for many 
years Annette has been trying to buy the campground from the 
government. But after years of frustration with NDP roadblocks 
and bureaucratic red tape, Annette finally terminated her lease. 
Now the campground and Annette’s businesses are both closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the NDP supposed 
wide open future is driving this person out of business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, our provincial park 
system in this province is one of the greatest treasures this 
province has ever had, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue 
investing in that positive development of this great 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But what I will say is this, Mr. Speaker. I’ll say this. For the 
past eight years we have been working with a number of lessees 
including the Jardines, and we have told them we will work 
very closely with you. And we have worked very closely with 
them over the last eight years, Mr. Speaker. And this party has 
done a wonderful job. They’ve generated revenues of over 
50,000 or approximately 50,000 per year as a result of the 
McLean lake site. 
 
Today now I can say, Mr. Speaker, this government has worked 
with them and each year we have charged them just over $500, 
over the last five years, to use that particular site to try and help 
develop a tourism opportunity and to help build up the 
economy, and to up entrepreneurial spirit of this province — 
$500 over the past five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — That non-answer from the minister tells the 
people of Saskatchewan two things: that the NDP wallet may be 
wide open for multi-million dollar investments in Atlanta and in 
Nashville but it sure isn’t open for business right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In NDP Saskatchewan the door for 
small business is slammed shut by that minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Annette Jardine says she has been working for 
four . . . for years to buy the McLean campground but the NDP 
has refused to make any regulatory changes to make this sale 
possible, Mr. Speaker, and the NDP has refused to give Annette 
a final price on the campground land. So now Annette Jardine 
has thrown in the towel and shut the campground business for 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP drive Annette Jardine out of 
business and close the McLean Trans-Canada Campground? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Once again I will point out, in 2001 we 
sent a lease bill of $560 to use 130 acres and a number of 
facilities at McLean lake. This was intended to make sure that 
the lessee continued appreciating the fact that we had a good 

opportunity here and that we’re prepared to work with this 
particular business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, when that party 
across the way criticizes some of the efforts we’re trying to 
undertake to promote a good park system in this province, they 
have to also understand that we’re trying to drive up the 
entrepreneurial spirit as well. 
 
Now what happens now, when the Crown Investments 
Corporation wants to sit down and talk to the member from the 
Battleford-Cut Knife and says, hey let’s develop a tourism 
opportunity by having this spa, and what does that member of 
the opposition say? The Saskatchewan Party, the Leader of the 
Opposition says no. No investment. No investment whatsoever. 
 
So if you want to stand up here and talk about no investment in 
the tourism opportunity, well we’ll take you on, on your record, 
any day over our record on this side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what this minister doesn’t 
understand is his decisions or non-decisions to sell this 
campground affect many more businesses in the area. 
 
The owner of the bar and restaurant in McLean says his 
business relies on people that stay in this campground. Ron 
McMillan says that the closure of Annette Jardine’s 
campground business may cause him to close his own business 
in McLean because of lack of business. Another local business 
owner, Angie Singbeil, also says that the closure of the 
campground will hurt her gas station. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has driven Annette Jardine out of 
business with government red tape and bureaucratic roadblocks. 
Now another two businesses are worried about their own 
survival in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because of decisions or 
lack of decisions by that minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister reopen that file and look at 
selling that property to people that are looking at buying it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government is very 
proud of their investment into the provincial parks system. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, I can go through a list of some of the 
improvements that we’ve made, but I won’t do this because I 
want to make a message pointing to the business people that 
man . . . that member makes reference to. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is spreading doom and gloom, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to tell mister gloom himself this. Number 
one is that we are very proud of some of the entrepreneurial 
spirit of this province; we are very proud of our parks. We’ll 
continue trying to marry the two and there’s some good 
successful stories out there to be told, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in reference to the two business communities that he has 
mentioned, is we are going to readvertise in the hopes that we 
can reopen that park and see if we can find another lessee. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, we’ve advertised for the past three and a half 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

weeks, and sometimes in April, and we never had no interest 
whatsoever. 
 
We’re working with the RM (rural municipality), with the town 
to try and see if there’s interest there, Mr. Speaker, and we 
haven’t got no interest expressed whatsoever. 
 
But that has not deterred us, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
readvertise, we’re going to re-examine, and we hope to reopen 
that thing very soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier this week I asked the minister what he was doing to deal 
with the dispute between the First Nations and the federal 
government that could result in water levels on the lakes in the 
Qu’Appelle River chain to decline by more than a metre or 
more, Mr. Speaker, which would be devastating to the local 
economies of dozens of communities. And his answer was, I 
think we sent a couple of letters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP seems to be more busy . . . more worried 
about buying $75 a dozen golf balls than it does about the 
economic futures of towns like Fort Qu’Appelle, Lebret, and 
B-Say-Tah.  
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, we get the same response about the 
McLean campground. It’s quite interesting, they sent out a news 
release today: 2003 officially opens the Saskatchewan 
provincial parks — unless you happen to be in McLean, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this minister is continuing to devastate small 
businesses around this province. What will he do to guarantee 
that McLean campground will open for people that want to use 
it this summer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, for the last four years, we 
have worked with the regional park system and put $2 million 
to help work with the Regional Parks Association, Mr. Speaker. 
We have continually improved the improvements or seen 
improvements throughout our provincial park system overall. 
 
And I would say something, Mr. Speaker, to captain gloom over 
there and his leader, doctor doom. That’s the reason why the 
Saskatchewan people will never support the Saskatchewan 
Party because they’re all negative and they whine and they 
moan with no solutions. 
 
And I’ll say again today, Mr. Speaker, that each year we have 
. . . This past 2001 we’ve got $530 in lease fees in reference to 
the lease at the McLean rec site. And we know the challenge of 
some of the small entrepreneurs in trying to make it happen and 
make it work. 
 
And I will point this out, Mr. Speaker — we’ll continue 
respecting the small entrepreneurs, we will readvertise for a 
lease, and we’ll work with the business community in that area 
to try and mitigate this particular challenge when it comes to the 
rec site in question. 

Freedom of Information Request 
Regarding Mega Bingo 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP cover-up of $8 million 
mega bingo scandal continues. CBC Radio recently requested a 
freedom of information request asking for documentation 
related to the mega bingo project and the tendering of the work. 
The NDP government has now responded, saying it will take 
562 hours to compile this information and they want $18,000 
for their efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely ridiculous. Will the minister 
order his officials to waive this ridiculous charge and turn over 
the information requested under the freedom of information 
Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, it’s evident, and it’s 
becoming more evident to the people of this province, those 
folks over there have no idea what goes on. And they could care 
less, they could care less because, Mr. Speaker, SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) frequently and 
regularly processes freedom of information requests. 
 
All the requests are handled in accordance with The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act — for the member 
from Weyburn; I want her to hear this. The Act allows 
government organizations to charge for the cost of preparing 
and reviewing records and for photocopying requested records. 
Mr. Speaker, these costs are all laid out by the Act — $15 per 
half hour of time, the first two hours are at no cost. 
 
I hear the Leader of the Opposition hollering, cover-up. Well let 
me just say to that member, Mr. Speaker, that strong and bitter 
words indicate a weak cause. And that’s all they have over 
there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, if the NDP, if the NDP had spent 
562 hours looking at the mega bingo project before they went 
into it, they probably would have not lost 8 million taxpayers’ 
dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I can’t understand why it would take 562 
hours to compile the information on mega bingo when the NDP 
spent exactly zero hours writing a business plan and zero hours 
getting cabinet approval. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government spent 8 million taxpayers’ dollars 
without a business plan, without cabinet approval, without due 
diligence, that now the people of Saskatchewan want answers. 
But what does the NDP do? They cover up. Mr. Speaker, what 
is the NDP trying to hide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this self-righteous 
indignation is frightening, Mr. Speaker, coming from those 
members. 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 
bases its time estimate on the number of pages involved in the 
request, including the time to search records, read records, and 
sever protected information. This doesn’t happen just overnight. 
Obviously they have no idea of what doing research is all about. 
 
They don’t do any research, Mr. Speaker. They come in here 
with fabricated stories and embellished comments about people 
on government and our civil servants and continue to attack 
them about hiding things. Nothing’s hidden, Mr. Speaker. All 
their questions are answered through their questions that they 
present in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, 8 million taxpayers’ dollars have 
been lost on the NDP’s botched bingo scheme. That money 
could have been used for a lot better purposes like maybe 
settling the doctors’ dispute in Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have been demanding answers 
about the bingo scandal for almost two months, Mr. Speaker. 
The NDP spent zero time on a business plan. They spent zero 
time on cabinet approval. The pattern of this government is 
alarming — cover up, no answers, and no accountability. Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister, what is your government hiding and 
who are you trying to protect? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, if the opposition is so 
adamant about obtaining that information, they can certainly 
advance the $18,000 to SLGA. 
 
This is an operation that was underway for a year and a half. It 
was implemented over a four-year period, Mr. Speaker. There 
are all kinds of records and documentations and board reports 
and on and on. And they are available. But it takes time for 
people to sit down, review, and as I mentioned, sever anything 
that needs to be protected under the protection of privacy Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one thing that I know for sure, if those . . . if 
the Saskatchewan Party was ever in power, you’d never get any 
information from anybody because they’d privatize those folks 
and they wouldn’t be able to . . . you . . . nobody would be able 
to access anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan told the people of Saskatchewan, after the 
minister responsible for SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) told the people that he had misled 
them for 6 years, the Premier said, and I quote: 
 

If and when mistakes are made the public is deserving of 
both explanation and accounting. 

 
He further went on to say in the same statement: 
 

The government has learned from decisions . . . (made) six 

years ago. 
 
This was on February 17, Mr. Speaker, of this year. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it appears that the Premier’s commitment of open and 
accountability was short-lived. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, will 
he today release all requested information? Will he come clean 
on the mega bingo scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, once again, if those members 
wish to obtain that information, the cost has been costed out. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s there, nobody’s covering anything up. They 
don’t appreciate or even consider the amount of time it would 
take to go over the number of suppliers the year and a half it 
was in business, the four-year implementation program, Mr. 
Speaker, requests, electronic records, and on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all freedom of information requests are handled 
the same way whether they come from the public, members of 
the media, or from the opposition. No one is treated any 
differently, Mr. Speaker. And we’re happy to supply any of that 
information through the freedom of information, and anybody 
that’s not happy with the responses, they have the option to 
appeal to the Information and Privacy Commissioner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day I’d like to ask leave of the Assembly to introduce a number 
of routine motions. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Annual Report to the 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library as 
tabled in the present session be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Communication. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move as well, 
seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the retention and disposal schedules approved under 
The Archives Act by the Public Documents Committee as 
tabled in the present session be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Communication. 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, folks. 
 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move as well, 
seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 
as tabled intersessionally and in the present session be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Bylaws of Professional Associations to the 
Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move as well that 
the bylaws of the . . . seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
North again: 
 

That the bylaws of the professional associations and 
amendments thereto as tabled in the present session be 
referred to the Special Committee on Regulations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Estimates and Supplementary Estimates Referred to the 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, and I know 
the member from Moose Jaw North will as well like to second 
this motion: 
 

That the estimates for the Legislative Assembly, vote 21; 
the Provincial Auditor, vote 28; the Chief Electoral Officer, 
vote 34; the Information and Privacy Commissioner, vote 
55; the Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate, vote 56; the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner, vote 57; as well as the 
supplementary estimates for the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, vote 55, be withdrawn from the Committee 
of Finance and referred to the Standing Committee on 
Estimates. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased this 
afternoon to stand on behalf of the government and convert 
questions 257 to 264 inclusive to debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — 257 . . . Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. I would ask the Government Whip to repeat the 
numbers, please. Repeat. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll convert for debates returnable 
no. 257 through 264 inclusive. 
 

The Speaker: — 257 to 264 inclusive converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to provide answers to written questions no. 265 and 266. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 265, 266 have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Health 
Information Protection Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, the 
protection of personal health information is important to every 
citizen in this province. Personal privacy is something we all 
expect from the health care system. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people also want their 
health care providers to have all of the information they need to 
make the best possible decisions with respect to patient care. 
Mr. Speaker, people give their personal health information to 
heath care providers because they trust those providers to keep 
that information private and to use it only when appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a growing need for more and more 
personal health information in the health care system today. The 
volume of individual’s health information increases as we have 
access to more tests and treatments, and so does the demand on 
the health care system continue to more effectively exchange 
information. 
 
Improved communication between health care providers allows 
for faster diagnosis and more effective treatment. As technology 
improves, our ability to share health information increases. 
Therefore it is all the more important that we must ensure that 
individual patient privacy is protected. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, we introduced The Health 
Information Protection Act in 1999. This Act sets the ground 
rules for protecting personal health information. It is designed 
to safeguard the privacy of people’s health information while 
ensuring that health care providers are able to share information 
as needed in order to give the highest quality health care. 
 
Since the introduction of The Health Information Protection Act 
in 1999, we have worked closely with our partners in the health 
care system in extensive consultations on the Act. Our goal has 
been to achieve the right balance between the need for personal 
privacy and the need for timely, accessible health information 
to be used by our health care professionals. 
 
During the extensive consultations since 1999, our health care 
partners identified certain issues. They felt that health care 
professionals might not be able to easily access, use, and share 
important information during the treatment of their patients. 
 
Last winter, the winter of 2001-2002, a formal consultation 
document on the amendments was distributed to the 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network, the Saskatchewan 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

 

Medical Association, the regional health authorities’ chief 
executive officers and the Chairs of their boards, the health 
professional regulatory bodies, the Saskatchewan Association 
of Health Organizations and its affiliates, deputy ministers of 
government departments, other government institutions, unions, 
as well as other stakeholders and people across the province. 
 
We heard and acknowledged their comments, Mr. Speaker, and 
decided that the best course of action was to amend The Health 
Information Protection Act. The result is the Bill before you 
today. 
 
We resolved the issues that would clarify and strengthen the 
Act while being true to its original intent. Mr. Speaker, we will 
now have a strong piece of legislation to effectively support the 
delivery of quality health care services for people across 
Saskatchewan while maintaining the right to privacy and the 
protection of personal health information. We are adding 
protection for personal health information and we are ensuring 
that strong, consistent rules are in place throughout the health 
care system for that information. 
 
With these amendments, The Health Information Protection Act 
will require health care providers and others entrusted with 
personal health information to collect, use, and disclose 
personal health information only as necessary and in accordance 
with strict policy and procedures consistent with the Act to 
protect the integrity and accuracy and confidentiality of 
personal health information, and to provide security for 
personal health information, and to have policies and 
procedures in place about retention and destruction of personal 
health information. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the event that a comprehensive electronic 
health record is created, The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act ensures that patients will have the power to 
block access to their personal health information once that 
system is in place. 
 
Organizations that contract with others for information 
management services for personal health information must enter 
into binding legal agreements to ensure that health information 
is kept secure and private. Current levels of information 
protection are being maintained or strengthened. Health care 
professionals will have access to the information they need to 
provide the best possible services. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Failure to live up to the Act’s requirements could result in stiff 
penalties, including imprisonment and fines up to $50,000 for 
an individual or $500,000 for a corporation. 
 
Patients will be better informed about the use of their personal 
health information and will have more confidence in the 
integrity of the system. They can bring their concerns regarding 
personal health information to the attention of the Information 
and Privacy Commissioner. 
 
This amended Act, Mr. Speaker, provides Saskatchewan with 
an excellent privacy framework which will enhance and 
improve the confidentiality surrounding personal health 
information in Saskatchewan. 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Health Information Protection Amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege to respond to the second reading of The Health 
Information Protection Amendment Act, Bill No. 28. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was listening to the minister talk about this 
Bill and the importance of the Bill, I couldn’t help but thinking 
of how vulnerable all of us are when we put all that information 
in the hands of certain people. I think, Mr. Speaker, that we just 
take it for granted maybe sometimes that that information is 
secure, that only the people that are supposed to see it will see 
it, Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately that maybe hasn’t always 
been the case and that’s the need for some amendments to this 
Bill. 
 
There have been situations, I think, in the past . . . And I know I 
have dealt with in my own constituency, issues dealing with 
health information. And it’s personal information. You want it 
to be confidential. 
 
I’ve dealt with it through a couple of different ways. I had one 
person that contacted my constituency and the doctor was no 
longer around and he had no access. He couldn’t access his 
health information. I mean it was so, I guess, tight that he 
couldn’t get the information that the doctor had had, had no — I 
guess he hadn’t been to the doctor for a long time — had no 
record of where the doctor went. And it was maybe on the flip 
side of what this Bill is talking about. But often, Mr. Speaker, 
we tend to take for granted where that information goes and 
who has accessibility to that information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think this certainly is timely in the events of what has 
happened over the last month or so with some information — 
health information — from a doctor here in Regina that didn’t 
dispose of the information correctly, Mr. Speaker. And that 
really brings to light the possibility for all of us of what could 
happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m certainly glad that these amendments are going to 
protect the information, health information, because as I said, 
it’s personal information that I don’t think any one of us . . . 
regardless of how clean of a health record we have or whether 
we’ve had health problems, should fall into hands of people that 
don’t deserve to see those records, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this time there are . . . this is a very major issue as far as 
health information. There are a number of players that we 
would like to consult with. The minister talked of the number of 
people, organizations that they have dealt with regarding this 
Bill. 
 
But there are other organizations and just private people, 
individuals that I know myself would like to pass this Bill by 
and see if it would meet with their requirements, if they would 
feel comfortable with this legislation covering this very, very 
important piece of legislation regarding health information, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So until we’re able to consult with those parties, Mr. Speaker, I 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Cities Amendment Act, 2003. The Cities Act 
provides a legislative framework through which Saskatchewan 
cities exercise their powers and provide services. 
 
In the spring of 2002 legislative session, government passed 
Bill 75, The Cities Act — new legislation for Saskatchewan 
cities, Mr. Speaker. This Act was subsequently proclaimed to 
come into force January 1, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all Saskatchewan cities, with the exception of 
Lloydminster which operates under a separate charter, passed 
resolutions to come under jurisdiction of the new Act on 
January 1, 2003. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Cities Amendment Act. These amendments are a result of 
the ongoing consultation with the cities as The Cities Act is 
being implemented, and will serve to strengthen the legislation. 
 
I am pleased, truly pleased that our respective officials have 
been able to continue to work together to refine the provisions 
of The Cities Act. Jointly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been able to lay 
the legislative foundation necessary to increase the autonomy of 
municipalities and to reflect the principles advocated by the 
cities while meeting the objectives of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province is very much committed to increasing 
municipal autonomy and reducing provincial involvement in 
governance of our cities where there is no overriding provincial 
interest. We recognize that Saskatchewan city governments are 
in the best position to make local decisions for the benefit of all 
of the residents. The Cities Act, Mr. Speaker, is a further 
extension and recognition of this commitment. 
 
The Act modernizes the relationship between the province and 
the cities. It enables city governments to encourage initiatives 
and creativity, and provides citizens with better, more 
accountable local government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, the Act introduced the principles of 
natural person powers and areas of jurisdiction into the 
municipal legislative landscape while at the same time 
incorporating the important elements of our current urban 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments in the Bill have been requested 
by the cities, as is almost always the case with a new Act. As 
the city administration has set about implementing the new 
provisions, various issues, questions, and gaps have arisen. This 
Bill seeks to solve those problems, Mr. Speaker, and in the 
process both speed up and enhance the implementation of this 
Act. 
 
The amendments include changes to the definition of control 
corporation, newspaper, street, and capital property, and a new 
definition for assessor. Also includes additions to the list of 

matters which cannot be delegated by councils to include 
limiting or prohibiting a business or class of business and 
exempting property from taxes; clarification regarding the point 
at which public notice is to be given in relation to when a 
council considers certain bylaws and matters; and the 
consolidation of most of the requirements for public notice into 
one section of the Act. 
 
It also gives clarification of wording in provisions relating to 
petition requirements, injunctions, and collection of service fees 
to remove potential conflicts with other provisions of the Act 
regarding these matters, and to restore wording from The Urban 
Municipality Act, 1984 and the applicability of The Local 
Government Election Act regarding votes on questions put to 
the electors. 
 
And finally, new provisions regarding vacancies on council, 
changes to council members’ public disclosure statement, the 
disposition of city land and buildings, unclaimed property, and 
special assessments, consistent with similar provisions in the 
other municipal Acts. 
 
A second group of amendments relate primarily to assessment 
provisions and include wording changes and corrections to 
ensure consistency between The Cities Act and other municipal 
Acts. In addition these amendments change the period over 
which property tax change due to reassessment may be phased 
in to four years. This change ensures that a phase-in process 
will not extend beyond a single reassessment cycle. 
 
Another amendment ensures that notification of property sales 
by owners and vendors is provided in accordance with the sales 
verification form being developed by the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency. The amendment related to 
sales verification form ensures that the form developed by 
SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) is 
used to notify assessors and the agency when property is sold. 
 
Sales verification forms will be used by SAMA and other 
assessing authorities to collect data on selected property sales 
transactions throughout the province. This data, Mr. Speaker, 
will assist in keeping the assessment system up to date and will 
enable SAMA to do a more effective job in determining which 
sales should be used for the calculation of the market 
adjustment factors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of working in partnership with our 
stakeholders, department officials have undertaken extensive 
consultation with the cities to both identify the provisions that 
needed amending and to develop suitable alternatives. Through 
this process and during the review of drafts of the Bill, a 
number of additional needed amendments were brought forward 
by the cities. Mr. Speaker, other consultations included the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, legal counsel, 
and other relevant groups such as SAMA. 
 
The direct consultation have proven to be a good basis for 
establishing consensus on policy direction and the wording of 
amendments. 
 
These amendments, Mr. Speaker, continue to strengthen the 
authority and flexibility of city government, further the process 
to ensure that cities are more accountable to the residents and 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

 

taxpayers as opposed to being held accountable to the 
provincial government. 
 
Our cities, Mr. Speaker, have a great deal to offer in terms of 
social, cultural, and economic development in this great 
province of Saskatchewan. We have listened to the city 
officials’ requests to modernize the legislation they are 
governed by. 
 
And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second 
reading of Bill No. 23, The Cities Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is an amendment to an Act that was first brought 
forward last year and there are considerable new pieces to this 
piece of legislation — lots of amendments, lots of corrections, 
lots of changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You would almost think that The Cities Act was struck as a 
brand new piece of legislation dealing with something that we 
knew nothing about and we were just sort of feeling our way in 
the dark and trying to develop a new program. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had cities in this province for the last 
100 years, and they have been governed, Mr. Speaker. There 
was a governance form for them. There was a system in place. 
And surely the transfer should have been made relatively easily 
from the system in place prior to The Cities Act, such that it 
wouldn’t need this amount of correction the very first year after. 
 
Things change over time and certainly that’s acceptable. And as 
things change, then you need to adjust the rules and regulations 
under which an entity operates because the circumstances have 
changed. But in this particular case, the Bill’s only a year old 
and yet this is one of the major pieces of legislation being 
brought forward by this government in this session, and it’s 
corrections, Mr. Speaker, on mistakes and errors and omissions 
that they made last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister was talking about sales identification 
forms and that these forms would be sent to SAMA so that the 
tax forms could be set out properly, the assessments could be 
made formally, properly to the new owner. 
 
He might also consider sending it to ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) because they seem to have a 
great deal of difficulty in tracking the sales of pieces of property 
in this province. They can’t get the names right, they can’t get 
the numbers right, they just . . . It’s just a mess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would suggest to the minister that he also include sending 
the information to ISC that there’s a new owner on this piece of 
property and here’s what it was sold for, Mr. Speaker. And they 
have to be especially careful, especially careful, that they get 
the name right on it, Mr. Speaker, because ISC can’t figure it 
out if they don’t have the name right. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of other little items here that I 
noticed in this Bill in listening to the minister and that is going 

to need some explanation to it. They’re changing one of the 
requirements from 30 days to 21. 
 
And I note that this government takes a long time in providing 
services and answers. The fact is one of the questions that was 
asked was going to take 560-some hours, roughly 90 days, to 
provide an answer. And yet they’re cutting down the time 
requirements on this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Now I don’t know exactly what it’s about because this is a new 
piece of legislation and we need time to look into this. But in 
reducing that time I wonder as to the reasons for it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In clause no. 50, they talk about no tax phase-in plan 
established pursuant to subsection 1 is to be extended. And you 
need to take a look at this, Mr. Speaker, as to what is this piece 
of legislation going to do. 
 
There are circumstances within the cities where they provide 
tax exemptions to get a certain area developed, Mr. Speaker, 
because they want industry in a particular area. They want to 
develop residential properties in a certain area and they provide 
some tax incentives to do that, some exemptions, Mr. Speaker. 
So you need to be careful in making these kind of changes as to 
what kind of a long-term impact is it going to have on a city’s 
urban development projects and their plan. 
 
In another clause it talks about a peace officer or designated 
officer may destroy any animal that he or she finds injured. And 
that reminded me of a case that took place in the US here a few 
weeks ago where there was an injured dog and the police officer 
came along and shot the dog, Mr. Speaker, that was supposedly 
injured, threw it in a deep freeze for two hours, and when they 
opened up the deep freeze the dog was still alive and is still 
alive today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when officers do find those kind of circumstances, they need 
to make sure that the animal is actually injured in the first place 
and that, if they do proceed to destroy the animal, that they do it 
in a humane and quick manner, Mr. Speaker, that actually 
works. In this particular case it didn’t work and I can say that it 
was considerable embarrassment to the police agency that was 
involved. And considerable chagrin to the owner of the dog, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then we get down to the last page of this particular Bill, and I 
think there must be something subversive going on here, Mr. 
Speaker, because it’s certainly not clear actually what is being 
done. Because it says, under clause 69: 
 

in clause (d) by striking out “city” and substituting 
“city,”; 

 
In clause (b) it says: 
 

in clause (f) by striking out “The Cities Act” and 
substituting “The Cities Act,”; . . . 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not exactly sure what the minister is doing 
here. He’s taking out one word and putting the exact same word 
back into the clause again. 
 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

So I’m not sure how many hours it took the minister or his staff 
to figure this out but maybe they should have spent some of that 
time providing the answers to the questions we were asking 
today. Mr. Speaker, that would have been much more 
productive than changing the word city to the word city; or the 
word The Cities Act to The Cities Act. And that’s not the only 
clause where they’re doing this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think the minister has a lot of answering to do, and we need 
to take a very serious look and talk to the stakeholders about 
this particular Act. We need to talk to the city people of Regina, 
Saskatoon, and all of the other cities in Saskatchewan to 
determine exactly what the minister is doing here and what kind 
of an impact it’s going to have on the citizens and the 
jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, of our cities. 
 
So I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again to move the 
second reading of The Northern Municipalities Amendment 
Act, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Northern Municipalities Act provides a 
legislative framework through which northern municipalities 
exercise their powers and provide services. The amendments 
presented today, Mr. Speaker, concern property assessment 
matters and include provision for a simplified assessment 
appeal process for taxpayers, as introduced in The Cities Act. 
 
These amendments are being introduced in order to keep 
Northern Municipalities Act provisions consistent with those in 
other municipal Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment related to the sales verification 
form ensures that the form developed by SAMA is used to 
notify assessors and the agency when property is sold and, upon 
the request for such information by SAMA or where a northern 
municipality undertakes its own valuations and revaluations, the 
municipalities’ assessor. 
 
The sales verification form will be used by SAMA to collect 
data on property sales transactions in the province. This data, 
Mr. Speaker, will assist in keeping the assessment system up to 
date, and will enable SAMA to do a more effective job in 
determining which sales should be used for the calculation of 
market adjustment factors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Cities Act includes a simplified appeal 
process that appellants may choose for property assessments. 
Provisions have been added to introduce this mechanism in all 
of our municipal Acts. 
 
Some property owners may choose to opt for the simplified 
process because they feel that the regular appeal process is too 
onerous. The simplified process provides for a one-person 
appeal board appointed from the members of a board of 
revision, and at the appellant’s option may be used for all 
single-family residential properties, regardless of assessed 

value, and any property with an assessed value under $250,000. 
 
An appellant, if not satisfied with the decision of the one-person 
board, would still have the right to further appeal to the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the maximum phase-in period over which changes 
in property taxes resulting from a revaluation may be phased in 
will be amended to match the four-year assessment cycle. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, municipalities that use phase-in are 
implementing tax increases or decreases over a three- or 
four-year period. No municipalities will be impacted as a result 
of changing the phase-in time to four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consultations on the 2003 proposed amendments 
were carried out by Government Relations and Aboriginal 
Affairs, and involved sharing drafting instructions with 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Northern Communities, and the 
Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account Management Board. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, afforded each organization the opportunity 
to analyze the proposed amendments in greater detail. The 
direct consultations have proven to be a good way of 
developing consensus on policy, policy direction and the 
wording of amendments. So, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
move second reading of Bill No. 24, The Northern 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the changes that are taking place in The 
Northern Municipalities Act are some of the same changes that 
are taking place in The Cities Act as well. And the sales 
verification form is one of those items that is likely in all four of 
the municipal Bills that are coming forward. 
 
And I think the criticisms that I applied in The Cities Act that 
ISC, the land titles project, should be notified as well so that 
they can get the names right, they can get the values right, they 
can get the property description down properly should be sent 
to them as well as to SAMA because we’ve already noted the 
difficulties that ISC has in running the province’s land title 
system. 
 
It takes a horrendous amount of time at a horrendous cost to do 
the land titles work that was done so simply before, Mr. 
Speaker. And so any additional information that ISC can 
possibly gain will be of benefit to them and could only — to use 
the word enhance is maybe a little strong for ISC — would 
certainly benefit them in providing some service to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m concerned though about the change that the minister is 
proposing on the phase-in for tax exemptions, Mr. Speaker, 
because I don’t know exactly what has happened across the 
North on this particular issue, but I do know that in the city of 
Regina they have a tax regime in place that allows for a 
five-year phase-in of the property taxes on certain 
developments. And if the minister is changing this to only 
provide a four-year exemption, that means that the city of 
Regina is going to have to change some of its policies as to the 
development of some of the residential areas and perhaps some 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

 

of the industrial areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate on 
this particular Bill at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — I just would like to clarify for all members 
that the second reading speech that was given by the Minister of 
Government Relations was for Bill 24, and the motion was for 
Bill 24, item 2. And the motion now is by the member for 
Cannington that we adjourn debate on Bill 24. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move 
second reading of The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 
2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, similar to The Urban Municipality Amendment 
Act, 2003, this Act is being amended to increase local 
decision-making authority, provide further clarity for certain 
terms, and create greater consistency between the municipal 
Acts. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, amendments proposed in this Bill 
change the time period for property tax phase-in from six to 
four years. The new time period coincides with the period of 
time between re-evaluations. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the sales verification form being 
developed by the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency, or SAMA, will be used as with the urban 
municipalities to ensure that the data provided for property 
assessment purposes by owners and vendors of property is 
consistent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a significant addition to the Bill will change when 
the term of office for rural council members commences. With 
this change, Mr. Speaker, council members’ term of office will 
now begin at the first meeting following his or her election, 
rather than January 1. This amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
was requested by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities and will make this aspect of the term of office 
provisions in the Act consistent with those in other municipal 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in recent years our government has 
introduced amendments to the municipal Acts that have 
increased municipal autonomy in a number of areas, subject to 
the protection of public or provincial interests where necessary. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to say this Bill is consistent 
with this approach. This Bill will provide a new discretionary 
authority for rural municipalities to determine weight limits and 
to designate truck routes on municipal roads. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as you will know, there is a clear public interest in 
ensuring the free flow of vehicles, goods, and other 
commodities throughout our great province. Development of 
our resource-based and agricultural economy very definitely 
depends on this. This new authority is balanced by two 
important limitations. 
 

(15:00) 
 
First, RMs (rural municipality) that choose to set weight limits 
and/or designate truck routes using this new authority will be 
required to ensure that their local transportation policies are 
harmonized with those that might be established in adjacent 
municipalities. 
 
Second, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in recognition that occasionally 
despite everyone’s best intentions and efforts, disputes can 
occur. We have included a mechanism whereby municipalities 
and road users can resolve their differences in a timely and 
cost-effective manner. In doing so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 
intention is to ensure consistency in the application of local 
transportation policies at the local level. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, providing this new authority to rural 
municipalities will improve councils’ ability to manage truck 
traffic, protect municipal roads, develop local economies, and 
provide an effective and efficient means by which goods and 
other products produced in our rural areas can be transported to 
markets around the world. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in response to a request by the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
amendments also clarify some wording in the provisions that set 
out the framework for rural municipalities to provide 
firefighting services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, with The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, passage of this Bill will continue the process 
of providing municipalities with greater independence to 
manage their own affairs and will broaden the scope of local 
authority and decision-making capacity. It will enhance the 
ability of rural municipalities, in partnership with the province, 
to help grow and serve our provincial economy for future 
generations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading 
of Bill No. 40, The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to respond to the second reading remarks of the Bill 
No. 40, The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Act talks about local decision making by giving 
municipalities in rural Saskatchewan a better opportunity to 
make decisions that impact their own municipalities. 
 
And it’s interesting that this Bill is coming forward at this time, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because certainly I remember one of the 
first major debates that I was in after being elected, and it 
started just prior to the 1999 election, was the whole issue about 
amalgamating municipalities. And forced amalgamation I think 
was the term that was used over and over again by 
municipalities, whether it was SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) or SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) who were talking about it. I 
know in my area there were a number of tax-revolt meetings 
held over and over again in different municipalities. 
 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

But it was interesting, one of the concerns were that the 
provincial government seems to think that we should all be 
amalgamated into one huge RM or county, whatever you may 
say, but then on the other hand they didn’t want to give us the 
powers to make our decisions that we felt needed to be made. 
 
And this Bill looks like it’s talking about giving more power, 
autonomy, back to rural municipalities which is exactly what 
that whole debate was about three years ago. 
 
Unfortunately, or perhaps I should say fortunately, that the 
municipalities along with the opposition, the Saskatchewan 
Party, won the day and the government backed away from that 
whole legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It talks about some other things such as the property tax phase 
in from six years to four years. It talks about SAMA. 
 
And it’s interesting, I remember a number of years ago, it had 
been years since we had any sort of assessment on property, and 
it’s been coming forward a little more recently — it looks like 
it’s going to be even more recently — but it’s extremely 
important that the assessments on property tax are correct. 
 
And when you go five and eight and ten years in between 
assessments, it throws things out of perspective and out of 
proportion. And if there’s one thing that should be in proper 
perspective and proportion, it’s the assessment on land because 
this government piles so much weight on the property taxpayers 
of this province, where there is municipal tax but more 
importantly the education tax of property. 
 
I would be very surprised if, and perhaps the members opposite 
being only city MLAs, if they went to any rural constituency 
and talked on . . . knocked on doors in the country or in town, 
and I know even myself in the city here, one of the major, major 
issues is the education portion of property tax that they have to 
pay. It truly is an issue. And if you talk to some people that own 
acres and acres and acres, sections of land, and if you only 
realize the amount of education that they put on property . . . 
that they pay each year on property tax, Mr. Speaker, it would 
be astonishing. 
 
The reason I bring that up is they’re finally talking about 
SAMA and assessment and how important assessment is, Mr. 
Speaker. And when you leave it 10 years between assessments 
and then keep piling on the education funding on property tax, 
it really puts things out of perspective. 
 
Mind you being out of perspective is really not that big of an 
issue I guess to this government, Mr. Speaker, because I had 
heard the Minister of Education talk about a mill rate and a 2 
mill rate increase as being slight or minute. Can you believe 
that? The Minister of Education not knowing the impact of a 
mill rate in this province. She didn’t have a clue what a mill rate 
. . . I don’t really know if it has much impact out there in rural 
Saskatchewan. Well I would ask that minister to get out into 
rural Saskatchewan and see what a mill rate means and how 
much it costs certain farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill talks about a number of other things as 
well, such as weight limits and designating road . . . designated 
truck routes for municipal roads — things like that. And, Mr. 

Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, again what this Bill talks about is 
putting more power in the hands of the councillors and the 
reeves of municipalities throughout this province. 
 
I think if anybody would know which roads are in shape and 
which roads aren’t, it sure is the government opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. It would be the councillors and reeves of RMs 
throughout this province that would know best as to that. So the 
Bill talks about designating some of the authority to local 
municipalities, rural municipalities, and I think that’s probably 
a good idea. 
 
It also talks about timely and cost-effective manner of — now 
let me just read here; disputes can occur, things like that — so 
what it talks about is the local transportation authority and 
resolving disputes. Whereas before, it used to go into the 
government’s hands and they would hang onto it and hang onto 
it and this seems to be much more timely and cost effective, Mr. 
Speaker. And that would be a good thing. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see that the government is 
looking at finally giving up some of its powers and turning it 
over to the municipalities that know best in their own area. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the 
minister of Education to at least understand what a mill rate 
means in Saskatchewan and the impact it would have before she 
stands in the House and talks about how minute a 2 mill 
increase would be in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, I would move to adjourn Bill No. 40, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 
2003. 
 
This Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is being amended to provide 
greater flexibility for urban municipalities to deal with 
governance issues. The amendments also deal with some 
property assessment matters and include provisions for a 
simplified appeal process as introduced last spring in The Cities 
Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, now that The Cities Act is in force and all 
cities have migrated to the new Act, we are proposing 
amendments that will remove references to city and cities from 
The Urban Municipality Act, plus remove provisions that 
exclusively pertained to cities. Additional amendments will 
repeal a number of unproclaimed provisions from previous 
urban municipal Act amending Bills that are no longer relevant. 
 
If I may, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to take a moment to 
provide a bit of the detail about some of the more significant 
amendments proposed in this Bill. As I mentioned, this Bill will 
provide urban municipalities with greater flexibility to deal with 
governance issues. As you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 
coalition government is firmly on record as supporting the 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

 

efforts of local councils towards voluntary, municipal 
restructuring. 
 
A number of the amendments in this Bill are expressly intended 
to enable councils to better address local circumstances or to 
facilitate restructuring proposals that require more flexibility in 
council sizes and configuration and electoral representation. For 
example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these amendments will provide 
the opportunity to adopt a more flexible ward system in a 
restructured municipality, achieved by giving municipal wards 
commissions the authority to design a variety of scenarios 
including multi-sector wards and even a combination ward and 
at-large systems. Mr. Deputy Speaker, these provisions will also 
ensure that wards commissions continue to conduct public 
hearings and consultations as part of the process of determining 
the most appropriate scenario. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendments relating to property 
assessment include provisions for a simplified appeal process. 
In addition, the amendments will reduce the period of time for 
phasing in changes resulting form . . . resulting, pardon me, 
from revaluations of property taxes from six to four years to 
match the four-year reassessment cycle. Amendments will also 
ensure that notification of property sales by owners and vendors 
will be provided in accordance with the sales verification form 
being developed by the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency. 
 
The amendments proposed in this Bill will provide 
municipalities with greater flexibility to deal with local issues, 
enhance decision-making processes, and align administrative 
processes. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure to move 
second reading of Bill No. 41, The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the urban municipal Act was the Act that the 
cities used to operate under and now they have their own Act 
that was brought in last year and is being amended again this 
year with the corrections. 
 
One of the issues that the minister raised was the possibilities of 
towns and villages going to the ward system. And I think that’s 
an area that’s going to have to be looked at very carefully, Mr. 
Speaker. I think there’s going to need to be some discussion 
with the towns and villages with SUMA, their towns and 
villages directorates, to determine which direction they want to 
go, whether they’re in favour of it. 
 
You know, a lot of these towns and villages, Mr. Speaker, are 
quite small and if you were to have a ward system in place you 
could maybe have a block or two within the ward. And an 
at-large system, Mr. Speaker, where the members of council — 
and a lot of these councils are four, five, six people only, Mr. 
Speaker — represent the entire community . . . They know 
everybody by their first name, Mr. Speaker, and an at-large 
system makes a lot of sense in those circumstances. And I’m 
not sure if there are many communities, Mr. Speaker — there 
may be some — but I’m sure that there are very many 
communities where a ward system would be appropriate. 
 
(15:15) 
 

So I think it’s going to be very important to talk to the people 
involved in the leadership of the smaller urbans, Mr. Speaker, to 
determine whether or not they’re actually interested in a ward 
system, and being forced to go to a ward system, just what 
would that mean to those communities. 
 
So I think that’s going to be an important role that needs to be 
played and the opposition will do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well there are some changes being made to the approvals 
that are necessary by the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. And 
when it talks, Mr. Speaker, the Bill talks of changes to rates, 
I’m wondering as well if that applies to the mill rate that is 
applied to the assessment of each of the communities. Are those 
mill rates going to have to be approved by the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board before they can be put in place to budget for 
that particular village, town, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Those are some of the kinds of things that really slow up the 
budgetary process if you have to go forward and seek approval 
every time you wish to make a minute change in, say, your 
water rate, Mr. Speaker. Those are some of the things that just 
add a lot of bureaucracy and really provide little or no service 
and little or no protection to the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, and yet 
drive up the cost of their administration. And most of these 
communities, Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker, have a very, 
very low budget. They don’t have a lot of money to waste on 
building bureaucracies. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there is the consolidation of long-term 
debt. Now municipalities are not supposed to have debt. They 
can have securities, Mr. Speaker. They can have . . . They can 
issue bonds which, in reality, are debt. But most municipalities 
do not look at the servicing of those particular financial 
instruments as being a debt vehicle such as going and 
borrowing money from the bank. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues here that need to 
be dealt with on this particular Bill. There are a number of 
stakeholders that we need to approach to determine what their 
view on this particular issue is. So I would move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of Bill No. 39, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
As many members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Act establishes the provincial funding, the provincial financial 
assistance allocated to urban and rural municipalities. 
Accordingly, these amendments primarily give legal effect to 
decisions announced in the 2003-2004 budget. 
 
The Bill provides for the amounts of the funds available this 
year to both urban revenue-sharing pool and the rural 
revenue-sharing pool. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to 
announce that the Bill provides for an increase this year for 
urban revenue sharing by $4.9 million and an increase for rural 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

revenue sharing by $4.3 million. This together with the funding 
for northern municipalities represents an increase of $10 million 
to municipalities from last year. 
 
These increases mean an additional $3.6 million in 
unconditional funding for cities. For towns, villages, and resort 
villages, the increase is $1.3 million. For rural municipalities 
the increase is $4.3 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my officials have consulted with the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the cities, and 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities on how 
to distribute the funds this year. Their views have been 
incorporated. Each city and urban municipality will receive the 
same unconditional revenue-sharing grants as last year, plus an 
increase of $6.73 per capita. 
 
After negotiation with SARM, an agreement was reached on a 
new distribution formula that SARM agrees with and supports. 
The formula will include both a transportation and a service 
component. More specifically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the formula 
is based 85 per cent on the road system in each RM, while the 
remaining 15 per cent is based on a three-year rolling average 
of expenditures such as protective services or culture and 
recreation services. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, costs will be adjusted based on 
taxable assessment of each RM and on the varying costs of 
providing services. Thus the formula will provide a degree of 
equalization for municipalities with different fiscal capacities. 
 
As well, we have accepted SARM’s recommendation that 
$500,000 of the incremental funding to RMs would be 
conditional for the construction of heavy-haul roads. This 
responds, to some degree, to concerns from RMs in the 
Lloydminster area about needing more provincial funding for 
roads used by the heavy oil industry. 
 
Amendments to the Act will be retroactive to April 1, 2003. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this means the new formula will be used for 
paying out grants to rural municipalities in the 2003-2004 fiscal 
year, although the full effects are to be phased in. 
 
In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this increase of $10 million 
increases the total amount of funding distributed through the 
revenue-sharing program to nearly $70 million for 
Saskatchewan municipalities. I urge all members to support this 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 39, The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once 
again, it’s a privilege to stand and respond to the second reading 
remarks of the minister regarding Bill No. 39, The Municipal 
Revenue Sharing Amendment Act. 
 
It is kind of an interesting Bill where it talks about the money 
that . . . the revenue sharing that the provincial government will 
be entering into with municipalities throughout the province, 
whether it’s urban or rural. And it was quite interesting. It talks 
about the 2003-2004 budget. 
 

And obviously he didn’t . . . Quite often when we hear second 
reading speeches, we say, well we’ve consulted with and 
they’re in full agreement with what we’re doing here in this 
Act. And I would think this would be one situation where the 
minister has left this out of the speech and that they’ve 
consulted with the cities and said . . . and rural municipalities 
and the cities have said, yes, we’re in full agreement with the 
amount of revenue sharing that is in this Bill, because it talks 
about revenue sharing, urban revenue sharing increased by $4.9 
million and rural revenue sharing by 4.3. 
 
I certainly remember the lobbying done by the city mayors, the 
city mayors’ caucus that has talked about increased revenue 
sharing and how they had taken the heat through the ’90s when 
this government said that they should share in the pain which I 
think the cities had . . . certainly have done and urban and rural 
municipalities have done. They shared in the pain of the early 
’90s because the government backed away from the revenue 
sharing significantly. 
 
So now that the government is certainly seeing revenues 
coming in, they would ask that they could share in the gain. 
And unfortunately they haven’t been able to share in the gain 
quite as much as they had wanted to. 
 
I believe the minister talked about 4.9 and he left out the 
remarks that the city mayors had to say after the budget speech. 
And that was probably a good idea because other than one 
mayor in Moose Jaw . . . other than one mayor, the one mayor 
of Moose Jaw who decided to break ranks with the city caucus 
members, it was interesting. He was the only one that thought, 
well I guess it’s sufficient. 
 
It was interesting, even the mayor of Prince Albert, even the 
mayor of Prince Albert had to pan the government. That really 
seems quite ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Don Cody, the 
mayor of Prince Albert would have to go against his very 
government here to say that it just isn’t enough revenue. 
 
They are asking for 15 million. I believe they’re asking for 20 
million last year, 15 million this year, and this government has 
fallen far short, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Prince Albert Northcote is saying that how 
much would we give if we were in government? Well I think 
there’s a . . . what was it, about a $23 million loss that the 
municipalities would have loved to have had instead of being 
spent on potatoes throughout this province, Mr. Speaker — 
which this government has ended up with nothing. 
 
If he wants to start asking how much money could have been 
put towards municipalities, we could certainly talk about the 
$85 million that the Crown corporations have lost outside of 
this province, and that $85 million came from taxes and people 
in this province. 
 
So he can holler from his seat and to say how much would we 
give? I certainly know there’d be a lot more to give the 
municipalities if there was better management on that side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill goes on to talk about a number of other 
issues and the revenue sharing and how they are calculating the 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

 

revenue sharing. And it talks about the cities, talking about 6.7, 
$6.73 per capita increase, and that’s where the money will be 
distributed, how the money will be distributed. 
 
It also talks about SARM having a bit of an input on how the 
money that they are going to be receiving is going to be 
distributed throughout the different RMs, Mr. Speaker, Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But I think until we talk to these municipalities and just see 
what they think of this Bill and the amount that is put out in this 
Bill for revenue sharing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would be amiss 
for us to just let it go. We would need to consult with a number 
of players — whether it’s SARM, SUMA, the city mayors’ 
caucus, those members. I would be very interested again to hear 
what Don Cody from Prince Albert would have to say. I’m sure 
he’s very disappointed with this provincial government and the 
money that was allotted. So, Mr. Speaker, until we have the 
opportunity to consult, I would move that we would adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 39. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise on this 
occasion to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill is being proposed to the 
legislature subsequent to the 25-year Gaming Framework 
Agreement signed in 2003 by the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations and the Government of Saskatchewan. As you 
will know, currently the First Nations’ share of profits derived 
from the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation and the 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority is paid into the First 
Nations Fund. The 2002 Gaming Framework Agreement 
included some changes to that arrangement, and this Bill will 
implement those changes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me explain in just a little bit more 
detail. As part of the 2002 agreement, the government and the 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) agreed that 
the FSIN would establish the First Nations trust in accordance 
with a trust indenture attached to the 2002 agreement. 
 
For its part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government agreed to 
expeditiously bring to this Assembly amendments to the Act 
that would enable the windup of the First Nations Fund and 
authorize payment of gaming profits to the First Nations trust 
fund. So then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the intent of this Bill 
— specifically to make amendments to the Act to enable the 
transition from the First Nations Fund to the First Nations trust. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill and the amendments it will enact 
are a significant and a very positive step forward, both for the 
province of Saskatchewan and the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations. The funding provided for economic 
development and other community projects through the First 
Nations Fund to date has been a very important and significant 
outcome of the development of the gaming industry in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, none of this important 

work will change because of the amendments that are proposed 
here today. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The trust indenture that will establish the First Nations trust 
contains a very similar set of purposes for which gaming funds 
can be used as was in the Act. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
trust indenture will ensure that in many respects the work and 
administration of the First Nations Fund will be carried on in a 
very similar manner through the First Nations trust. 
 
Of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fundamental difference in 
the arrangement is that the First Nations trust will be directly 
responsible to the FSIN and will operate more independently of 
the provincial government in keeping with the terms and 
conditions set out in the 2002 Gaming Framework Agreement. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to just take a moment to expand 
on that point and provide you with some important details on 
how the First Nations trust will operate. As you know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has in the past 
expressed concerns with regard to some aspects of how the First 
Nations Fund was operated and administered. I want to assure 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and indeed all members of this 
Assembly, that both the government and the FSIN take these 
concerns very seriously. 
 
Along with the increased responsibility and authority to be 
exercised by the FSIN over the Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation profit, comes increased accountability. As is the 
case now with the First Nations Fund, the First Nations trust 
will be administered by a board of trustees. FSIN will have the 
authority to appoint the trustees independent of the government. 
The trustees will be required to get yearly reports from all 
beneficiaries of the trust. These reports must demonstrate that 
all money received was used for approved purposes as set out in 
the trust indenture. 
 
The trustees must also appoint a qualified independent auditor 
to provide a written report on the trust’s financial statements 
within 120 days of the end of each fiscal year. The trustees are 
required to provide the government with copies of the auditor’s 
documentation including audited financial statements, annual 
report, any report prepared by the auditor, and access to 
documents submitted by the beneficiaries. 
 
In addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in accordance with the 2002 
Gaming Framework Agreement, the terms of the trust indenture 
cannot be amended without the agreement of the government, 
and monies will only flow to the trust if the trustees fulfill their 
obligations in accordance with the trust indenture. 
 
If the trustees do not fulfill their obligations, Government 
Relations and Aboriginal Affairs, as the lead agency responsible 
for overseeing the trust, would initiate a series of steps to ensure 
compliance. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to add that the coming-into-force 
provisions in the draft Bill provide that the sections pertinent to 
the transition from fund to trust will be proclaimed only after 
the trust is established by the FSIN. 
 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, once the First Nations trust is established, 
the minister will be provided the authority to make payments to 
the First Nations trust, thus beginning a new page in the 
administration of gaming profits by First Nations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
Bill No. 35, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to join in to the debate . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — With leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker, and sorry to 
my colleague for interrupting. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and through 
you to the House, someone sitting in the east gallery that really 
needs no introduction. Paul Martin is certainly a recognized 
promoter of the economy and the building economy in 
Saskatchewan, and I want to welcome here to the Assembly. 
Please join me in welcoming to the session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you. I’d like to join with the 
member from Lloydminster in welcoming Mr. Paul Martin to 
the Legislative Assembly. And he is certainly well known to 
members on both sides of the House. 
 
And one of the things that is most, I think, beneficial about Mr. 
Martin’s work is he maintains a very positive attitude to all of 
the wonderful things that are going on in our economy and has 
been instrumental in some campaigns to promote 
Saskatchewan. And we certainly enjoy his positive attitude, the 
work we’ve been able to do together. And we certainly join 
with the opposition in welcoming Mr. Martin here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

(continued) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a privilege again to respond to the second reading speech 
given regarding Bill No. 35, regarding Saskatchewan gaming 
and the remarks made by the minister. 
 
There are a number of areas again that this Bill deals with that 
certainly, I guess, raises a few red flags on our side of the 
House and a number of areas that we’re going to want to check 
out before we see this Bill go any further, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister talked about this Bill is a consequence of the 
25-year agreement that they’ve entered into with the FSIN 
regarding gaming, which is a bit of a concern right off the bat 
but we’ve talked about that before. And I’m going to move on 
to what this Bill talks about in, specifically. 
 
It talks about moving payment from the First Nations Fund and 
establishing a new First Nations trust fund and that’s where the 
monies would be directed to. I guess the whole issue, and the 
minister touched on it, he touched on the Provincial Auditor and 
the concerns that the Provincial Auditor has regarding the 
accountability and the transparency of the former fund, the First 
Nations Fund, as we’ve had a number of questions and concerns 
on it as well. We’ve raised them in the House. 
 
We’ve been concerned that at times perhaps the money hasn’t 
gone to where it was intentionally set up to go towards. And 
when we asked questions, we felt that at many, many times the 
whole process wasn’t transparent and wasn’t accountable. And 
as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it wasn’t just the members on 
this side of the House, it was the Provincial Auditor that also 
showed concerns over and over and over again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister talks about reporting processes, that the money 
will be controlled by the FSIN, and more by the FSIN and not 
the government now, whereas the government had a bit of a 
role to play in it. But he also talked about the accountability 
steps that were being put into place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
there are a number . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. While this is 
time for debate, there is rules in that we do it one at a time and 
as recognized by the Chair. I know that the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone has the floor and I would appreciate if all 
members would pay attention. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister talked 
about steps to ensure accountability, and I guess if they are 
there and they work, that is one thing. But until we see the steps 
that have been put into place to ensure accountability, until we 
have a chance to look at the Bill and make sure that the steps 
will make it more transparent and will be accountable, Mr. 
Speaker . . . Accountable to the people that this money was 
directed for, people on-reserve that really in so many cases live 
in poverty. And it’s an absolute shame when you hear some of 
the misuse of money that should have been directed to those 
very people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So until there is full accountability, until we are comfortable 
with the accountability steps, the steps for transparency that 
have been put into place with this piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, we’d move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Film Employment 
Tax Credit Amendment Act. 
 
This Bill further strengthens Saskatchewan’s pool of local 
artists and technicians who support the province’s growing film 
industry. Specifically the proposed Bill will extend the deeming 
provision of The Film Employment Tax Credit Act. As you 
know, The Film Employment Tax Credit Act was originally 
passed in 1998 and it does provide a 35 per cent tax credit on 
eligible Saskatchewan labour costs for film and television 
productions produced by Saskatchewan companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deeming provision allows non-Saskatchewan 
residents to be deemed as eligible for the film employment tax 
credit, provided they supply training to local artists and 
technicians. SaskFILM has told us that the deeming feature is 
one of the most attractive features of the tax credit. By 
extending the deeming provision, we give local producers a 
competitive advantage in attracting feature films and television 
series to our province. 
 
Amendments will allow the industry to continue to hire 
expertise on large-scale productions that may not be available in 
the province and which continue to strengthen the level of 
training available for our local production crews. As well, Mr. 
Speaker, a number of members of the production community 
have brought to my attention that without the significant level 
of trained people needed, it reduces the number of productions 
we would be able to deliver. So this helps them to be able to do 
all the productions that they received funding for within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deeming provision is key to the successful 
marketing of Saskatchewan as a viable film location, and is 
particularly important in attracting large-scale productions that 
have the most impact on the economy of the province such as 
feature films and television series. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Bill. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again it’s a 
privilege to respond to the second reading speech regarding Bill 
No. 34, the film employment tax credit. 
 
This is a very interesting piece of legislation. It’s interesting 
because every year it comes forward — it’s being coming 
forward since 1998, the minister said — and every year we’ve 
supported it. And we supported it because it gives tax credit and 
allows the film, has given tax credit and has allowed the film 
industry to expand in this province like you wouldn’t believe. 
It’s been a true success story on what tax credits and giving tax 
breaks can do in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now unfortunately if the government would quit just saying 
okay, we can only do it in the film industry but we won’t do it 
. . . try it anywhere else, Mr. Speaker. That’s what is holding 
this province back so often, Mr. Speaker. The tax credit has 
been a good idea. The deeming provision allowing 
non-Saskatchewan residents to come in as long as they’re 

instructing and teaching is a good idea. It’s expanded the film 
industry and created a film industry in the province. 
 
Unfortunately with this government, though, any time an 
industry gets going they just can’t help but get involved 
financially, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what this government has 
done again; it’s got directly involved in the film industry. 
 
It’s been interesting over the last couple of months, or four or 
five months, talking to different people in the film industry and 
saying, well how come we didn’t get any money? They’re 
giving money to Minds Eye and how . . . There’s so many other 
film companies that are being left out. 
 
Once again they’ve got it right with the tax credit because the 
tax credit is for all, anyone in the film business. Where they fail 
to get it right is when they start picking winners and losers as to 
who gets government money and who doesn’t, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is done over and over and over again by this 
government in many, many different sectors. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the minister once again . . . And we’ll support 
this Bill once again because we believe in tax credits. That’s the 
way to go as opposed to direct, financial injection into 
hand-picked companies by this provincial government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But once again, until we have an opportunity to check with all 
the players in the film industry — not just hand-picked ones by 
the government — that they’re still happy with this Bill or 
whether any amendments could be done to make the Bill, 
enhance the Bill, to enhance the film industry in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d move that we would adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:45) 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 25 — The 
Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I know that members are disappointed that 
the member from Indian Head-Milestone isn’t on his feet but I 
would like to respond to this legislation, The Personal Care 
Homes Act. 
 
The intent of the Bill, as I understand it, is to provide seniors 
and disabled people from the sudden closure of large personal 
care homes in the province. New operators of personal care 
homes that are intended to accommodate 21 people or more are 
going to be required to post a bond or another form of security 
to ensure that if in the event of the closure of the home through 
financial circumstances, that there is a source of funds that can 
be accessed in order to continue the care for these individuals 
and provide a transition to another facility for them. 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

The Bill also provides for the opportunity if in the event of the 
closure of a personal care home that an administrator can be 
appointed to administer the home and to access the bond or 
other security that’s put into place so that the continuity of care 
can happen. So I think that this legislation is a very important 
bit of legislation for seniors and people that require the services 
of a personal care home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of things in this Bill that do 
constitute some kind of concern. Initially it’s our understanding, 
or at least in the situation as it currently exists, that most of the 
personal care homes in Saskatchewan, representing 95 or more 
per cent of the beds that are provided by personal care homes, 
are provided in very small personal care homes of 10 beds or 
less. 
 
And while there is the provision in this legislation that says 
something to the effect that this is not necessarily limited to 
personal care homes of 21 or over, that the minister may require 
an operator in any existing category of personal care home to 
file similar bonds. And for the very small personal care homes, 
this is a concern. 
 
As I mentioned, in Saskatchewan, 96 or 97 per cent of personal 
care homes are those that accommodate 10 individuals or less 
and they have a very good track record over the years and have 
provided very, very good service. 
 
And there is a concern by the operators of these small personal 
care homes that this legislation could indeed be implied or 
imposed on them as well. And I know that that is a concern 
from them, and it doesn’t seem to be the intent of this 
legislation. 
 
Certainly the intent of the legislation about providing a 
framework of security and reliability for residents of personal 
care homes is an important concept, and we very much support 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think this is good legislation. There are some 
issues that I think need to be discussed and clarified 
surrounding what the regulations will do, and the intent of the 
application of these regulations to other categories. And I know 
that we can deal with those issues in Committee of the Whole 
and so with that I would suggest that we move this Bill forward. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 22 — The 
Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak on Bill No. 2, the amendments to The Pharmacy 
Act, 2003, as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation provides for the pharmacists of this 
province to be enabled to provide emergency birth-control 
prescriptions without the scrip from a physician. 
 

Mr. Speaker, over the years emergency birth-control 
medications have been available in this province from a 
physician’s office, and the advocacy of these prescriptions is 
time sensitive as you can imagine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The situation as it exists provides for doctors to be able to write 
these scrips and their most effective opportunity of doing that is 
in the 24- to 36-hour period after intercourse has occurred. And 
so time sensitivity of the availability of these prescriptions is a 
very important issue. 
 
In many areas of the province, the access to a family physician 
in a time-sensitive way is very problematic, and the situation is 
relatively uniform across the province in that many pharmacists 
operate with much longer hours in communities than what 
community clinics or doctors’ offices do. 
 
It’s my understanding that there has been work done and 
protocols have been agreed to between the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, and the pharmacists of the province in order to 
establish appropriate protocols for pharmacists to be able to 
independently prescribe this important medication. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a good example of collaboration between health 
care professionals where a problem was identified and a 
pragmatic solution was arrived at between the medical 
professionals. And this is the result of this collaboration. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve communicated with these various 
regulatory agencies. We are assured that there’s going to be a 
proper program put in place for the accreditation of pharmacists 
in order to be able to participate in this program and prescribe 
this very important medication. And so, Mr. Speaker, we 
certainly support this initiative and commend it as a good 
example of collaborative practice in the medical system in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. And I recognize the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today to 
my left is Mr. Larry Spannier, the deputy minister of the 
Department of Industry and Resources. And to his left is Ms. 
Debbie Wilkie, who is the executive director of corporate 
resources of the department. To my right is Mr. Bruce Wilson, 
the assistant deputy minister for petroleum and natural gas. 
Behind Mr. Spannier is George Patterson, who is the executive 
director of exploration and geological services. Behind me is 
Mr. Jim Marshall, the assistant deputy minister of resource and 
economic policy. Behind Mr. Wilson is Ms. Denise Haas, the 
acting assistant deputy minister of industry development. 
 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

 

And also seated at the back are Gerry Adamson, who is the 
vice-president of the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership; Louise Usick, who is the director of finance and 
administration of Tourism Saskatchewan; and Lynn Flury, 
who’s the vice-president and director of marketing for Tourism 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees, and I’d like 
to take the opportunity to welcome the minister and his officials 
this afternoon. It’s good to have you here to assist the minister 
in answering these questions because I’m sure that he’s going to 
have to refer to your assistance on a few of them. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like you, first of all, to outline the 
government policy on public-private partnerships as far as the 
construction for instance of any project, any industry project in 
the province where the government has some partnership in it. 
 
If you could outline for me what the government policy is 
regarding, specifically, the responsibility for hiring and 
tendering? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think to assist in answering that question, 
Mr. Chair, it would be helpful if the member would indicate 
whether she’s speaking of partnerships within what we would 
call executive government, that is in relation to things that 
government owns, like highways, or is she speaking about 
things that might be done with third parties, like hospitals, 
schools? Or is she speaking about things that might be done in 
partnership with the private sector, like ethanol plants and the 
like? Or is she speaking about all three or some of them? And if 
the member could clarify what kind of projects she might be 
talking about, I’d appreciate it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, what I am 
speaking of is . . . I would like the minister to outline, first of 
all, the policy regarding public-private ownership in industry, 
for instance, something like the ethanol plants. And if you could 
give me an indication of what the government’s role is and 
responsibility is as far as putting forth the policy for tendering 
processes and hiring processes for that kind of construction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I’m very happy to answer the 
question. The member has clarified that she’s generally . . . 
she’s talking about partnerships with industry. 
 
The general policy of the Government of Saskatchewan is that 
we want industry to be self-sufficient and to develop on its own. 
We believe that we have a role to play in creating a positive 
environment for industry. There are certain tax changes we’ve 
made in that regard, which I won’t detail unless the member 
wishes me to. There are other things that we have done. We 
provide infrastructure. 
 
But generally speaking, we would prefer to see development in 
the private sector proceed without a partnership with 
government but proceed on its own so that if there’s, for 
example, a new mine, a diamond mine let’s say, we would want 
that to be built by the private sector. 
 
Having said that, there are some situations where government, 
not only our government but other governments, have wanted a 
certain sector of the economy to develop and it appears that 

there isn’t sufficient private sector investment. And in some 
cases governments have entered into arrangements with the 
private sector to do so. 
 
(16:00) 
 
With respect to the Department of Industry and Resources, the 
department for which I’m responsible along with a few others, 
it does not partner with private industry in that regard. There are 
some instances where other agencies such as the Crown 
Investments Corporation have partnered with private business 
to build industries. From the point of view of the Department of 
Industry and Resources, we don’t do that directly. And, as I 
said, we recognize that sometimes it will be necessary. We do 
not believe that in terms of the long-term building of the 
economy that it is . . . necessarily should be the norm or the 
regular way to do things. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, could you 
please outline for me the structure of ownership of the OSB 
(oriented strand board) plant at Meadow Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The member is certainly entitled to have 
that information. I do want to point out that we, in the 
Department of Industry and Resources for whom . . . for which 
I am responsible to answer, do not have a relationship with 
anyone in terms of the OSB plant at Meadow Lake. That is, 
there is an investment, and the member is correct that there’s a 
partnership between a government entity and I believe it’s 
Tolko. That actually is an investment through the Crown 
Investments Corporation for which, as the member knows, the 
member for Meadow Lake is responsible and I’m sure will be 
pleased to answer the member’s questions. 
 
These officials will not have brought the detail about tendering, 
about investment and so on, even though they’ll have a general 
knowledge about it or some specific knowledge, but they won’t 
have prepared themselves to provide information about that 
because it doesn’t fall under their jurisdiction. It falls under the 
jurisdiction of the president of the Crown Investments 
Corporation and his officials. And I do know, Mr. Chair, that 
the minister in charge of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) and his officials, I’m sure, would be more 
than happy to deal with the member with respect to any 
questions she may have in that regard. But my officials are not 
responsible for that file and therefore will not be providing me 
with detailed information about that file. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, is it within 
the jurisdiction of your ministry or your department to comment 
on the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement? Is that a 
brainchild of your government? 
 
For instance, when there is . . . the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement requires that there be hiring of Crown 
construction projects by union people, that union people have a 
right to have the jobs in those kind of construction projects. 
And so I’m wondering if you could comment on whether your 
government in fact would answer questions regarding Crown 
construction tendering and the agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in answer to the member’s question I 
want to make it clear that yes, our government will answer 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

every question about the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement or anything else. But the questions, of course, 
should be raised in the appropriate forum. 
 
In this particular instance, again I’m not trying to be difficult 
. . . We have many, many things that the Department of 
Industry and Resources is responsible for and for which I am 
responsible to answer questions; but it does happen to be the 
case that in the case of the Meadow Lake pulp mill that isn’t 
part of my responsibilities directly. 
 
And in the case of the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement, that isn’t something that the Department of Industry 
and Resources is responsible for. It isn’t something that I, as a 
minister, am responsible for. 
 
There are other ministers that are responsible for that policy and 
they would be very happy to answer the member’s questions. 
But it is unfortunately the case, for the time being at least, that I 
am not the minister in charge of those areas and therefore I 
must respectfully suggest to the member that the questions 
should be addressed to the appropriate minister with the 
appropriate personnel present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, I guess the fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Minister, that in this House it’s very difficult to 
be getting answers given to the opposition regarding anything to 
do with Crown investments. And we’ve had some problems in 
estimates having any minister answer questions on investments 
and we’ve just had to sort of sit and wait and hope that another 
minister who is referred to by one of your ministers would 
answer the questions. It appears as though this is sort of what’s 
happening again today now. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is an OSB plant being built at Meadow 
Lake, and right now there are unionized workers who have 
indicated to me that they’re not able to get work there. Yes, 
Tolko does own 75 per cent of that, about $150 million 
investment from what I understand. I understand also through a 
question that I submitted to your government, a written 
question, that there is about $55 million in both loan guarantees 
and government equity in total put into that. 
 
I understand that there is some First Nations involvement in it 
and that there is a hope that First Nations as well as the 
communities, the northwest communities, will have an 
opportunity to buy more into that in the future. 
 
But as it stands right now, the focus of my questions is on how 
the hiring process was done and how the tendering process was 
done. And these people are asking me for some answers. 
 
Some of the union workers are not getting work in their own 
province. Rather, there has been contracting coming from . . . 
contracts, rather, given to companies outside of Saskatchewan 
on a number of fronts and they’re bringing their own workers in 
with them. 
 
And so this is really very difficult for people in Saskatchewan 
who are — some of them — farming, but also working as 
unionized workers and trying to make a living. They’re 
wondering just whether there was a fair tendering process that 
went on in the first place and who was responsible for that 

tendering process. 
 
Tolko owns 75 per cent. The government, at this point, has $55 
million in that, one way or the other. And so what I’m asking 
you today I would expect that any minister of your government 
might be able to answer in the event that that’s the case, that the 
government has that much money put into it. 
 
Does the government take the authority and responsibility to 
determine or to have some say in who in fact will be hired for 
those projects and whether or not tendering should go out to 
companies within Saskatchewan or whether or not there was 
any fair tendering done at all? 
 
This is the question and I would appreciate the minister’s 
response on this. Does the government have the responsibility 
and the authority, in this public-private partnership, to have 
some say as far as tendering goes and the hiring goes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m trying to be helpful to 
the member and I’m not trying to be difficult. But the simple 
fact of the matter is that I can’t answer questions in the House 
that do not fall under my responsibility. 
 
The member . . . I appreciate having the member’s views. I 
respect her views. She’s certainly entitled to answers. But the 
simple fact of the matter is if the member gets up and asks me 
about hog barns — we’re all concerned about hog barns — but 
I will say that that’s a question for the Minister of Agriculture. 
If she asks me about hospitals, I’ll say that’s a question for the 
Minister of Health. If she asks me about schools, I’ll say that’s 
a question for the Minister of Learning. 
 
And the point is, Mr. Chair, she’s asking me questions about a 
policy which is the policy of another department of government 
and another minister, both in terms of the investment with 
Tolko, which is not an investment that my department has made 
directly, and in terms of the tendering policy, which is not a 
policy that my department has formulated. 
 
And the member, in doing her job in a reasonable and skilful 
way as I’m sure she can, can address her questions to the 
appropriate ministers. I actually am not the minister of 
government assigned to answer questions for other ministers. 
And I have every confidence that my colleagues in those areas 
can answer the questions, and I certainly encourage the member 
to direct her questions to the appropriate members. 
 
And I understand she’s frustrated that I am not able to answer 
questions for other ministers, but the member has been a 
member for quite some time, and I think she knows that I can’t 
answer questions in the House that do not come within my 
office. So thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Chair, I’d just 
like to say to that minister your government has reorganized 
and restructured so many times that it is almost impossible to 
come to understand just exactly what items are the 
responsibility and under the jurisdiction of different ministers. 
 
Last year we had a number of questions that we asked a 
minister of the Crown that . . . questions of, that he should have 
or she should have certainly been able to answer, and had that 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

 

responsibility for years. 
 
Now with all of your restructuring, your reorganizing — and I 
believe it’s done with the intent of putting off answers and 
making excuses not to give answers — we have to say that this 
is a very, very difficult situation to get answers to the people of 
Saskatchewan, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well this is the way it is, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And I guess, you know, you’re referring me today to the 
minister responsible for CIC and I’ll look forward to 
approaching that minister when estimates come up, if there are 
CIC estimates that come up. 
 
Can you tell me today, Mr. Minister, are there going to be CIC 
estimates that are going to come up in this House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as the member knows, Mr. Chair, the 
legislature has decided to create an entire committee known as 
the Crown Corporations Committee to deal with questions 
relating to Crown corporations. 
 
And I hope the public knows — and I’m sure they will — that 
the member and her party are entitled to go to the Crown 
Corporations Committee and ask questions. And she should 
address her questions — I understand it’s meeting again on 
May 27 — to the appropriate forum. 
 
If it’s helpful to the member, Mr. Chair, I do wish to point out 
that at page 75 of the estimates, which certainly is provided to 
the member, there is a description under summary of 
expenditure, of the things for which the Department of Industry 
and Resources is responsible. 
 
And I might suggest to the member that she might wish to read 
the material that is provided to her and all other members of the 
Legislative Assembly as to what ministers are responsible for, 
and I could read it to her if she wishes. But I would be more 
than happy to answer any questions that pertain to my 
responsibilities which, Mr. Chair, is the rule of the House as the 
member well knows. But I would refer her to page 75, which 
would give her an indication of what my department is 
responsible for. 
 
I would also say to her that if she is confused — as she says — 
as to which minister is responsible for what, I’d like to 
undertake to send her a complete list of the ministers of the 
Crown and their responsibilities, Mr. Chair, in an effort to be 
helpful to the member as I always attempt to be. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well those are some very 
interesting but fairly condescending remarks. Mr. Chair, by the 
time the minister sends me a listing of responsibilities of the 
minister, it wouldn’t surprise me that they would shuffle cabinet 
again, or do something, or else the House will be completed for 
the year. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, the minister speaks of addressing this in 
the Crown Corporations Committee. It took a lot of prompting 
and probing by the Saskatchewan Party opposition to even get 
them to call the Crown Corps Committee to sit. They were 
certainly reluctant to do that. May 27 there will be some 

questions. There’s no doubt about that. 
 
But further to that, Mr. Chair, I’d just like to say on behalf of 
the people that have asked me these questions, and the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan, they are somewhat 
disgruntled with the fact that in this forum, the Legislative 
Assembly where there should be openness and accountability 
and transparency, that we cannot get answers for the people of 
Saskatchewan to view on their television sets, to hear on their 
television sets, and to be satisfied with the minister’s response 
or not satisfied. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I will turn the questioning over to my colleagues 
right now. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I’m looking at 
the budget for Industry and Resources and I notice there’s the 
vote (IR06), resource and economic policy. There’s 
approximately $2.5 million allocated to that particular vote. 
 
The information that is provided in the estimates indicates that 
this unit . . . or this money is being used to conduct research and 
identify . . . or do an analysis and develop policies to encourage 
economic growth and address climate change. And that’s the 
area that I’m somewhat interested in, Minister. 
 
What type of activity and what is your department doing to deal 
with the whole area of climate change, and in particular with the 
federal government’s implementation plan for the Kyoto 
Protocol? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, Mr. Chair, there 
is a federal-provincial . . . I’m sorry I meant to say a 
provincial-territorial committee of officials from Saskatchewan 
and also from the other provinces and territories that meet to 
discuss issues surrounding the climate change issue. And 
climate change, of course, is something that all governments are 
concerned about. And what has been in the news, mainly in the 
last number of months or maybe few years, has been the Kyoto 
accord. 
 
And one of the frustrations that we’ve had, and the officials are 
working on, is how to respond to the federal government. And 
it’s very difficult because we’ve been waiting for the federal 
government to come up with a plan for the implementation of 
the Kyoto accord. 
 
They have ratified the Kyoto accord, which says that 
greenhouse gas emissions must be reduced by a certain amount 
by a certain time, but they have not said how that’s going to be 
done. And what our department has been trying to do is to 
analyze the impact that the Kyoto accord could have on 
industry in Saskatchewan and also make representations to the 
federal government and others from time to time as to the 
approach that we think should be taken. 
 
One of the frustrations, as I said, is that the federal government 
has not yet given us an indication of how much each industry 
might be required to do. For example, how much should the 
agricultural industry or the farmers be required to do? How 
much should the oil and gas industry be required to do? How 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

much should the electrical generators, like SaskPower, be 
required to do? Not just in Saskatchewan but across the country. 
 
And you know we have been saying, well we need to have a 
plan that is fair if we’re going to do this, that fairly allocates the 
cost all across the country. And we don’t want the Western 
industries like farming and energy to be hit without others 
bearing part of the load as well. 
 
And actually the federal government hasn’t come up with any 
plan so it’s very difficult. But we are proceeding with climate 
change projects in five areas. 
 
First of all, public education. We put out some material about 
climate change which I’m sure the member has read. We are 
looking at the development of new technology dealing with 
climate change — research into adaptation to climate change 
and impacts of climate change, development of biological sinks 
for carbon dioxide in soil and forests, and also working on 
energy conservation and alternative energy. 
 
This isn’t all done in this branch of Industry and Resources. 
They also work with agencies like the Saskatchewan Research 
Council where the energy conservation office is located, 
SaskEnergy and SaskPower which have certain measures to try 
and conserve energy, and so on. 
 
So those are some of the things that we are trying to do. The 
situation is, as I’ve said, somewhat uncertain because we don’t 
actually know what the plan of the federal government will be 
to actually implement the Kyoto accord which seeks to address 
some issues surrounding climate change. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, in your government’s Speech from the 
Throne, the Speech from the Throne indicated that your 
government was going to negotiate with the federal government 
particularly in the area of agricultural carbon sinks. And I asked 
the Minister of Agriculture what his department is doing in that 
area and he had indicated that the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs was the lead ministry on this issue. 
 
I’m wondering, has your department got an involvement in this 
particular issue? Are you working with the Intergovernmental 
Affairs ministry on the carbon sinks, not only in agriculture but 
in forestry? And if so, what work is being done currently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — To answer the question specifically, Mr. 
Chair, yes, we are working with others, in particular the 
Department of Agriculture and Food in Saskatchewan, to put 
forward a position to the federal government. 
 
And I want to say that, in our view, Ottawa’s current policy on 
carbon sinks unduly penalizes Saskatchewan farmers and other 
Western Canadian farmers. As is well known — and the 
member knows because he is a farmer himself and I’m sure he 
has sunk some carbon through carbon sinks — farmers in 
Saskatchewan have moved to zero till and minimum till, and 
also have cut down the amount of summerfallow. And when 
farmers refrain from disturbing the soil as they have and 
changed their practices, that has the effect of sequestering 
carbon in the ground, which is a good thing. 
 
And we think that the farmers and ranchers have been good 

stewards of the environment by doing that. And if we want to 
continue building on good soil conservation success, our 
farmers have to be acknowledged as the owners of that carbon 
sink and receive benefit for the resulting carbon credits. 
 
Now what has happened up until now, the federal government 
has said that they get the credit for the carbon sinks that have 
been done by the agricultural producers. And we view that 
policy by them as being unacceptable, and we will continue to 
make that point to the federal government as clearly and loudly 
as we can. And we are working with the Department of 
Agriculture and Food who are mainly responsible for taking 
that message to Ottawa. 
 
But I want to let the member know also that there was a 
standing committee of the Senate; I believe it’s called the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture but I could be mistaken. 
Senator Wiebe is on it and Senator Tkachuk from 
Saskatchewan, and others. And I actually appeared in front of 
that committee within the last six weeks I think, or two months 
anyway, and made this very point to them, that one of the things 
we want Ottawa to do is to recognize the farmers and ranchers 
and that those carbon sinks should belong to them, that they 
should get credit for doing that as distinct from the federal 
government taking credit. 
 
So that’s our position. I can’t say that we have met with success 
in Ottawa. In this regard I guess we’re probably in the same 
position as Alberta and Manitoba in particular, and maybe some 
others. But that is our policy and we continue to work in that 
regard. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, there was a number of things that you 
mentioned as far as the farmers and ranchers of this province 
receiving credit for the things that they do. And we certainly 
would support that. As I’ve said to the Minister of Agriculture, I 
think it’s a hugely important issue and I urge the Minister of 
Agriculture to stay on top of this issue because it’s one that 
could have some long-lasting, positive effects in this whole area 
of climate change. 
 
We know for sure that all users of energy will most likely be 
incurring increased costs as energy producers are forced to 
reduce their carbon emissions and thereby pass those costs 
along to the consumers. And farmers and ranchers of course are 
large consumers of energy in the form of diesel, and gasoline, 
and electrical energy, and natural gas, and so on. And so 
therefore I would urge your department to do what it needs to 
do to move this issue along. And the Minister of Agriculture 
had indicated that the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs has 
written a letter to the federal government. Have you as minister 
been in a discussion with any federal ministers on this whole 
area? 
 
And not only with this regard. I realize that the carbon sink 
areas falls more in the area of the Minister of Agriculture and 
the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. But also I think it’s 
important for your department and yourself, Minister, to be on 
top of the cost side of the equation and get those . . . that 
information. And I understand that the federal government has 
put the preliminary implementation plan forward, and if we are 
going to be meeting our obligations under the Kyoto Protocol 
we will have to get the plans in place and the regulations in 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

 

place and so on. 
 
And time is of the essence. These things don’t happen 
overnight. And it seems that, to me, that somebody needs to 
take a lead in this area. And if perhaps the federal government 
is lagging somewhat, I’m asking if you and your government 
are taking a lead in some of these areas, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, we are. I wouldn’t . . . I do agree with 
the member’s characterization of the issue and I wouldn’t want 
the member to think that we are only writing letters to Ottawa. 
We are doing other things as well. 
 
We have meetings on a regular basis of our representatives 
through officials with the federal and other provincial 
representatives to try to press this point. And certainly we will 
also be making representations at a ministerial level. I’ve 
appeared at the standing committee of the Senate when they 
were in town to make this very point. And certainly the 
Minister of Agriculture, myself, probably the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, will take the opportunity in 
discussions with our federal and other counterparts to make this 
same point. 
 
So we share the same view as the member. We share the same 
sense of urgency. We, as I said in my previous response, have 
not succeeded in convincing the federal government yet but 
we’re going to keep trying. And in that regard we’re no 
different than the Government of Manitoba or the Government 
of Alberta. I think we’re all of one mind but we haven’t 
successfully convinced the federal government to see the issue 
our way. And of course it’s like a lot of other issues with the 
federal government — we’re unhappy with their position, but 
we’re not really in a position to tell them what to do. 
 
But in terms of trying to convince them what should be done, 
we’re sure trying to do that — meeting with them, writing them, 
and we’ll be meeting with them again. And we’ll be pressing 
forward the very same points that the member is making 
because I think on this issue there’s no difference in view 
between the opposition and government. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, in the vote (IR06), as I’ve 
indicated, there’s approximately two and a half million dollars 
allocated to that particular vote. The majority of that, $2.254 
million, is for salaries. Could you give us an indication as to 
how many people are in that particular vote and perhaps the 
responsibilities of those individuals in that area of your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, there are 37 individuals that work in 
that branch of the department and they are policy analysts. 
Their job is to conduct economic research and identify, analyze, 
and develop policies to encourage economic growth in the areas 
of climate change, energy conservation, and resource 
development. And I might say this includes tax structures for 
coal, industrial, and metallic minerals — in other words mining 
— to optimize revenues. 
 
And one of the things that they’ve been working on is, you 
know looking at some of the tax structures. And we’re certainly 
meeting with a lot of success. The oil and gas sector is certainly 
taking off, and there’s a lot of good work I think underway in 

the area of mining as well. And the work that these people do, 
in conjunction I should say with some other branches, because 
we also have exploration and geological services which is very 
interested in oil and gas and mining, and we have a petroleum 
and natural gas division which also is as well; not to mention 
mineral revenues, which collect the money which is very 
important too. 
 
So there are 37 individuals in that branch. And they advise 
government as to what our policies to promote economic 
development should be. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, in addition to those 37 people that work 
in policy development, how much money does your department 
spend on hiring consultant . . . outsourcing policy development 
work? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With respect to this area of resource policy, 
the department does not consult outside with respect to the 
development of policy. 
 
I mean, certainly we consult with many people, but not in a paid 
sense. They go out and we go out consulting with people across 
the province, talking to people that work for companies, talking 
sometimes to other governments, but that is done in-house. We 
don’t hire people as paid consultants to develop our policy. That 
would be something that we would do inside the government 
and these people would do themselves. 
 
I don’t mean to suggest that there would never be an occasion 
where the department would hire consultants. It’s not actually a 
huge thing. There might be some consulting in some areas — 
information technology, management structure, that kind of 
thing. 
 
But in terms of this area, we don’t believe that we spent . . . 
have been spending money in terms of paying outside 
consultants. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, so if I understood you correctly, you 
don’t hire consultants to develop policy for you, but you do hire 
consultants to do research in specific areas, whether . . . And 
my question doesn’t necessarily pertain to the resource sector 
but also to the economic development area. 
 
We know full well and we certainly had a lively . . . number of 
lively sessions in this House over a consultant’s report that your 
department hired to do some work on the viability of the 
forestry centre in Prince Albert, as an example. 
 
And my question is: what type of expenditure would your 
department have in hiring consultants of all types and for 
whatever reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that the . . . 
with respect to specific projects where consultants might be 
hired by the Department of Industry and Resources in a given 
year, probably somewhere in the neighbourhood of $700,000 to 
$800,000 might typically be spent on consulting services in the 
private sector out of a department budget this year of 
approximately $77 million. 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

So it’s a small amount of the department’s budget and it would 
relate not to policy development but to specific projects so that 
if there was some proposal for some kind of project and the 
department needed advice, they might get advice. The P.A. 
(Prince Albert) forestry centre has been mentioned, where I 
think at least one and maybe more people were asked for their 
advice and reports were obtained and so on. And so it would be 
in that kind of range. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
welcome the officials here today. We’ve always found the 
officials from this department to be very helpful in estimates in 
the past, and we appreciate your knowledge base and your hard 
work and your diligence, and now welcome here today. 
 
Mr. Minister, Cameco’s McArthur River uranium mine has 
been shut down for some time due to flooding. Of course that 
mine is not only the richest mine in Saskatchewan but the 
richest mine in the world. 
 
I’m wondering if the minister would have an update on the 
conditions at that mine and a target date for restart. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that Cameco now 
has the water flow under control and the machinery is now 
above water. And they’re in the process of repairing some 
electrical equipment that was apparently damaged by the 
flooding. 
 
We don’t have a firm date as to when the situation will be 
considered completely resolved but we do know that the matter 
is as well in hand as this kind of situation could be and that a 
great deal of progress has been made. And as I say, the situation 
is certainly under control, the machinery is above water, and 
repairs are being undertaken even as we speak. And so they’re 
on their way to resuming normal operations. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, assuming that it will still be 
some months before the McArthur River mine is back in 
production and because McArthur River is such a high 
percentage of uranium production in this province, I wonder 
what impact the shutdown of this mine is likely to have on 
uranium revenues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that Cameco has an adequate 
supply of uranium that has already been mined and that, 
therefore, they will continue to process the stockpile that they 
have. And so we don’t have any indication that this very 
unfortunate circumstance, if repaired within the time frame that 
I think they’re looking at, will actually impact their ability to 
mill and sell their product. 
 
So we think that, in that sense, the matter is certainly under 
control, that they had already mined a lot of uranium that can be 
milled, and so that process we don’t expect to be interrupted. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I wonder, could you 
give us a rough idea how many months’ supply would be in that 
stockpile at the present rate of sales? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to preface this by saying that 
nobody really knows exactly how long it will take to 
completely resolve the situation, but I’m advised that we 

believe from Cameco that they may be looking at a period of 
four to six months. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Yes, I understand that four to six months is the 
period expected to get the mine back into production. 
 
My question is, how many months supply are in the stockpile 
that’s been mined at the present rate of sales? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the exact amount of their supply 
would be, you know, private business information. But to 
answer the question, we’re advised that the supply would 
exceed the time period that they see as necessary to fix the 
mine. So in other words, if it is another four to six months, they 
feel that they have enough stockpiled that their ability to mill 
uranium is not going to be interrupted. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, the Department of Fisheries and 
Oceans is now involved in regulating particularly the oil and 
gas business and the mining business in this province as it 
pertains to waterways or what the Department of Fisheries and 
Oceans perceives as waterways. What concerns does the 
department have over the federal government moving in in this 
regulatory and policing role? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we do have concerns. We have 
concerns from the point of view that I believe, if my memory 
serves me correctly, this area of regulation of fisheries in 
Saskatchewan, relative to uranium mining, was formerly — 
before the arrival of federal officials — handled by, I think, 
about four or five people that worked for the provincial 
Department of the Environment. And I believe some dozens of 
Fisheries and Oceans people from Ottawa now are concerned 
about this kind of issue. 
 
And so our concern is — we want certainly the environment to 
be respected and anything that needs to be done should be done 
— but we would have a concern if added layers of bureaucracy 
resulted in delays in necessary approvals. And so we have been 
communicating with the federal government to say we want a 
streamlined process so that industrial development can proceed. 
 
And this isn’t only relevant to the uranium companies but is 
relevant in other areas as well. And we are working with the 
federal government to try to arrive at a streamlined process with 
Fisheries and Oceans. 
 
And I might say that we’ve made some progress with respect to 
the federal environmental officials to try to streamline the 
process there, which is . . . Because the process there, at the 
federal level, has been the source of some frustration for 
industry. We’re trying to arrive at appropriate protocols with 
the federal government in the area of fisheries as well. 
 
But we are still in the process of doing that as opposed to being 
able to say we have achieved that. But we’re certainly doing our 
very, very best to achieve that and we’ll continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — When the Department of Fisheries and Oceans 
came to Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, was the Saskatchewan 
government involved in discussions beforehand or did the 
Department of Fisheries and Oceans more or less impose 
themselves upon us, duplicating our own SERM (Saskatchewan 



May 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

 

Environment and Resource Management) department’s 
functions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that if there were discussions 
with the provincial representatives, those discussions would 
have been with people from the Department of the 
Environment, not our Department of Industry and Resources, so 
I’m unable to give the member any details of discussions with 
officials. But I know that the Minister of the Environment 
would be more than happy to provide that information to the 
member. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
looking at item (IRO7) in the Estimates for Industry and 
Resources, petroleum research initiative shows a figure of $1 
million estimated for 2003-2004, as well as $1 million last year. 
 
Mr. Minister, what functions are included in that item? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That is actually a grant to the PTRC, the 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre. 
 
And as the member knows, but members of the public watching 
this may not know it, the Petroleum Technology Research 
Centre is a research centre located in the research park at the 
University of Regina. And it is a partnership of the province of 
Saskatchewan — so we give the $1 million — the Government 
of Canada, which gives I think a similar amount; the 
Saskatchewan Research Council is involved, the University of 
Regina has some involvement, and also the private sector. 
Industry puts money into it as well. 
 
And it is a very exciting place. And I would encourage anyone 
to learn more about it. And I’ll just give one example. 
 
In Saskatchewan — many people do not know this — 85 per 
cent of the known oil reserves are unrecoverable using 
conventional means. In other words, we know the oil is there — 
we don’t actually have trouble locating the oil in Saskatchewan 
— but you can only get 15 per cent of it out of the ground. 
Eighty-five per cent of it is basically embedded in sediment or 
rock, I think. 
 
And so what we’re trying to do through the Petroleum 
Technology Research Centre, in partnership with the federal 
government, the University of Regina, and the private sector 
and the Saskatchewan Research Council, is find a way to get 
the rest of the oil out of the ground, which of course would be 
beneficial to industry and everyone in the province. 
 
And one of the very interesting things that is being looked at up 
there — and this isn’t just the PTRC but also the international 
test centre for carbon dioxide sinks and also the Weyburn test 
site of EnCana — is together, the PTRC and those other parties 
I just mentioned are trying to figure out if they can take carbon 
dioxide, for example from SaskPower which burns coal which 
creates carbon dioxide, and pump that into the ground and leave 
the carbon dioxide there, thereby reducing the climate change 
effect. And at the same time, when they pump that into the 
ground, it makes it easier to get the oil out of the ground. 
 

So you kind of have a win-win. You can improve the 
environment by sinking the carbon dioxide into the ground, but 
at the same time you can get the oil, more oil out of the ground. 
 
And so the work they’re doing is very important. Our 
contribution of $1 million per year to that centre is just one part 
of their budget. But the work they do and with their partners at 
Weyburn and the international test centre as well, we think has 
a potential to make great returns for the people of the province 
by developing the oil industry, and that’s what that $1 million is 
for. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I am quite familiar 
with the work of the PTRC and I just . . . I wanted to check on 
the $1 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have in front of me a news release entitled . . . 
It’s dated April 28, 2003, entitled “Province’s Geological Lab 
Expanded.” Part of the news release states: 
 

Expansion of this lab increases the province’s research 
capacity and our ability to serve our vital oil and gas 
industry (according to yourself, Mr. Minister). Good 
research infrastructure is critical to the growth and 
sustainability of our oil and gas resources, which are 
driving our economy and creating jobs and benefits for . . . 
(the people of Saskatchewan). 

 
Mr. Minister, it looks like about $300,000 was invested in this 
facility recently. I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you tell us how 
that lab was expanded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that it was for a new roof, fire 
suppression, and reorganization of the offices. 
 
And I want to say I visited the lab recently and it’s actually an 
amazing place. It’s on the 200 block east of Dewdney in 
Regina. And someone told me that it was the length of two 
football fields. That’s pretty long. 
 
And one of the questions I asked when I was there, actually, 
was . . . It’s quite amazing because you go down and down and 
down the hallway and on either side they have the core samples 
that result from people drilling oil and gas wells which industry 
is required to give to the centre. And then people can come in 
and look at the core samples, examine them in order to assess 
whether it’s possible to exploit the resource that is in the 
ground. 
 
And I did ask the people when I was there whether there was 
protection for fire because if this collection, which goes back to 
the 1940s I think, of thousands and thousands and thousands of 
core samples which gives us a virtual geological mapping of 
much of the province, if we were ever to have a fire where that 
was lost in the sense that the cardboard containers were burned 
and everything was in a rubble, it would really be a major, 
major catastrophe really in the area of geological science. 
 
So I was advised at the time that there was fire protection. Fire 
protection was part of this; having the roof repaired or fixed 
was another part of it; and also some organization in the office. 
 
But I want to assure the member insofar as the office part goes, 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2003 

 

that having visited this place, this place is not any kind of a 
fancy place at all. It’s extremely basic; it’s extremely 
functional. And it’s a very important resource for industry, and 
I’m sure some researchers and academic people in the province 
as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I am aware . . . I’m 
aware that the provincial geological lab is doing a . . . providing 
a very important function to the industry. And I know that 
Saskatchewan has done a good job over the years of logging our 
core samples and actually is . . . We’ve actually been 
commended by other jurisdictions for that. 
 
And I guess my question was, are there new capabilities added 
to the centre as a result of this three hundred dollar . . . thousand 
dollar investment, or is it just more or less a refurbishing and 
the fire protection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — New capabilities — I would say, no. I 
would say this was really to . . . for protection. It was to protect 
what we have, as I’ve described. 
 
And with that, Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the members of the 
opposition for their very helpful questions today. And I’ve 
enjoyed our dialogue on some of these important issues. 
 
And I also want to thank the officials that have come here 
today, not only for the very good job that they have done today 
but the very good job that they do each and every day on behalf 
of the Saskatchewan public. 
 
So with that, I move that the committee rise, report progress, 
and ask for leave to sit again. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I as well would like to 
thank the officials for their help today. We always appreciate it. 
Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone on his feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I raised 
a point of order at the conclusion of question period regarding 
letters that the Minister of Agriculture had quoted from. The 
point of order was well taken by yourself but as of yet we have 
not seen any letters tabled, Mr. Speaker, so I would ask that 
those letters be tabled immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s point is well taken. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the minister yesterday made 
reference to some letters, quoted directly from one that will be 
tabled, if it has not been. I was of the impression it has been. 
And the second one he referred to he paraphrased; it wasn’t a 
direct quote. But the letter that the minister quoted directly from 
in the House yesterday is expected to be tabled and will be. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members for their clarification 
and their intervention. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 

 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1077 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1078 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1078 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1078 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1078 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1078 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1078 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1078 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1078 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1079 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1096 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1096 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Wind Power in Saskatchewan 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1079 
 SABEX Awards 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1079 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1079 
 Cluff Lake Mine Honoured 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1080 
 The Orange Zone Challenge 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1080 
 Future is Wide Open Promotions 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1080 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1081 
 Canada-Wide Science Fair 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Contract Negotiations with Medical Profession 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
 Our Future is Wide Open Campaign 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1082 
 Closure of McLean Trans-Canada Campground 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1082 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1083 
 Freedom of Information Request Regarding Mega Bingo 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1084 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1084 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Annual Report to the Standing Committee on Communication 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1085 
 Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the Standing Committee on Communication 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1085 
 Referral of Public Accounts to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1086 
 Referral of Bylaws of Professional Associations to the Special Committee on Regulations 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1086 
 Estimates and Supplementary Estimates Referred to the Standing Committee on Estimates 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1086 



 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1086 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 28 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1087 
 Bill No. 23 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1088 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1089 
 Bill No. 24 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1090 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1090 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1091 
 Bill No. 40 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1091 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1091 
 Bill No. 41 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1092 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1093 
 Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1093 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1094 
 Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1095 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1096 
 Bill No. 34 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2003 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1097 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1097 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 25 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2003 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1097 
 Bill No. 22 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1098 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Industry and Resources — Vote 23 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1098 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1099 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1101 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1104 
POINT OF ORDER 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1106 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1106 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1106 
 


	The Orange Zone Challenge
	The Orange Zone Challenge

