















































Hansard: April 16, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 611 
 April 16, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
another petition signed by citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan regarding Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation and their announcement that the 2003 premiums 
charged to farmers will increase by up to 52 per cent and 
further. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Lucky 
Lake, Macrorie, and the fine community of Beechy, and I’m 
pleased to present it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
signed today from people in my constituency who are 
concerned about Highway 49 from Kelvington to Highway No. 
35. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in the area. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Kelvington 
and Quill Lake. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the alarming and 
deplorable lack of a hemodialysis unit in the Moose Jaw Union 
Hospital. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

This petition is signed by individuals, Mr. Speaker, from the 
communities of Regina, Strasbourg, Tuxford, Lebret, and 
Silton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of the people of the Estevan constituency very concerned 
about the unreal condition of Highway 47. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents of Estevan and 
Calgary. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the 52 per cent increase to crop insurance 
premiums. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Fillmore, Tribune, 
Weyburn, and Lake Alma. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
improve Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and 
also prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Tugaske. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about fairness for Crown leaseholders. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

present a petition to save the twin bridges: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
positive action to preserve the historic original twin bridges 
between the Battlefords and Battleford. 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I present a 
petition today on behalf of constituents concerned with the 
condition of Highway 22 between Junction 6 and Junction 20. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey and Raymore. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 27, 35, and 36. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 27 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Agriculture minister: what is the total assessment of 
the Crown leased ranch land, and what is the average 
quarter section assessment of this same land? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Merci, Monsieur le président. Mes chers collègues 
je vous présente membres de l’Assemblée communautaire 
fransaskoise. Jennie Baudais est le présidente et aussi députée 
de la communauté, Bellevue. Nous espérons que vous avez 
passé une journée intéressante au Palais legislative. 
 
Savez que les portes des membres de la partie saskatchewannais 
sont toujours ouvertes. 
 
Bienvenue aux invités distingués. Merci, Monsieur le président. 
 
(Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members, I present to 
you members of l’Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise. 
Jennie Baudais is the president and also a deputy from the 
community of Bellevue. 
 
We hope that you have had an interesting day at the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Please know that the doors of members of the Saskatchewan 
Party are always open. 

Welcome to our distinguished guests. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
can see that the hon. member opposite and myself are both very 
motivated today to improve our bilingualism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I introduce to you and 
all the members of the House today, le présidente, Jennie 
Baudais and Équipe fransaskoise, members of the ACF 
(Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise) here today. And I’ll 
mention that Jennie’s from Bellevue, Saskatchewan, where I 
think they have the world’s largest pea plant. That’s right. We 
always have something bigger in every town in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Baudais is an ardent supporter and champion of the 
Saskatchewan francophone community since 1983 and has 
worked tirelessly — as I do believe most of this group of people 
have on behalf of their communities — so much so that she has 
been the elected president of the Assemblée communautaire 
fransaskoise. 
 
And I’ve had the pleasure of meeting several times Ms. Baudais 
and know that she’s not only passionate about her heritage but 
also the province, having been born and raised in the 
Wakaw-Bellevue area. And she does continue to work hard for 
the community and was instrumental in building the cultural 
centre. 
 
Now along with being the president of ACF, she’s also a board 
member for the hamlet of St. Isidore-de-Bellevue. I don’t think 
I knew that. 
 
Later this afternoon I look forward to meeting with Ms. Baudais 
and becoming more familiar with Saskatchewan francophone 
interests and concerns. 
 
But I will say on behalf of my colleagues in the legislature: 
 
Merci à vous, les fransaskois et les fransaskoise, pour votre 
contribution à notre province. 
 
(Translation: Thank you, francophone residents, for your 
contribution to our province.) 
 
I thank all members and ask them to welcome Ms. Baudais and 
members of the delegation to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my pleasure to introduce, seated in your 
gallery, Mr. David Anderson, Member of Parliament from 
Cypress Hills—Grasslands. Mr. Anderson is also the Member 
of Parliament for constituents from seven MLAs (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) on this side of the House, and he sits 
with his Majesty’s Loyal Opposition as the Agriculture critic 
which is very fitting because he represents some of the best 
farmers in the world. 
 
So if you join with me to welcome our friend, Mr. Anderson. 
 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if all 
these guests are here yet today. These are guests that are here 
for the honours and emblems. Can you let me know if you’re in 
the gallery? If not, I’ll wait until a little bit later. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to join my colleague from Kindersley in welcoming to the 
House today the MP (Member of Parliament) for Cypress 
Hills—Grasslands, Mr. David Anderson. 
 
Mr. Anderson has been a personal friend of mine; I met him 
when I first moved to the Cypress Hills area about 20 years ago 
and we’ve developed a good friendship over that time which 
has stood some rather important tests. He was also a customer 
of mine, and when you can leave a big, important combine deal 
as friends — when you’re on either side of the contract — I 
think the deal was probably pretty fair. 
 
So I’d like to welcome Mr. Anderson to our Assembly, and I’d 
like to congratulate him on his fine work as the MP representing 
our area. He’s a man of integrity, and I trust him implicitly with 
our interests. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Major Projects Underway in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s future 
is wide open. Indications of this are all around us — job 
numbers up, manufacturing shipments up, exports up, potash 
sales up, housing starts up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about the only two things in Saskatchewan that 
are going down are social assistance caseloads and the Leader 
of the Opposition’s popularity. Small wonder they’re so gloomy 
over there all the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not the only ones that recognize that 
Saskatchewan is on a roll. Here’s a sample of the more than 280 
major projects worth more than $7 billion that are currently 
underway in Saskatchewan. 
 
Philom Bios Incorporated and Sask Pulse Growers, a pulse field 
lab in Saskatoon, $10 million; the Hi-Lite Custom Feedlots of 
Melfort, a 20,000 head cattle feedlot, $10 million; Stoughton 
Feed Processing feed plant, $2.4 million; the Beefeater Inn in 
Estevan, renovations, $3 million; Springwood Development, a 
$30 million retail complex in P.A. (Prince Albert); Saskatoon 
Hyundai, KIA — they must be selling some cars, Mr. Speaker 
— a new showroom, two and a half million dollars. 
 
The list goes on and on. Clearly investors have confidence in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have a plan for Saskatchewan 
and it’s working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

South East Saskatchewan Association Awards Program 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently 
the South East Saskatchewan Association for Culture, 
Recreation and Sport held their annual awards program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of the large geographic area the 
Southeast covers, this awards program has . . . have been held 
in a number of communities each year. This year’s program was 
held in the community of Odessa. 
 
The purpose of the South East Saskatchewan Association for 
Culture, Recreation and Sport is to develop . . . foster the 
development and delivery of culture, recreation, and sport for 
the benefit of all peoples in the southeast region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this southeast region actually organizes and hosts 
programs, and assists in a number of programs in the area 
including community consultations, resource persons, district 
workshops, official development; and 25 other different 
organizations and projects are assisted by this region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the awards program honours people in a number 
of different areas including culture, heritage, recreation, youth, 
coach, athlete, sport administrator, and team. 
 
And of particular note, I’d like to congratulate Don and Dell 
Dayle of Langbank for their recognition in the area of recreation 
for their work in the Langbank Recreation Board, and well as 
Dennis Scott of Whitewood for his work as a sports 
administrator of the year. 
 
Congratulations to all the award winners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

April is Cancer Month 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is cancer month, 
and the daffodil is the symbol for the annual campaign by the 
Canadian Cancer Society to raise awareness and funds to fight 
this awful disease. 
 
The daffodil, in its hardiness and brightness, is a symbol of 
hope and determination for those fighting cancer and for those 
multitudes of us affected by it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most widespread and deadly forms of 
cancer is breast cancer, especially for women over 50. Before 
early detection technology, the survival rate was one-half of 
what it is now. A simple mammogram today provides the 
necessary screening. 
 
(13:45) 
 
For me and for most of my colleagues here, we need only make 
a quick trip across town to one of the permanent or regional 
sites of the Saskatchewan Cancer Society’s screening program 
for breast cancer; it’s a different story for women outside our 
major centres. But I’m proud to remind the Assembly that the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Society and Saskatchewan Health have 
supported a mammogram mobile unit for the past 13 years, and 
this morning a new million dollar bus was unveiled complete 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

with up-to-date mammogram and X-ray equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have known for years that early detection is 
less expensive, less traumatic, and more effective. I know we all 
wish this new mobile unit a safe journey as it carries the 
message of hope for an end to the suffering from breast cancer 
to all corners of the province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Valley-West Community Justice Committee 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday, April 
14, I had the privilege of attending the inauguration ceremony 
for the Valley-West Community Justice Committee. This is a 
committee made up of volunteers and professionals, and their 
express purpose is to keep youth out of incarceration and to 
provide opportunities for closure and restitution for victims. 
 
The area is policed by three police agencies, Mr. Speaker: the 
Dalmeny Police, the Corman Park Police Services, and the 
Warman RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) detachment. 
 
And the area that’s covered by this new program involves the 
communities of Radisson, Maymont, Borden, Martensville, 
Warman, Dalmeny, Langham, Delisle, Langham, Vanscoy, 
Asquith, the Pike Lake region, and their surrounding RM (rural 
municipality) of Corman Park. 
 
They are a very enthusiastic group. They’ve spent the last year 
in preparation for it and we wish them well because their 
objectives are very honourable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Voluntary Sector is Strengthened 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan’s future is wide open and one of the 
keys to building a successful and prosperous future lies within 
our voluntary sector. This government recognizes that, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is why we’ve announced the next steps to 
equip Saskatchewan’s volunteer organizations to fulfill their 
visions. 
 
The work of our voluntary sector reflects who we are and the 
values that are important to us here in Saskatchewan. We have a 
vibrant voluntary sector, which is a valued part of the social 
fabric of our province. It will benefit all of the people of our 
province to have government and the voluntary sector 
strengthen their relationship and share the resources as 
effectively as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three working groups will be established under the 
Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative to address three key areas. 
These include enhancing the co-operative relationship between 
the public sector and the many components of the voluntary 
sector, building capacity within Saskatchewan’s voluntary 
sector, and creating awareness of the benefits of volunteerism 
for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased and delighted to note that my 
colleague, the member for Wascana Plains, has been appointed 

the Legislative Secretary responsible for the Premier’s 
Voluntary Sector Initiative. This job is in capable hands, Mr. 
Speaker. Our future is wide open and we have a plan to work 
co-operatively with all sectors here in this great province. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Queen’s Hotel Destroyed in Fire 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
with sadness today I rise to talk about an event that happened in 
the small town of Qu’Appelle, about 50 kilometres east of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about 2:30 this morning a fire broke out in the 
Queen’s Hotel, which is located on the main street of 
Qu’Appelle. Mr. Speaker, firefighters, volunteer firefighters 
from around the area came to fight a heroic battle but 
unfortunately lost. Volunteer fire departments from Indian 
Head, Qu’Appelle, Fort Qu’Appelle, and McLean all responded 
to the call. 
 
This building was built in 1883, Mr. Speaker, and is one of the 
oldest structures in the province. It has been the site of many 
historic events, not to mention the staging ground for General 
Middleton when he staged the area to go up to Batoche in the 
Riel Rebellion. 
 
The community of Qu’Appelle and the province is going to be 
missing one of the nicest structures in the province — the 
Queen’s Hotel — and we look forward to perhaps rebuilding a 
structure that in the next 200 years will still be standing to 
replace this great structure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

White City Volunteer Awards 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very pleasant 
coincidence that I can rise in this Assembly as the Chair of the 
Premier’s volunteer sector initiative to tell my colleagues of a 
special event I attended recently in my constituency to honour a 
number of people who give definition to that sector. 
 
I was privileged to attend and bring greetings along with Mayor 
Mitchelson, also a recipient at the White City Order of 
Recognition Awards, their program, and banquet. We were 
entertained by the Greenall School Jazz Band and the White 
City Dance Group. Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, 
added her dignity and an added sense of formality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ambrose Reschny hosted and emceed the evening 
that recognized over 20 separate persons, and I won’t name 
them all except Irene and Rick Temple, and Jack Ramm who 
received standing ovations from their peers. I will say that 
individually and collectively these citizens reflect our 
province’s strength as they build our living communities. 
 
The value of the voluntary sector goes far beyond the fact that 
volunteers will often work for free; rather they are the human 
and humane face and presence that implements a vast range of 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

 

programs and activities for all citizens. 
 
Our province has the highest percentage of volunteer 
participation in Canada. One reason for that, Mr. Speaker, may 
be that there’s so much opportunity here that we don’t want to 
miss out; or it may be because we learn at a very early age that 
in Saskatchewan it’s both a duty and a joy to work with our 
neighbours for the good of all. 
 
Regardless, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the recipients of the 
Order of White City Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Roundup Ready Wheat 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to address the 
House on an issue that is of critical importance for the future of 
farming in Saskatchewan. 
 
The proposed introduction of glyphosate tolerant wheat, or as it 
is popularly known, Roundup Ready Wheat, has the potential 
for serious harm to our economy. The greatest concern is with 
its marketability, or more correctly, its non-marketability. 
According to the Canadian Wheat Board, 82 per cent of its 
customers reject genetically engineered wheat. The 
consequences for the provincial economy, if markets were to be 
closed to Canadian wheat, would be disastrous. 
 
Another concern is the problem of controlling Roundup Ready 
volunteer wheat in the years following initial planting. The 
control of volunteer wheat will require producers to abandon 
zero-till to the detriment of prairie soils. 
 
Scientists are concerned with the possibility of glyphosate 
tolerant wheat out crossing with other grasses and weeds. This 
would further put the prairie environment at risk. Roundup 
Ready Wheat is of no benefit to farmers, consumers, or the 
environment. The only beneficiary would be the chemical 
companies. 
 
In light of the gravity of the situation, I’ve written to the federal 
Minister of Agriculture urging him to deny the application, and 
requesting that marketability and cost-benefit analysis be added 
to the criteria used in evaluating the introduction of genetically 
engineered organisms. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to support Saskatchewan 
farmers in their fight to preserve our wheat markets. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation into the Death of Lawrence Wegner 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
caused tremendous confusion with his statements yesterday 
about Lawrence Wegner case and his apparent backtracking 
today. Yesterday the minister clearly stated, and I quote: 
 

The police are going to be conducting further investigation 
into the matter (he said). Justice officials have been advised 
of this by the RCMP. 

 
Now today the minister’s completely backing away from these 
statements. Mr. Speaker, what happened? Why was the minister 
saying one thing yesterday and another today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say what I 
said yesterday and what I will have repeated today to the media 
and what I will say to the House now, which is that obviously 
this is a very tragic and troubling circumstance. 
 
There has been some suggestion, perhaps inadvertently through 
my office in the past, that the matter would not be investigated 
further or that the matter was considered closed. What I have 
tried to say to the media and I say now to the House is that as 
long as there are troubling questions with respect to this very 
tragic death of a young man, this matter is not considered 
closed. 
 
And the major point, in my view, Mr. Speaker, and which I 
would reiterate, is that as long as there are unanswered 
questions, we need to do everything we can to try to find the 
answers. I cannot guarantee to the public that we will find the 
answers in this or any unsolved case, but I can guarantee that 
we will take whatever steps we can to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
all must be very troubling to the Lawrence Wegner family. 
Yesterday the minister said the RCMP is reopening the case. 
Today, he says the case was never closed. 
 
However, that clearly contradicts a letter sent to the Wegner 
family by former Justice minister Chris Axworthy. The former 
Justice minister advised the family the case was closed. Now 
the minister is telling us the case was never closed. Mr. 
Speaker, it seems like the minister is more interested in 
covering his own misstatements than in providing the Wegner 
family with clear answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why the confusion? How does the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) Justice department manage to botch so many 
cases or is this just one more example of NDP Saskatchewan 
justice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, if there is any way in which 
any comments that I have made or anyone in the Department of 
Justice has made, if any of those comments have created any 
confusion, then for that I apologize. 
 
But I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I did never . . . I never 
said, as the member just said I had indicated, that the case 
would be reopened. In fact, what I said yesterday and I repeated 
today is that this case has never been closed. This case must 
remain open as long as there are unanswered questions. 
 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

The file has remained open and we consider it to be an active 
file, Mr. Speaker. And if the letter to the solicitor for the 
Wegner family suggested otherwise, as it may be taken to have 
suggested otherwise, I apologize for that, Mr. Speaker. And I 
just want to assure the family, the House, and the public that as 
long as there are unanswered questions with respect to a very 
tragic death of a young man, we will do our utmost to find the 
answers to those questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Confidentiality of Personal Health Records 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. About 300 patients of a 
Regina doctor were very concerned to learn this morning that 
their personal medical files turned up in a recycling bin. The 
doctor involved has stated that they were inactive files that were 
supposed to be shredded and he has apologized to his patients. 
 
Still, this situation raises questions about the confidentiality of 
patient files. Mr. Speaker, what legal requirement does the 
government have in place to safeguard the confidentiality of 
individual patient files? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is an area which is being 
addressed very quickly by the appropriate body, which is the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons. They have procedures in 
place to deal with the professional conduct of their members, 
and this involves a private physician and his private practice. 
My understanding is that they’ve already received some 
questions about it, and that they’re working through this and 
with the procedures that are set out under their Medical 
Profession Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, in 1999 the government 
passed a Bill called The Health Information Protection Act. 
Section 17 of this Act deals with the retention and destruction 
of personal health records. It states that all health care providers 
must ensure that personal health information is destroyed in a 
manner that protects the privacy of the patient. 
 
This provision seems to make good sense. There’s only one 
problem; the Act has never been proclaimed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP passed this Act in 1999. Why have they 
not proclaimed these provisions to protect the confidentiality of 
personal health records? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation, The Medical 
Profession Act, sets out the rules for the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons and the appropriate procedures. They have codes 
of ethics within their profession, and one of those codes of 
ethics deals with confidentiality. They have a long history of 
protecting that concern. And they are attending to that right 
now. 
 

We have legislation that we have passed and that we’re working 
on. We’ve been in consultation with the partners that we have 
throughout the system. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that our government is very careful 
when we get into complex areas like confidentiality to make 
sure that we work with all of the people within the whole area 
that we’re working on. We have been doing that. We are 
coming forward with some amendments that will allow this new 
legislation to go into place. But we want to do it in a way that 
will be effective in a very complex area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, in her second reading speech 
in 1999, the then associate minister of Health said the 
following, and I quote: 
 

In Saskatchewan today personal health information is 
regulated by a number of statutes, by professional ethics 
and bylaws, and in some . . . instances . . . is not regulated 
at all. 

 
She goes on to say: 
 

This patchwork of legislation, regulation, and bylaws 
reflects the health service structure of the past . . . It does 
not support the health information needs of Saskatchewan 
people today. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the minister said in 1999. But here the 
minister is condoning what has happened by pointing to the 
same patchwork of . . . mishmash of regulations and bylaws 
because his Act has never been proclaimed. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the government was so sure they had the 
solution in 1999, why are they delaying these past four years to 
proclaim this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the question and the tone of 
that member is exactly why the people of Saskatchewan do not 
trust the Sask Party with their health system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the member, the minister says 
that the reason that they have mismanaged their own legislation 
is because we’re drawing attention to the incompetence of this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the confidentiality of patient 
information is extremely important and this government should 
have thought through the ramifications of its legislation in 1999 
instead of delaying for four years and making excuse for their 
inaction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not only these kinds of circumstances that 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

 

need to be dealt with. The question of what happens to medical 
records when a doctor retires or leaves the province or leaves 
his practice, Mr. Speaker, the whole issue of the confidentiality 
of medical records is extremely important. Why will this 
government not get its act together and proclaim this 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a plan and we are 
working at it in this particular area, which is a very complex 
area. The whole area of information technology . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. One at a time, 
members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, The Health Information 
Protection Act will be coming forward in this session to deal 
with these particular issues. And until that time, and in this 
particular instance, The Medical Profession Act covers it 
completely. We have confidence that the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons and their people will take care of this particular 
issue. 
 
The bigger issue is, how do we provide care in Canada with 
many, many provincial records into a national record? Mr. 
Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are at the forefront of working 
and developing a comprehensive health record. We have to 
make sure that everything that we do in our province fits in with 
a national plan and we are going to continue working on that 
way with all of the partners in the system, rather than do some 
of the things that the members opposite want us to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provision of Emergency Health Care 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, what the members opposite 
want the government to do is to make a plan and not always 
react to problems that are creeping up that they should have 
interpreted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not only in their 
mismanagement of personal health records that this government 
falls short. Mr. Speaker, the government is long in platitudes 
and always talks about what plan that they have. But, Mr. 
Speaker, people are really getting tired of waiting while this 
government’s inaction continues to affect the health care 
system. We have the longest health care waiting lists. We have 
emergency departments that are overrun by patients needing 
attention. They are understaffed and they are overworked. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does this government have for a plan to take 
care of the overburdened emergency departments in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think this is another 
example of where this party and this government has a plan. 
Those people don’t like it and so they are complaining. And so 

what I would say is . . . He asked a specific question. 
 
I was just handed a press release as I walked into the legislature 
this afternoon. This is from the Saskatchewan . . . Saskatoon 
Health Region. The number of surgeries surpasses 33,000 in the 
last year. The number of surgeries has increased. The wait list 
and times have declined. There are a total of 33,298 surgeries 
done in Saskatoon’s three hospitals for the fiscal year ending 
March 31. The total is 2,544 more than done in the previous 
year. At the same time there was a steady reduction in the 
number of patients waiting for surgery. And overall there was a 
reduction in the length of time people wait for surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re working at these together with the partners 
that need to be there when we’re doing it, and that’s the way to 
do it, not the way the members opposite are talking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have a letter from the Saskatoon Health Region dated 
March 7 to emergency measures providers in the region, and it 
states that the Royal University Hospital emergency department 
is experiencing critical overcrowding leading to occasional 
delay in patient transfer to emergency care. 
 
It advises EMS (emergency medical services) that, quote: 
 

. . . Ambulance personnel will be required to stay with the 
patient providing . . . care until . . . (the patient can be 
admitted). 

 
And for a non-critical patient, that delay will not be more than 
six hours. 
 
Six hours, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this causes a lot of 
difficulty for EMS providers because while they’re providing 
this care, they are not available for other emergency calls back 
in their health region. Mr. Speaker, this also increases the cost 
to the patient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the emergency 
department is so overloaded that there can be delays as long as 
six hours? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we will do is work 
with those people to address those particular problems, and we 
will do it in a coordinated, planned way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have waited for years to hear what the Sask 
Party position or plan is for health care, for education, for 
agriculture. We don’t know what it is and we are waiting 
because we think the people of Saskatchewan are very 
concerned, especially as it relates to health care because they do 
not trust the Leader of the Opposition and his crew, and we 
want to make sure that they tell us what kinds of things they’re 
doing before they have any, any opportunity to do any damage 
to our system. 
 
We are going to defend our medicare system because it’s the 
best one for the people of Saskatchewan. And we will continue 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
want to understand the issue is about the competence of this 
government and its direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, what the people want to do is 
trust the health care system because they’re working so 
diligently and hard under the circumstances imposed by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority says that 
this is a multi-faceted problem, and we understand that that is 
true. Mr. Speaker, people of this province don’t trust the idle 
promises of this government who promised — who promised 
— in the last election that, and I quote: 
 

The election campaign of the NDP promised that all 
patients arriving at emergency rooms would be assessed by 
a health care provider within 15 minutes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, how can anybody in the province trust that 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the Sask Party 
member opposite has made a fatal mistake because he’s 
complaining about what we said in our platform in the last 
election. 
 
Let’s remind everybody what he said and what all those people 
said. And that member was the person who wrote it. He said 
zero money. Maybe at the rate of inflation, but zero money and 
we’re going to freeze the whole system until we do an audit or 
review. 
 
Well, we’ve seen what’s happened in British Columbia. We’re 
not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 

Supply of Health Care Professionals 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
everyone in the health system understands what this 
government seems not to be able to understand — that the 
problem in the emergency departments in Saskatoon, in fact in 
every health district in this province, is of staff shortages, of 
medical professionals. There’s a shortage of nurses. There’s a 
shortage of medical technicians. There’s a shortage of almost 
every category of health professional. 
 
We’re experiencing the difficulties of believing this government 
who said there would not be delays of more than 15 minutes. 
This government also said in the last election that they would 
provide . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please, 

members. Too many people hollering out. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this government also promised 
that they would hire 500 more health care professionals. Mr. 
Speaker, that isn’t happening. The NDP government have 
broken their promises and their pledges to this province, and the 
people of this province will hold them accountable. Why 
haven’t they addressed the issue of critical staff shortages, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we 
have a leader who the people of Saskatchewan trust. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — And we have leadership in health care and 
education and in highways and a number of areas that the 
people trust and they support. I think what the member opposite 
is doing is he’s trying to raise questions about that leadership 
and about that trust because he doesn’t have anything else that 
will work for him. 
 
I think that what needs to happen, Mr. Speaker, is that those 
people in the Sask Party better tell us what they intend to do 
with this province if they ever got their hands on it because we, 
on this side, will be working long and hard to make sure that 
they never ever get any chance to wreck our health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
find the minister’s attitude towards the shortage of medical 
personnel simply incredible. On a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) Radio news report on March 28, the minister had 
this to say and I want to quote. Mr. Speaker, he said: 
 

The Health minister says the government has increased 
nursing . . . seats . . . since 1999. 

 
And he says, and I quote: 
 

John Nilson says there’s no advantage to training more 
nurses if other provinces can hire them when they graduate. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what kind of an attitude is that? It almost implies 
that if we didn’t train any nurses, then other people couldn’t 
hire any of them. Mr. Speaker, that is simply irresponsible. 
 
There is a critical need of medical personnel and this 
government has not met the challenges of providing the 
required number of nursing seats. Mr. Speaker, Donna 
Brunskill, the head of the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association) says there’s absolutely no plan by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why isn’t the government addressing this? Are 
they simply waiting until it gets to crisis proportions before they 
deal with it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have an Action Plan for 
Health Care which includes a health human resources plan 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

 

which builds on making sure we get the professional people that 
we need in this province. It builds on providing operating 
funding. This year, it’s an 8 per cent across-the-board increase 
for health care. It includes a capital plan for equipment and 
facilities. 
 
And I don’t hear the member from Swift Current rising in his 
seat and complaining about some of the things that we’re going 
to do in his community because he knows what kind of positive 
things are happening in health care in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are they going to do? They voted against our 
budget already. Are they going to vote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, members. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 
a chance to vote with a good budget that provides lots of money 
for health care and allows us to work together with the partners 
throughout the system. I challenge those members to come and 
be part of the team that’s going to build health care in 
Saskatchewan, not be a drag or an anchor on what we’re trying 
to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Position on Conflict in Iraq 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The other day 
the deputy minister of Agriculture addressed the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Agrologists’ conference and he made an interesting 
observation. He said that Canada’s position on Iraq does not 
help our trading relationship with the United States. However, 
the damage caused by the federal government has at least been 
somewhat offset by the premiers of Alberta, Ontario, and BC 
(British Columbia), who have spoken out in support of the US 
(United States). Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan is not on this list of supporters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the position of the Canadian federal 
government is going to have a negative relationship on our 
trade with the US. The deputy minister of Agriculture says that 
the statements by the other premiers have lessened the damage. 
Why didn’t the Premier of Saskatchewan do his part to distance 
Saskatchewan from the federal position on Iraq? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would advise the Leader 
of the Opposition to check the Hansard from the Alberta 
legislature, review the comments made by the Premier of 
Alberta in that legislature, and you will find the Premier of 
Alberta stating a position which was in support, in support of 
the position of the national Government of Canada, as this 
province has been in support of the national Government of 
Canada in saying that Canadian activity in Iraq would be 
governed by the United Nations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am proud that our nation has an independent foreign policy — 
independent foreign policy. 
 

Now I think then, Mr. Speaker, it is about time for the Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party to once and for all speak on behalf of 
his party on this matter. He very, very nicely has tried to skirt 
taking a position on Canada’s involvement or non-involvement 
in the conflict in Iraq. I think it’s time that the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party stood and said to the people of 
Saskatchewan just what is his . . . what is his position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has been very clear in our support for the 
actions of the British and the United States doing away with the 
tyrant, Saddam Hussein. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the comments that I referred to were made 
by the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
Order. I invite the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They don’t hear 
so good over there. Mr. Speaker, the comments that I referred to 
earlier were made, not by the Saskatchewan Party, but by the 
deputy minister of Agriculture of the NDP government sitting 
over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan exporters are concerned about a 
backlash against Canadian trade with the US. Gerry Adamson, 
vice-president of STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership Inc.), said a phone survey done near the start of the 
Iraq war found that some of the group’s members, companies, 
were concerned about a potential backlash. Again the deputy 
minister of Agriculture said that this has been lessened by the 
statements made by other premiers. That means it could have 
also been lessened even more by a statement from our Premier, 
the Premier of Saskatchewan. But that never happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the potential damage caused to US trade 
relations by the federal position on Iraq, why didn’t this Premier 
do more to distance Saskatchewan from the federal position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this is the very 
first occasion the Leader of the Opposition Saskatchewan Party 
has unequivocally said that he would support the activity of the 
United States and Great Britain in the Iraq conflict and not 
support the position taken by the national government of 
Canada. I think that is the first time I have heard that . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is my view — I’ve stated it widely — that 
the strong neighbourly relationship, the strong trading 
relationship that exists between our province and our nation and 
our neighbours in the United States of America will not suffer 
long-term consequence as a result of a difference of foreign 
opinion. 
 
I well recall, Mr. Speaker, my father, I recall my father telling 
me about being called to service in Europe in the Second World 
War and at that time Canada went alone, that the American 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

government chose a different foreign policy, appropriately so 
from their point of view. 
 
In other occasions we have stood with our American friends in 
conflict. In this occasion, Canada chose an independent foreign 
policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that it is my view that foreign 
policy should be decided separate and apart from trade policy. 
We do not decide the future of Canadian young men and 
women in conflict based on whether it’s good or not good for 
business. We determine that if it’s good for the nation and 
peace in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan’s Centennial 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Today I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, to 
make a statement about this province’s centennial. As we said 
earlier today, the world needs a little more Saskatchewan. 
 
La Saskatchewan est overt sur le monde. 
 
(Translation: Saskatchewan is open to the world.) 
 
This morning I joined the Premier to officially launch the 
planning for Saskatchewan’s centennial year in 2005. The 
government announced the injection of another 20 million over 
the next three years for centennial initiatives through the new 
district . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. I 
would just ask members to tone down a bit so we can hear this 
statement. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
government announced today the injection of another 20 
million over the next three years for centennial initiatives 
through the new distribution strategy for the Community 
Initiatives Fund. Mr. Speaker, this 20 million is in addition to 
the 120 million the government already committed through the 
Centenary Fund for infrastructure and such key areas as 
schools, parks, roads, and social housing. 
 
This morning’s announcement unveiled two exciting new 
programs. The first, the Celebrating Community centennial 
grant program, supports unique projects designed to create new 
lasting bonds, personal bonds, and new understandings among 
people from diverse communities. These relationships that will 
build lasting legacies in our communities across cultures, across 
geography, across ages, and across physical abilities. 
 
The second program, the centennial facilities grant program, 
will help seed renovation and construction projects that support 
community involvement and quality of life, especially in this 
chilly place where it may snow well into spring. 
 
Both these grant programs will contribute to lasting legacies 
that build the pride and confidence of local communities. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to mention that our 
government’s partnerships with key provincial organizations 
has been essential to this innovative planning for the centennial 
— partners such as Sask Sport, SaskCulture, Sask Parks and 
Recreation Association, the Community Initiatives Fund Board 
of Trustees, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the 
Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Arts Board, 
and Tourism Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning we also unveiled the wonderful new 
centennial logo. And I know that people in communities, many 
of them are far ahead in planning their centennial activities 
already, and the excitement will continue to build. 
 
For more information on centennial planning, people can check 
out the Saskatchewan centennial Web site at 
www.saskatchewancentennial.com. And, Mr. Speaker, starting 
today we can all work to make sure the whole world has a little 
more Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it was my 
privilege to be in the rotunda with the minister and with the 
Premier as the new logo was unveiled to commemorate the 
celebration of Saskatchewan’s centennial, something that . . . an 
event that’s going to occur quite soon, in less than two years 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly are excited about the celebration and 
we’re certainly looking forward to the next 100 years. 
 
We do have a little bit of concern with the new slogan that the 
Premier unveiled — The World Needs a Little More 
Saskatchewan. In our opinion, the world’s been getting a lot of 
Saskatchewan as it’s left our province and gone other places. 
We’d like to see Saskatchewan a little bigger in the world, Mr. 
Speaker. That would be a better goal for our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our first 100 years Saskatchewan has seen good 
times and bad times. Mr. Speaker, we have seen the expansion 
of the province as people came from all over the world to make 
their home and their future in this province. Mr. Speaker, it was 
an exciting time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been on hard times lately, but we do 
think that the 21st century holds a lot of promise for this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, we also do hope that we will be 
able to celebrate our centennial and be involved first-hand in the 
many celebrations that will occur in the year 2005. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — By leave, to respond. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate 
the Premier and the minister, first of all, on the slogan which I 
thought was catchy and new and innovative, and the logo. 
 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

 

This is indeed a time for pride, and a time to express our 
confidence in what we have managed to accomplish in the past 
century, and more important, our confidence in what we will 
succeed in, in the next century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the intervening 100 years since our province 
was formed, the divisions between the homesteaders and 
settlers, the non-Aboriginals, has largely disappeared no matter 
what country our ancestors came from. 
 
In the next century any divisions between Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal, I hope, will also fade into the distant past. As I 
say, any divisions between settlers from one part of the world as 
opposed to another have already disappeared. 
 
I did note that there was no reference to the fact that our sister 
province of Alberta is also celebrating. I think that it is 
appropriate they be included. Although I know I did complain 
when I was minister that we had some concern that the province 
of Alberta would be paving No. 2 Highway between Edmonton 
and Calgary with platinum as their celebration mode, and we 
would be holding a potluck supper. Notwithstanding some of 
the problems with resources, I think it is appropriate that we 
join with our sister province which is also celebrating its 
centennial as well. 
 
I think this has been a good, good start. I would have liked to 
have heard more details but the mood and spirit in the rotunda 
today was excellent. The slogan is good. The logo is good, and 
let’s have a blast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, before I begin, I ask leave 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In addition to 
the rest of our guests from around the province, I’d like to take 
this opportunity to introduce to you representatives of 
thousands of individuals who work in the areas that protect the 
people of our province. 
 
And I’ll just ask that you stand when I introduce you so 
everybody gets to know who you are. Representing the 
commanding officer of “F” Division, RCMP Inspector Bob 
Mills. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now representing the municipal police 

service of the province, Regina Police Chief — oh there he is 
— Cal Johnston, who is also president of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Police Chiefs. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Representing the fire service of the 
province, Regina Fire Chief Jack Lichtenwald. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Representing the emergency medical 
service areas of our province, Mr. Dan Lewis, board member of 
the Saskatchewan Paramedic Association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And representing our many federal 
civil servants who work in protective services, Mr. Claude 
Marchand, program services officer, Canada Customs and 
Revenue Agency. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And representing Canada’s armed 
forces from 15 Wing Moose Jaw, Chief Warrant Officer Steve 
Joyner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And accompanying them today is the 
familiar face of Michael Jackson, the executive director of 
protocol and honours; and protocol senior policy and planning 
officer, Debbie Saum. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming our 
guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2003 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of Bill No. 19, The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Act. 
 
On September 11, 2002, Premier Calvert announced the 
establishment of a medal to honour people who ensure the 
safety and security of Saskatchewan citizens. The Saskatchewan 
Protective Services Medal will recognize 25 years of exemplary 
service in our province by personnel with law enforcement 
powers and by those in other occupations and professions 
directly related to protecting Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
The occupations and professions whose employees are eligible 
for the medal will be set out in regulations but they include: the 
police — municipal, RCMP, and others; firefighters, whether 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

career or volunteer; emergency medical personnel such as 
medical technicians, paramedics, and first responders; 
conservation officers, both provincial and federal; highway 
transport compliance officers; corrections personnel, both 
provincial and federal; customs and immigration officers; and 
members of the Canadian forces. 
 
Since last September’s announcement, Provincial Secretary 
officials have been meeting with stakeholders from groups and 
organizations who will be eligible to receive this medal, and 
I’m pleased to say that this initiative has met with enthusiastic 
support from these stakeholders, and they have been of great 
assistance to us in preparing the criteria and guidelines for the 
medal. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, the medal will be awarded to 
personnel who have completed 25 years of exemplary service in 
Saskatchewan with one or more of the qualifying organizations. 
Now individuals who believe they’re eligible for the medal, Mr. 
Speaker, will initiate the nomination process themselves and 
must receive the support of the head of the service to which 
they belong. Eligibility is effective January 1, 2003. 
 
With this medal, Mr. Speaker, we’re responding to a request by 
the police forces in Saskatchewan for provincial recognition of 
long service by their members. 
 
Second, given the new awareness of threats to the safety and 
security of people following the tragic events of September 11, 
2001, the Premier and I believed it was important to extend the 
medal to all those in public agencies who often risk their lives 
to serve and protect our citizens. And I’m glad to say that the 
Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police welcomed this 
inclusive approach. 
 
The government believes that we should publicly honour long 
and exemplary service by those to whom society owes so much. 
 
Currently the Government of Canada awards the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police Long Service and Good Conduct 
Medal, the Police Exemplary Service Medal of Canada, and 
similar medals for corrections and emergency medical services. 
These medals recognize 20 years of service anywhere in 
Canada. 
 
The proposed Saskatchewan medal will recognize 25 years of 
service, a milestone that’s not marked by any other medal. It’s 
also inclusive since a wide range of protective services will be 
eligible, and this makes the new medal unique among Canadian 
honours. The legislative amendments being presented to the 
House today provide for the Protective Services Medal to be an 
official honour of the Crown, in right of Saskatchewan, 
presented by the Lieutenant Governor or her designate. In the 
case for other provincial honours, this ensures a sound policy 
basis as well as a prestigious status for the medal. 
 
The Office of Protocol and Honours and Provincial Secretary 
will administer the program in close co-operation with the 
Saskatchewan Police Commission, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Chiefs of Police, the Saskatchewan Firefighters 
Association, and other agencies and organizations eligible for 
the medal. The first presentation is planned for the fall of 2003. 
In the first year, several presentations will take place and then at 

least one will occur annually. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Act also provides for the Commemorative Medal for 
the Centennial of Saskatchewan. The centennial of our province 
is only 20 short months away and now is the time to plan 
initiatives which will mark and commemorate this important 
anniversary for the people of our province and for the Canadian 
Confederation. 
 
One of these initiatives is the Centennial Medal, and it will be 
awarded to citizens who have made exceptional contributions to 
the . . . (inaudible) . . . and our province. The Saskatchewan 
Honours Advisory Council will be asked to recommend specific 
criteria and nomination procedures in the coming year so that 
it’ll be in place by the end of 2004. 
 
Like the Protective Services Medal, the Centennial Medal will 
be an official honour of the Crown and presented by the 
Lieutenant Governor or her designate during 2005. And 
Saskatchewan will be the first province to institute a 
commemorative medal of this kind. And I might add, Mr. 
Speaker, I guess we could have hardly done it sooner seeing as 
this is our first 100th anniversary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past 18 years Saskatchewan has 
developed a provincial honours and awards program of which 
we can all be proud and which has enjoyed the strong support 
of members on both sides of this House. In 1985, Mr. Devine’s 
government established the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. Ten 
years later, Mr. Romanow’s government created the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal whose latest recipients we will 
be honouring in this Chamber May 1. And in 1997 came the 
Saskatchewan Distinguished Service Award for non-residents 
of the province. Early this year we announced the Premier’s 
Award for Excellence in the Public Service. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, today I’m pleased to continue this pattern of 
innovation and excellence in recognizing the achievements of 
the people of Saskatchewan by introducing legislation to 
establish the Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal and the 
Commemorative Medal for the Centennial of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 19, The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to rise today on this particular Bill which 
enhances our emblems and honours Act in the province of 
Saskatchewan. In particular, Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to be 
able to be a part of recognition to our security and safety 
services in this province for the hard work and the dedication 
and the exemplary service that they provide to all citizens, Mr. 
Speaker, from corner to corner in this province. 
 
And often, Mr. Speaker, they do so under difficult 
circumstances. They do so in circumstances, Mr. Speaker, 
which at times even endanger their own lives. And we owe 
them a debt of gratitude, Mr. Speaker, when they perform those 
services that help ourselves, help our communities and in 
particular, Mr. Speaker, help our children. 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new award, the Saskatchewan Protective 
Services Medal, recognizes the hard work and dedication that it 
takes to remain committed to one particular service, Mr. 
Speaker, for 25 years. Most of us, Mr. Speaker, change 
occupations, change jobs more often than that. In fact as I 
believe the average is getting now to where most jobs last for 
about seven years and a person goes on to a new career. So to 
have stayed in the same job performing the same duties and 
under difficult circumstances, Mr. Speaker, for 25 years, I think 
does deserve an award, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the award is not just for 
long service, though. It’s for exemplary service and can be 
awarded at periods shorter than 25 years to individuals that are 
judged to be very deserving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we all saw the circumstances at September 11 in New 
York, the kind of service, the kind of dedication and difficulty 
that has to take place under those very extreme circumstances 
where lives are on the line, Mr. Speaker. And the people of 
Saskatchewan that work in our security and safety services do 
that day in and day out. They don’t know when they go to work 
in the morning what circumstances they’re going to face — it 
could be rescuing the cat from the tree, or it could be entering a 
burning building to save a child. They don’t know, Mr. 
Speaker, but they go out every day and perform those services 
day in and day out, Mr. Speaker, and are certainly deserving of 
this award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other award, the Saskatchewan Centennial 
Medal, Mr. Speaker, is also a worthy award, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m glad that the minister clarified this, that it was just for the 
centennial year because that was one of my questions. Because 
it doesn’t state in the Act what the criteria for this particular 
award is, and was it going to become an ongoing award, Mr. 
Speaker, after the centennial year, because it does in fact 
replicate in a lot of ways what the Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
is already doing. 
 
And so it is certainly worthwhile in our centennial year to have 
a special award for that year, Mr. Speaker, that recognizes 
outstanding achievements in our communities for all of the 
effort that have to take place throughout society, Mr. Speaker. 
And so, we agree, Mr. Speaker, that this should also happen. 
 
But we do have some concerns about what the criteria will be 
and we’d like to talk to the minister a little more about that 
development before this particular piece of legislation goes 
ahead, so that we can determine exactly what the minister has in 
mind for this particular Bill: what the criteria is; how broad 
spread this is going to be; does the minister have any particular 
numbers in mind for how many people will be receiving this 
particular award, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we would like to be able to ask the minister those kind of 
questions and have an opportunity to discuss this before the Bill 
moves ahead any further. Therefore I would move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 3 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand up in this Assembly today and speak to this 
Bill, Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we would all agree that children are a very 
special part of our lives. And there isn’t an individual in this 
Assembly today that hasn’t at some point or other been affected 
by either a sibling, a brother or a sister, in their lives or indeed 
their own children that have been born into the lives, a son or a 
daughter — and just the joy of seeing that new life come into 
that home and become part of that family, and to watch that life 
just begin to develop, and the joy that you see coming forth 
from that child as they begin to experience new changes in their 
lives and as they begin to grow and develop their personalities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, even in this past few weeks as we’ve 
observed the situation in the world, and certainly the war in Iraq 
has brought it to our attention more clearly, the hurt that may 
come upon a child’s life as a result of actions of others. And the 
importance it is for us to recognize how we need to indeed be 
very diligent in protecting the rights and the well-being of 
children, not only in our province, in our communities, but even 
reaching outside of our communities to the world around us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill before us today, I think, just speaks 
very clearly to a number of issues that have been raised over the 
past number of years, and certainly some of the things that have 
been on my heart and my mind regarding how we treat children, 
how we care for children, how we provide for children. 
 
And as I begin my comments this afternoon, I’d like to as well 
just point out some of the comments that were made by the 
Child Advocate in her final report: Children and Youth in Care 
Review: Listen to Their Voices, of April 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at that time a couple of recommendations came 
out from the Child Advocate’s office and one of them was that 
every child . . . and she says: 
 

That every child in care has a comprehensive, child-based 
plan of care that recognizes the importance of stability in 
the child’s life and that honours the continued involvement 
of family, extended family and community. 
 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, she goes on to say: 
 

That every child in care has a clearly articulated and 
documented care plan . . . 
 

She mentions that when we’re looking and caring for children 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

that: 
 

Children, family members and community members, 
particularly First Nations or Métis Nation representatives, 
where appropriate, must be included in the development of 
the care plan and must participate in the regular reviews of 
the care plans. 

 
She brings another recommendation that says: 
 

. . . every effort . . . (can be, or should) be taken to support 
a child to live and grow up in a stable environment. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, of note . . . I noticed one other 
recommendation that . . . in that review of . . . final report of 
2000 entitled Listen to their Voices where the Child Advocate 
says: 
 

. . . connections between a child in care and his or her 
family and extended family are made as early as possible 
and supported to the maximum extent. Children should not 
drift within the foster care system without every effort 
being made to connect them in a meaningful way with their 
family of origin. 

 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we listened to the minister’s comments the 
other day . . . And I think what the minister has endeavoured to 
do is to address the number of the concerns that were raised by 
the Child Advocate in her report of 2000, as well as, Mr. 
Speaker, I think we can rightfully say that the minister and his 
government as well have been listening as well to some of the 
comments that have been coming from this side of the floor. 
 
Well we’ve talked about the fact that it’s important for us to 
recognize the relationship of a child with family members and 
extended family members. Mr. Speaker, the minister talked 
about the fact that we need to recognize that there are certain 
situations and circumstances in the communities around us in 
family relationships where a child may not have that loving and 
caring parental relationship or home environment, where they, 
where they receive the loves . . . the love, where they receive 
the hugs, where they receive the compliments and the words of 
encouragement. 
 
At times, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we have children living in 
our communities, living in homes in our communities, where 
unfortunately in many, in many cases as a result of anger, a 
pent-up anger, maybe coming from the workplace or the effect 
of drugs and alcohol abuse we see in the homes, that children 
unfortunately are left in a situation of abuse and neglect. And 
tragically at those . . . in those situations, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
unfortunate but at the same time, it is fortunate that we have a 
means whereby we can give that child some support. 
 
Unfortunately over the past number of years, the support 
mechanism has been for the Department of Social Services to 
receive the call and go into a home and remove a child or a 
number of children from a home environment and take those 
children and place them into a foster, a foster home situation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, don’t get me wrong. I’m not speaking 
against foster care because there are many families in this 
province that have provided excellent home environments while 
. . . in meeting the role as a foster parent and offering an avenue 
of care and loving support for a child when their home 
environment has not met that need. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly want to say thank you to the 
many foster families across the province of Saskatchewan. 
However, I might add that there are many families that have left 
the role of foster parenting. And it’s because of circumstances 
that they face. In many cases they’ve decided they can’t 
continue on in providing that foster parent role, partly because 
of the financial problems that it raises in their home. But in 
many cases, Mr. Speaker, because of the stress that they feel in 
their home and that they’ve had to face as a result of the 
background of some of the children that have been placed in 
their care and the unfortunate lack of information that they’ve 
been provided with and then the circumstances they’ve had to 
deal with. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about children in care, I think 
it’s very important that we recognize the role of immediate 
family members. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re all aware of the fact 
that children, not only do they get to love and have a growing 
appreciation and love and admiration for their parents, their 
mother or their father, or their siblings — older brothers and 
sisters or even younger brothers or sisters. But as well we can 
see where children grow to have a real admiration for 
grandparents and aunts and uncles. And in some cases, Mr. 
Speaker, it may be a very close family friend that happens to be 
a visitor to that home on numerous occasions, and that child 
may develop a kinship relationship with that family friend. 
 
And what the legislation is doing is really opening up the door 
and asking the Department of Social Services to take a closer 
look — and not just take a closer look but make a greater effort 
when they are called into a situation of abuse and neglect in a 
family environment. And to look to the realms of extended 
family members and if there happens to be grandparents in the 
area or if it’s an aunt and an uncle or, Mr. Speaker, if it’s a close 
family friend that that child can identify with as being someone 
that they feel, they feel love, they feel that protection of that 
home environment, that indeed the Department of Social 
Services would make every effort to establish those 
relationships. 
 
And rather than putting a child into a foster parent relationship 
where that child has no connection whatsoever with that foster 
family regardless of how well and the loving and protective 
home environment that foster family might provide, the facts 
are the identity isn’t there for the foster family to build the 
relationships with those children. 
 
And what this piece of legislation does, Mr. Speaker, is opens 
up the door to extend the opportunity to family members to 
provide that loving and caring and protective environment for 
that child, while the department endeavours to work out and 
address the problems in the immediate family home 
environment and address the abusive situations or address the 
neglect. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe while it’s . . . we could say while 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

 

it’s long overdue, it’s time we moved in this direction. Mr. 
Speaker, regardless of the timing, it’s certainly appropriate that 
this legislation is before us at this time, that we have the 
opportunity of debating this legislation. And having encouraged 
the current minister, encouraged past ministers to give some 
serious thought as to how we can deal more effectively and 
more forthrightly in providing the caring atmosphere that 
children need as they are removed from a situation of abuse and 
neglect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s rather unfortunate that we have children in our 
communities and in our society actually living in very difficult 
environments. And, Mr. Speaker, I can certainly indicate that 
when my colleagues and I — the member from Humboldt, the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena, and a number of the NDP 
members on the government side of the House — had formed a 
committee to address the problem of children on the street in 
child prostitution, and we heard from many, many groups 
across this province. We heard from individuals, from social 
workers. We heard from men and women who are providing 
daycare programs for children. We heard from our First Nations 
community. We heard from the Indian family and child 
services. 
 
And each and every one of them, Mr. Speaker, pointed out the 
fact that they felt it was important that we begin to recognize 
the value of kin and family relationships, and that government 
needs to move into a direction where we begin to recognize 
those important roles. And that we . . . as children are taken 
from abusive situations, until those family and home 
relationships are addressed, the problems are addressed, that 
young children actually have the ability to reside with a family 
member if at all possible, or where possible, or even a very 
close family friend that they can feel comfortable with. And, 
Mr. Speaker, what I see in this piece of legislation is it indeed 
does that. 
 
But as well, Mr. Speaker, the legislation does speak about the 
fact that a study be done, as well, of the home environment. 
That we don’t move a child from a neglected and abusive 
situation, place them with a family member, without first of all 
determining that that family environment we’re placing that 
child with will indeed provide a loving, protective, and caring 
environment for that child. 
 
So while the child is trying to address the problems of all of a 
sudden being suddenly plucked out of their home environment, 
the environment where they’re very comfortable with . . . their 
parental parents and the role of the parents, but as well . . . and 
then being put into a strange environment, Mr. Speaker. That as 
we look at the extended family members and, Mr. Speaker . . . 
We can provide that child with the knowledge that they are 
going to be placed into a protective and loving and caring 
family environment. 
 
And the piece of legislation does address that. It does point out 
the fact that any home that a child is placed into, any home that 
is . . . reaches out to provide that support, that there is 
appropriate measures are taken to verify that that home will 
provide that comfortable relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well this legislation goes beyond just providing 
the common needs and the everyday needs of children in 

abusive relationships. And it also looks at and recognizes that 
when a child is taken from a home and wherever that child is 
placed, that that new home environment may not always 
necessarily have the monetary opportunities to provide for all of 
the needs of that child — whether it’s the clothing needs or the 
health needs of that child. And therefore the legislation as well 
extends the opportunity or the ability for the department of 
community services and resource management to provide the 
economic needs as well to follow the child into that home 
relationship. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, not every, not every home may be in a 
financial position to just accept a child even though it is a 
grandparent . . . or a grandchild or even though it may be a 
nephew or a niece or maybe just a good close friend that that 
family has become very close to. And yet what they find . . . 
their financial resources may not provide them with the 
opportunity to . . . while they would have a desire and a 
willingness and would take that child in regardless of their 
financial well-being to provide that loving and caring 
relationship. 
 
This piece of legislation as well, Mr. Speaker, as I read it, 
recognizes the fact that we also have to give consideration to 
the fact that there may be some fiscal needs. And the 
department is recognizing that and that responsibility and is 
certainly giving the department the ability to make sure that the 
financial well-being of a family is not put at risk because 
additional family members have been moved into that home. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about family members, 
sometimes we’re not just talking of one individual. We may be 
talking of a relationship of four children that have to be taken 
from a home because of the abuse and neglect in the home and 
be placing them . . . And, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important as 
well for us to recognize that placing all four children in the 
same home is important. Because here again, we continue to 
address the kinship and the family nature of those children, and 
the fact that each and every of them have developed a 
relationship and have developed a love and admiration for each 
other. And if you were to separate . . . let’s, for example, if you 
took the four children out of one home and you put them in four 
different home environments, Mr. Speaker, we would then be 
destroying that kinship relationship between those children. 
 
So it’s important as well, Mr. Speaker, that while this 
legislation recognizes it, while we look at kin, the family 
relationships, the close family relationships . . . And I’ve talked 
to a number of foster families, Mr. Speaker, who have also said 
that if a child was brought to the home and they realized there 
were two other children in that same home environment and 
they were taken to other . . . or being taken to other 
foster-family relationships, I’ve talked to foster families where 
they said they would prefer that all three children were brought 
and they would look after them in their home environment just 
to keep those family ties together. And I think that is important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill certainly goes a long way to address 
the needs of children in care. And the minister I think made the 
comment about the . . . he basically said the amendments will 
provide caregivers with the assurance that they have the 
freedom and the ability to make the day-to-day decisions and 
take the actions necessary to safely care for a child. And he 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

makes comments that children and kinship care will enjoy a 
greater sense of security and belonging. And I certainly agree 
with that, Mr. Speaker. The fact that they will be placed in a 
close, family environmental relationship will certainly give that 
greater sense of security and well-being. 
 
And I talked about the fact that the legislation . . . talks for a 
home study to make sure that home environment will be an 
appropriate, protective, loving . . . provide a loving and caring 
environment. 
 
And the minister also, in his comments, talked about children 
who have been abused or neglected and have special needs as a 
result of that abuse or neglect. And it’s important that families 
recognize what those needs are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier about the fact that we have . . . 
some foster families are finding it very difficult. In fact, a 
number of foster families have left providing foster care 
because of that very concern, that children were brought into 
their care and they weren’t really provided with adequate 
knowledge of the problems in the home environment that that 
child was removed from and the emotional stress and 
environment that that child was facing. And as a result, when a 
child was brought into their care, all of a sudden they had to 
deal with emotions that they didn’t have any knowledge of, and 
they were not prepared and didn’t have all of the abilities to 
deal with those emotional stresses that child was facing. And 
they found it very traumatic and difficult to deal with children 
in that nature. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And so it’s important that families are well informed, even 
close kin families, that they’re informed of the experiences that 
these children have been brought up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said we will not simply place children 
with an extended family member or others with a significant 
interest in the child, and then abandon them to struggle with 
figuring out how they care for and support the child or those 
children. And those are important things for us to know, Mr. 
Speaker — that indeed the minister and his department 
recognize their responsibility; that this piece of legislation is not 
only recognizing the recommendations and the concerns that 
have been raised by the Child Advocate office; that this piece of 
legislation is not only recognizing a number of the concerns 
that, as an opposition, we have been raising over the past 
number of years; that it recognizes the importance of the family 
home, the family relationship, and the family environment. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, while I’ve been giving the minister a lot 
of compliments, and his government, for this piece of 
legislation, it’s important that we do indeed take the time to 
look very carefully at the legislation to make sure that it indeed 
addresses all of the concerns that have been brought to our 
attention. And that when children are provided or placed in 
care, that we not only are providing for the immediate care and 
concern and addressing the immediate needs of a child in need, 
Mr. Speaker, but, Mr. Speaker, as well that we are working very 
diligently and very deliberately to address the ongoing needs of 
that home relationship, that home environment that that child 
was removed from. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, that child or those 
children still have a bond to their paternal parents, to the father 
and the mother, that have . . . and then the home environment 
that they were brought into . . . that were born into and they 
were raised . . . would love to be raised up in. 
 
So it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we go beyond just 
providing for children when they need care and attention; that 
we help . . . that we begin to, as well . . . While children are 
placed in a loving and caring relationship, that we look at how 
we can address the problems in that home, in that family 
relationship, so that the children then can be placed back in that 
home environment, and they can experience the love and the 
care and the compassion and understanding that each and every 
one of us, as parents in this Assembly today, would expect that 
we would provide for our children. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think, as we look at the legislation, and we 
give some thought to further addressing the needs of this 
legislation, it’s imperative that we are very diligent in our 
studies, in our deliberation, and at this time, Mr. Speaker, I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 4 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
into the debate on Bill No. 4, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have sent this particular piece of legislation 
out to a number of groups to get their input; groups that we 
thought would be impacted by what the government is 
attempting to achieve here. And we’ve heard back from many 
of them. 
 
As you will know, Mr. Speaker, this amendment would 
basically set up something that is, oh, perhaps for lack of a 
better description, a one-stop shop for line locates, and not just 
in the energy sector now. It would expand it to other sectors as 
well, and may be of interest to municipalities and other groups. 
 
And it really expands on something, as the minister pointed out 
in his second reading speech, that he introduced or announced a 
year ago called Saskatchewan First Call Corporation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister in his speech indicated that the 
model that’s being proposed here for the province of 
Saskatchewan in Bill 4 has been tried and implemented 
successfully in two other provinces — I think he mentioned 
specifically the province of Alberta and the province of British 
Columbia. 
 
And as near as we can tell, Mr. Speaker, the information the 
minister has provided the House with respect to the experiences 
in those provinces is exactly correct — that this same sort of 
one-stop shopping for these line locates service has been 
available in those provinces and it is quite . . . it’s working quite 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

 

well. 
 
Now we do have a small, small concern that we are still 
pursuing with different third parties that we’re talking to with 
respect to this Bill and it has to do with whether or not there is 
anybody currently in the private sector providing a service like 
this or similar to this that may be impacted. 
 
Because let’s not forget the Bill expands the location, service, 
the one-stop shopping, if you will, to — actually as the minister 
pointed out — to other services and talks about it providing call 
screening, notification services, facility monitoring, 
maintenance and operating service, facility location services, 
training of the corporations’ specialized skills, and that’s right 
from the minister’s comments as recorded in Hansard on April 
9 of this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so that’s quite a wide-ranging set of services that this 
particular initiative . . . that Saskatchewan First Call 
Corporation wishes to offer the province of Saskatchewan. It 
may indeed be quite a bit more expansive in terms of services 
than is the case in the Alberta model or the BC model, and 
that’s something we want to check into, some questions that we 
want to ask the minister in this legislature on behalf of anybody, 
any company that may provide those services currently and face 
the prospect of competing with a Crown corporation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you might think, well what is the . . . why 
would we be suspicious of that? Why would we be worried 
about that? Well sadly in this province under this government, I 
think it’s fair to say that companies have all too often had to 
compete with the Crown corporations for any number of things. 
 
We know that the NDP government is competing with cable 
co-operatives, with the non-profit co-ops if you can imagine, 
Mr. Speaker, in the cable television industry. We know that 
they are competing in the security monitoring business. We 
know too, Mr. Speaker, they compete with the private sector in 
any other number of areas. 
 
And so we are a little bit concerned that the scope of this goes 
possibly farther than it need go and we just simply want to find 
that out and get some assurances not only from third parties but 
also from the minister that this is something, that this is 
something that is as innocuous and potentially positive as it first 
appears. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are others who want to speak to this, 
especially as more and more information comes to the 
opposition and we get more and more input from third parties. 
There are other members who wish to address this Bill before 
we get into the detailed questioning in committee, and as such I 
would move that debate be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 8 — The Youth 
Justice Administration Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill that we’ll 

be discussing I think is one of the more major pieces of 
legislation this government has presented so far. We know 
there’s precious few items that they have presented but this will 
be one of the more critical ones I believe. 
 
As we well know, the administration of justice across our 
country is partly a federal responsibility. It is also partly a 
provincial responsibility. We’re also quite aware that the federal 
government over the last numbers of years has been looking at 
revamping the youth justice situation. 
 
This should have had and probably did have some input from 
all the provinces and the Justice ministers from various 
provinces. Unfortunately I don’t think it had the input to the 
extent that it should have had, because what happens . . . what 
happened in this particular piece of legislation — and this is 
where Bill No. 8 comes from — is that the federal government 
went ahead and created a new Bill and they said, now we have 
done our job. And then they left big vacuous holes in the plan 
and gave it back to the provinces and said, now you figure it 
out. 
 
Now that sounds maybe a little blunt or a little crude but 
essentially that’s what’s happened. There is very little direction. 
The provinces as a group have not organized themselves into 
any one voice on how to deal with this. So each province is now 
left to go ahead and interpret what this federal law means and 
fill all the holes that are in there in whatever way they choose 
and see fit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s where we need to discuss our present 
government in Saskatchewan. And I intend to do that at some 
length this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, because as we look at what 
this government now has to do, they have a big job ahead of 
them. 
 
We need to look at what the situation presently is in 
Saskatchewan. We also need to look at what this present 
government has done in the various areas. And so when we 
look at what they’ve done in the various areas, it’ll give us 
either a definite feeling of confidence or lack of confidence in 
how well they’re going to be able to dovetail the new 
Saskatchewan youth justice administration with what the 
federal government has allowed them to do. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what I intend to spend some time on doing this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to cover to some extent what the situation 
for crime and justice is across this great province of ours. We 
have, Mr. Speaker, over the years developed in Saskatchewan a 
reputation for crime and criminality, which is very unfortunate. 
And I think it’s uniquely unfortunate for this particular 
province, because this is a province where we still pride 
ourselves, Mr. Speaker, on being a province of volunteers and 
we have, as you know, a very high number of volunteers. 
 
We also take a lot of pride in the fact that we have some of that 
rural mentality existing in rural and urban Saskatchewan which 
basically says if you see someone in a certain amount of trouble 
you help them, you help them. And yet when we contrast that 
mentality of helping each other and then contrasting it with 
what is actually happening as far as crime and fear that people 
live in, we say how could those two exist side by side. And 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

that’s a very interesting question. 
 
We have in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, been from time to 
time, and very much so in the last half decade or so, we’ve 
become the car theft capital of Canada — the car theft capital of 
Canada. Now maybe that started 20 years ago when everyone 
left their keys in the ignitions because nobody would steal a car, 
but that’s no longer the case. All you have to do is walk down 
the streets and you will see cars that are locked up, almost all of 
them. You’ll see the little bars, the red bars and orange bars, 
attached to the steering wheels to keep them from being stolen. 
So people now are taking all the steps possible to keep their 
vehicles from being stolen. So it isn’t like we’ve become 
lackadaisical from our past history of thinking that nobody ever 
stole anything in Saskatchewan. They are stealing things. So we 
have become the car theft capital of Canada. How did that 
happen? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in order to understand that a little bit, I think 
we have to look at what’s happened in, I believe it’s New York 
City, a number of years ago. The mayor at that time came up 
with a policy that I believe was called the broken window 
policy, which essentially said that we’re going to deal with all 
the small crimes in the area. And if we can take care of all the 
small crimes, the broken window kind of thing, if we take care 
of those then those individuals who will move from broken 
windows to vandalized cars to stolen cars to larger crimes, we’ll 
stop that right at the broken window level. And they put a lot of 
effort into that, Mr. Speaker, and the crime in New York 
dropped dramatically. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And I think it should have been an example to our NDP 
government in Saskatchewan, because they could have seen that 
over the years. And they’ve been in charge of this province long 
enough that I believe they have to take responsibility for the 
province as it is today. 
 
So had they looked at that back then and said that’s a good 
philosophy, it’s working, let’s pick it up over here, we could 
have probably stopped this. But instead of doing that, they said 
well car thefts are car thefts; we have SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance). SGI is great — at least they say it is — 
and so SGI will cover this off. So a few more cars get stolen 
one year, then the next and the year after that. And suddenly it 
ballooned, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, into a number one 
problem in Saskatchewan when we compare it with the other 
provinces in Canada — very unfortunate. 
 
Now can it be dealt with? Yes, it can. Has it been dealt with in 
Saskatchewan? In one case, yes, and that’s right here in Regina. 
I believe it wasn’t very long ago, Mr. Speaker, believe it was 
the winter before this one, that people in Regina got together 
with their law enforcement officers. They planned a strategy. 
Law enforcement officers, social services, a number of other 
agencies came together and basically said let’s work on this. 
 
Now yes, they did have to go ahead and put some expenditure 
into it; they did. But it was successful. Now what it does show, 
Mr. Speaker, what it does show is we don’t have to throw up 
our hands and say this is hopeless, kids are bad, kids are 
terrible, kids will be kids, our cars will be stolen, let’s just, you 

know, hide out in the basement somehow, bar the windows, 
come out in the morning and hope our vehicles are there. We 
don’t have to have that mentality. We can work with it. Now 
unfortunately that concept has been initiated only in Regina, 
successfully so. 
 
Now why did I earlier on, Mr. Speaker, say that we’re going to 
have to look at this particular government and where the NDP’s 
responsibility lies in this particular situation? Previous election, 
Mr. Speaker. Previous election. You will recall that one of the 
NDP promises was to go ahead and put on the streets of this 
province 200 more police officers — 200 more. You spread 200 
people around Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to be 
hard to find. But it is a direction. 
 
Now very often when the NDP make a promise, then they’re 
elected, then they say, oh but we forgot to tell you this is going 
to be over the length of our reign, this will be four or five years 
before we put this all into place. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
waited till about the end of the time. For the NDP, these are the 
end times. It’s about over. 
 
Have they given us those 200 police officers, Mr. Speaker? No 
they haven’t. Have they given us half those police officers, Mr. 
Speaker? No they haven’t. They’re still way under that. They’re 
still way under that. They have had the opportunity, they’ve had 
the opportunity and heaven knows, Mr. Speaker, there was a 
definite need. 
 
Now had they put that in place right at the start, Mr. Speaker, 
we might have been able to reduce, if nothing else, at least the 
car theft across this whole province. And it’s not just unique to 
Regina and Saskatoon and Moose Jaw and P.A. It’s unique to 
all of our small towns as well. In my town of under 2,000 we 
have probably a number of dozen cars stolen every year. Same 
problem. We need more people on the street. 
 
This government promised us more. We’re not asking to go 
ahead and have them take . . . and up their budget over what 
they committed. We’re asking only — only, Mr. Speaker — for 
the very commitment that they made. We would have been 
happy with that one. We could have probably reduced car thefts 
substantially throughout the rest of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t as if car thefts are the only issue that 
we have. We have break and entries all across this province, 
small towns included. We have armed theft. All you have to do 
is listen on your radio in the morning, any of the towns, cities, 
and they will probably list exactly how many were broken into, 
and if they weren’t broken into, where there was an armed 
robbery that took place. That’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
unfortunate. Also a substantial amount of arson, the kind of 
arson that involves fires in alleys, cars set on fires, car sheds in 
back alleys set on fires — all those sorts of things are out there. 
So we have that kind of a situation developing in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we have Bill No. 8, where this government now has the 
opportunity to take and revamp the whole youth justice thing. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we have to make one point clear here. 
This is a youth justice Act. Probably the majority of these 
crimes are committed by youth, but let’s never make the 
mistake of saying that all youth are involved in these activities. 
It is a very small percentage, a very small percentage. And 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

 

that’s why it’s so critical that this government finally decided to 
take action and say, here’s a small group of young people; let’s 
deal with that small group of young people; let’s correct that. 
Then those individuals who unfortunately want to paint all of 
youth with the same brush won’t be able to do that. 
 
We also need to do that for the security of all of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the implementation of Bill 
No. 8, Bill No. 8 doesn’t go anywhere near doing what it 
should. And I think let’s just follow a few things that they need 
to address. 
 
I was at that meeting last winter, Mr. Speaker, that I spoke of 
earlier on, where the new plan came into being for the city of 
Regina to reduce car thefts — the plan that worked. It also 
happened to be interesting that’s where Chris Axworthy, the 
then minister of Justice, had his car stolen — the same day. 
 
So it kind of shows that the predominance of car thieves . . . 
Who would think that the Justice minister would have his car 
stolen — of all the people, the Justice minister would have his 
car stolen on the very day that he wants to initiate a new venture 
to reduce car thefts? Utter irony in that whole case. Utter irony, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, I sat in that meeting, and what was one of the . . . what 
was probably the sad thing in that whole meeting . . . Most of it 
was very positive because they were enthused about the new 
venture, a venture that was going to work. However, there was 
a young mother there whose daughter had been involved in a 
car theft situation. And she spoke very earnestly to the minister 
and said, Mr. Minister, the work that you’re doing with the 
young people — remember Bill No. 8 deals with youth justice. 
She says, you do some very silly things. And she was very irate 
at this point, and I don’t blame her because she was concerned 
for her daughter’s welfare. 
 
But she says, first of all, you’ve taken away all the tools that I, 
as a parent, thought I had to deal with my youngster. And she 
was referring to Social Services because they were involved in 
that. She didn’t go into any detail on what those tools were, but 
she was very concerned about that. 
 
Then she said, now Social Services has basically taken over. 
And so my daughter’s supposed to be home at 10 o’clock at 
night. And so what happens? Well at 10 o’clock at night her 
daughter gets a phone call from the Social Services department, 
and they ask to speak to her daughter. So her daughter goes on 
the phone. Hello, are you there? Yes, I’m here. Very good, just 
checking up. Click, down goes the phone, and out the door goes 
the daughter. It’s bizarre. It’s bizarre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the kind of system that only the NDP government could 
think of. And I have the Minister of Corrections, though, 
saying, guess what we do now? Well, I am sure he will explain 
this to us in boring detail the next time he has a chance to get 
up. 
 
And we’ll be listening for that because I hope they have a better 
system, a system that isn’t as full of loopholes, because you 
have to understand that the youth of our province are an 
intelligent bunch. This wasn’t an isolated case. This wasn’t the 

one youth that had an IQ (intelligence quotient) of over 190 
who said, guess what, I’m getting one phone call in the evening 
and when it comes now I can leave. You see, I’m sure every 
person under the age of 18 could figure that out and probably 
did. And that’s where some of those high numbers came from. 
 
And Bill No. 8, I’m not sure totally if it deals with all of those, 
because it’s going to be a very, it’s going to be a very difficult 
situation, Mr. Speaker. It is really a fairly awesome task that 
this government has been entrusted with and that is to move 
from the situation where we were to a new system dovetailing it 
with the federal system. There are some opportunities there. I 
hope they take those opportunities to heart and use them as they 
could. 
 
We’ve discussed specifically some common sense things that 
haven’t been there in the past. We’ve talked about the need for 
officers. And you can’t do this without people. The situation in 
New York that I mentioned, the broken windows concept, they 
put literally thousands of more people on the streets. Now the 
city of New York has a bigger problem than all of 
Saskatchewan, I would hope — not that I wish them any bad 
luck, but I just hope ours doesn’t compare with that. But still it 
requires a lot more personnel doing things differently and in 
different ways then they have in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another issue that I don’t think there is an 
answer to at this point, but it’s a situation that we have to look 
at when we’re going to deal with youth justice. If we don’t deal 
with it we’re going to have a certain segment of our youth that 
are going to be repeat offenders regardless of the youth 
administration Act and how carefully you dovetail it with the 
federal system. It’s an area that isn’t mentioned in this Bill and 
it’s an area that the federal Bill also doesn’t address. And I’m 
going to challenge this government — they’ve only introduced 
some half-dozen or a dozen pieces of legislation so far — to 
work through that and introduce at least something that starts to 
move in that direction. 
 
That is, Mr. Speaker, FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) — a very 
serious concern in our society. Because you suddenly have one 
group of young people that all the things that we work at, that 
the federal plan plans to work at, that Bill 8 plans to work at, 
that we as opposition might say should or shouldn’t be in there, 
all of those don’t address this. Because you have a certain group 
of people who just actually can’t fathom that what they do has a 
consequence and that consequence needs to be considered when 
they’re going to take that particular action. That isn’t there. 
Later on if they, you know, commit the misdeed, looking at 
what they’ve done and saying, that was awful, that was bad, I 
shouldn’t have done that — that ability isn’t there either. 
 
So you have a group of young people in every province, and 
also in our province, with FAS who almost always get involved 
in the criminal scene. And we at this point have no adequate 
way to deal with them. 
 
We could say, well let’s lock them up. But it seems a very 
painful, shameful thing to do, to lock up people who actually 
have no concept of what their actions actually are and what the 
implications of their actions are. 
 
I had the . . . I’m not sure if it’s the fortune or misfortune, Mr. 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

Speaker, of attending a court situation some time ago where a 
young person with FAS had committed a very serious crime. 
This young person was brought into the courtroom. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would say that every other young person in this 
province — every other young person in this province — who 
would have committed that misdeed, that crime, who would 
have come into that courtroom and seen the families, would 
have realized the hurt that they had put other people through. 
And there would have been a look of either shame or regret or 
something on their face to implicate that, man, that wasn’t very 
smart; I probably shouldn’t have done that. This young person 
with FAS walked in, and just grinned, and gave all of us the 
finger; obviously had no idea what they had done, no idea of the 
consequences, and no idea of the situation that this young 
person found themselves in now and how serious that situation 
was. And we need to deal with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s easy to say we can’t assess it. It’s easy to give all kinds of 
other excuses, but the reality is we have these young people in 
our schools, in our homes, in our communities. And in all of 
those areas they create difficult situations for their families, for 
their communities, and for their schools. And so that needs to 
come out somewheres as we try to dovetail this. 
 
Now that happens to be a provincial responsibility. Rightly or 
wrongly it’s left there because the federal government hasn’t 
acted on it. So it must be something that we as people of this 
province deal with. And it’s a major problem, and it’s one of 
those things, Mr. Speaker, that we need to look at. We need to 
look at situations as to, do we have to lock these people up? 
That’s not the answer. Do we have to find special places for 
these people to live in, where they can live there with respect 
but a lot of freedoms are removed? Possibly. But just to put 
them in a prison situation, the answer is definitely no. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 8 deals with those issues and I’m really 
quite concerned that as we look at this dovetailing, and this is 
really what it is, that, number one, there’s going to be an effort 
by this government to sort of modernize what they’re doing and 
say, guess what? We’ve now taken the old system and created a 
new system and here it is, Bill No. 8. And yet, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not good enough. 
 
I think we need to look at what the federal system has. Look at 
all those gaps that are there, all the opportunities. And 
unfortunately I would imagine government side, they won’t 
always see this as opportunities because some of these are 
responsibilities that require new solutions, new thought in new 
areas. And if we look at how this NDP government has dealt 
with justice and youth in the past, there have been some new 
ventures, but unfortunately precious few — precious few. 
 
That’s why we are still capital of Canada and sometimes North 
America when it comes to certain kinds of crimes — when it 
comes to theft, crimes of violence, all of those sorts of things. 
It’s still there. 
 
So this government needs to look at a whole lot more than just 
Bill No. 8 and try to just say, we’ve generally covered this. 
Because what will happen is next year and the year after and the 
year after, governments are going to have to deal with the fact 

that crime in Saskatchewan has not gone down. There is 
virtually nothing in Bill No. 8, Mr. Speaker, virtually nothing in 
Bill No. 8 that’s going to actually reduce crime in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This government has basically said, what are we doing now that 
we have to cover off in the future? Let’s do that. They haven’t 
gone the step further to say, and what else can we do that’s 
new? How do we have to interact with education? How do we 
have to interact with health? How do we have to interact with 
social services? All of those key things need to be worked 
together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we continue on as the way we’ve done, where we go to our 
police forces and basically say, you’re supposed to be the 
people who enforce the crime; you’re supposed to be the people 
that go ahead and find the individuals; you’re supposed to bring 
them to justice; at the same time you’re supposed to be their 
parent and counsellor. It’s very difficult, Mr. Speaker, for the 
officer who has to grab a young person by the back of the neck 
and say, I’m taking you to justice, at the same time saying, and 
now I want to sit beside you and help you to turn out to be a 
good, contributing person of society. That’s a difficult situation. 
Bill No. 8 doesn’t address the need for those changes in our 
justice system in this particular province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have done some checking with some of the groups across 
this province and, as I’ve already intimated, this is a very large 
area. This may actually be the most significant Bill that this 
government’s going to present this year and so we will be 
checking with all of the groups that have a stake in this. 
 
And we will be debating this much more in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, hoping that the government will in the future, and 
maybe even later on in this particular session, bring forth some 
other pieces of legislation to go ahead and deal with those areas 
that aren’t dealt with in Bill No. 8. And so at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Junor that Bill No. 5 — The Teachers 
Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 
2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to rise 
and speak to The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 
Benefits Bill. I know that everyone around the province 
breathed a sigh of relief last September when there was an 
agreement, a collective agreement between the teachers and this 
province, agreeing that we would actually have no strike and 
that they would have an opportunity to have our children return 
to the classroom. 
 
I congratulate the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) and the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 
in ensuring that this collective agreement did happen. And I 
know that right around this province we know that growing our 
population and ensuring that our children have a bright future is 
relying on the educators in the province. 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

 

As the Saskatchewan Party, we recognize the value of our 
teachers and recognize that we . . . the need for their input and 
their value they have in our children’s lives. 
 
The teachers and the parents and the children in Saskatchewan 
know that the unfunded pension liability that is part of the debt 
of this province has got nothing to do with this latest negotiated 
agreement. They do know that the $4 billion that is unfunded 
pension liability debt, that is growing right now, is something 
that they’re going to have to be dealing with. 
 
But this current Bill is something that was agreed to by all the 
participants at the table and there was four issues that were dealt 
with directly. 
 
The first one was the periods of disability for teachers who 
experience long-term disability. This is going to allow them 
now to have their pensions calculated in the same ways as it 
would have been if they would have been able to teach during 
their disability. Through no fault of their own, many teachers 
are having to leave the classroom, and then they would retire at 
the age of 65 without having the same pension that they would 
have had, had they had the opportunity to continue teaching. 
 
So through this Bill and through these changes in the collective 
agreement, they’re going to be able to contribute to their 
pension. 
 
Another one of the changes is regarding the parenting leave that 
teachers can purchase for their pensions under The Labour 
Standards Act. We know that there was changes under this Act, 
and the actual principles under the old agreement didn’t jive 
with the provisions of The Labour Standards Act, so part of the 
collective agreement was actually these agreements to work 
together. And now the teachers have the same benefits as other 
people under The Labour Standards Act. 
 
There’s a number of teachers who actually have had to move 
their pension from another province, if they decided to go 
teaching elsewhere and then come back to Saskatchewan, and 
there was always some problems with moving the pension back 
and forth. And now with the changes to this Act, they’ve 
removed some of the financial barriers and there will be not the 
same problems that there was before. 
 
The fourth and probably one of the more important issues is 
eliminating the need to publish the names of the plan members 
who actually died during the last year or their age or their 
reason for superannuation. The freedom of information and 
privacy Act actually made this important. And we knew that 
there was some inconsistencies with this Act. So the changes 
that were allowed during this disability pensions Act make this 
all possible. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s some questions that I do have on this 
Bill — conditions on transferring pensions, some of the 
administrative issues that were talked about in the Act, and 
whether these amendments will actually encourage teachers to 
stay in this province? These are all questions that we will want 
to discuss with the minister but this can be done within 
Committee of the Whole so I move that this Bill now move to 
Committee of the Whole. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
Subvote (SP01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you 
for the opportunity to introduce to you and members of the 
committee the five officials from Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation who are here with me today. 
 
First of all on my left, Mr. Ray Clayton, who is the president; 
Garth Rusconi, immediately behind me, who is the 
vice-president of accommodation services; Donald Koop, 
vice-president of commercial services; Debbie Koshman, 
vice-president of corporate services; and seated behind Debbie 
is Paul Radigan, director of financial services, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And if I may continue just for a moment, Mr. Chairman, what I 
would like to do is to thank them very much for being here for 
the benefit of the committee today. And just to offer a few 
comments in advance and invite the questions from committee 
members. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the corporation services include, and I just want 
to outline some of the services that are provided by SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). That 
includes property management, facility operations, purchasing 
services, warehousing, supply distribution, and transportation 
services. SPMC, Mr. Chairman, provides these services 
throughout Saskatchewan to more than 200 communities. 
 
As a support service, SPMC works hard to ensure that other 
government departments and agencies are well supported in 
their efforts to serve the people of this great province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As an example, Mr. Chairman, SPMC’s central vehicle agency 
saves government approximately $3 million every year through 
its bulk discounts. SPMC also saves another $5 million a year 
on long distance and voice services for government, as well as 
another $1 million a year on cellular services. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, it doesn’t stop there. SPMC provides 
additional savings of approximately $3 million every year by 
making centralized purchases of the goods and services that 
government departments and agencies need to operate. 
 
And SPMC does more than save money for this government, 
Mr. Chairman. This past year SPMC unveiled an action plan on 
procurement design to make it easier for Saskatchewan 
suppliers to do business with the public sector agencies. 
 
As part of an action plan on procurement, SPMC issued a 
discussion paper last December. This discussion paper was 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

designed to stimulate discussion about current procurement 
policies as well as to seek input on anticipated opportunities in 
government procurement. 
 
As part of its efforts of support for the Saskatchewan supplier 
community, SPMC held a one-day purchasers’ showcase in 
Saskatoon this January. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’d be better off answering questions 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Absolutely. I’m looking forward to 
answering the committee’s questions, Mr. Chairman. I just want 
to make sure that they do have an appreciation of the hard work 
that people in SPMC do behalf . . . on them, on the services that 
people provide to this province, and that this government 
through SPMC provides to all the communities. 
 
The showcase that I had mentioned, Mr. Chairman, was 
attended by more than 700 people, representing over 450 
businesses, Mr. Chairman. This event was a huge success. 
 
And I’m sorry if I’m saying so much good news, it’s upsetting 
other committee members in the House, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The one-day event, I need to tell you though, made it an awful 
lot easier for Saskatchewan suppliers — Saskatchewan 
suppliers — to make contact with a broad spectrum of public 
sector agencies which is important. This is supporting our 
businesses, our communities, throughout the province. 
 
In February, SPMC launched a new Web site called 
sasktenders.ca. This Web site, and the members of the 
committee on the opposite side of the House should take note of 
this because it provides free and simple access to Saskatchewan 
public sector tenders, and as such responds to suppliers’ 
concerns about the expense of using the national electronic 
alternative. 
 
The action plan on procurement is making it easier for 
Saskatchewan suppliers to do business with government, Mr. 
Chairman. So that’s something that SPMC should be and is 
very, very proud of. 
 
SPMC is also very proud of its air transportation service, Mr. 
Chairman. This service includes executive air which helps 
members from both sides of this House travel this vast and 
beautiful province of ours safely and conveniently. SPMC’s 
transportation service also includes air ambulance service, 
which is run in collaboration with the Department of Health and 
the Saskatoon Health District. Mr. Chairman, when someone in 
this province urgently requires care not available in their home 
community, air ambulance is there to take them where the care 
can be provided. 
 
SPMC provides important services to this province, Mr. 
Chairman. It is my hope at this point, on this occasion, that I 
will be able to expand further on these particular issues today, 
Mr. Chairman, as we respond to questions from members of 
this committee. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and on behalf of the 
opposition we want to welcome the officials from SPMC here 
today for questions in Committee of Finance, and I thank them 
for their time and for their effort here this afternoon. And, Mr. 
Chairman, I’ll just at the outset indicate that I will be, with the 
help of the pages, sending over the globals for SPMC and 
getting into some specific questions. 
 
But before I do that, my colleague, the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, has some specific questions so I’ll defer 
to her and then be able to return to some questions that I have 
for the minister and the officials. Go ahead. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, I have a few questions around 
the whole issue of the Souris Valley Hospital in Weyburn. I 
have questioned in this House several times about this facility 
and I wonder if you could provide me with an update of the 
status today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the 
question from the member of Weyburn-Big Muddy. That 
particular facility . . . There have been agencies — government 
agencies — canvassed for use of that facility, and we found 
nobody that is interested. 
 
Now there has been a new facility announced by the 
Department of Health, as the member would be well aware. So 
now we are still in the process of dealing with the city of 
Weyburn to determine whether or not they may be able to come 
up with some ideas or some uses for that particular facility. And 
that’s where it’s at right now, and we’ll work with them in 
whatever endeavours or efforts to find a suitable tenant, if in 
fact someone comes along and sees there may be a use for it. 
But at this point in time, the city of Weyburn is involved in that 
looking for perhaps a tenant and sub-use of that building. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, some 
time ago I met with officials from SPMC with some other 
residents of Weyburn who had an idea for use for Souris 
Valley, and who were very concerned because there was talk at 
that time of it being . . . the main use, which is the long-term 
care facility, moving out of there. And I was told at that time 
that there was an extensive package that had been put together 
by SPMC that was given out to prospective clients that might 
want to purchase Souris Valley. Following that, I received a 
two-pager which actually held no information that would be of 
any value to someone wanting to purchase this facility. 
 
I’m wondering if today if SPMC has a package that they 
actually can give out to people or parties that are interested in 
purchasing the Souris Valley facility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the 
member could clarify. What you’re looking for is the 
specifications and what the facility entails and . . . I’m just not 
sure exactly what kind of a package you were hoping to have 
sent out or put together. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Minister, it was not my package. It 
was SPMC’s package. And I was told at the time of this 
meeting that there was a package that was available to be sent 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

 

out to interested parties should they inquire about using Souris 
Valley and possibly purchasing Souris Valley. 
 
I would like to know if that package was ever put together, and 
if it was, what it contained. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the member is correct with 
respect to a package being available for interested parties. But 
we’re a little ahead of where that . . . at that stage that it should 
be at. There is an order of priority with respect to disposal of 
properties by SPMC. 
 
First of all, it’s offered up to and looked at by provincial Crown 
corporations, independent government agencies as well, health 
districts, and some of the . . . or whichever of the 
non-government organizations that provide core government 
services. 
 
Now secondly, it’s offered up to local government 
organizations such as municipal governments, school districts, 
or pardon me, school boards, and universities to see whether or 
not they have any use for it. 
 
And thirdly, and then this is . . . I know that it may seem like an 
arduous process but it’s a process that’s been in place with 
some long-term mutual agreements to afford the opportunities 
to government agencies that may have use of it. So thirdly I’m 
at the federal-funded organizations such as federal departments, 
agencies, Crowns, corporations, and treaty land entitlement and 
specific claim bands. 
 
Then fourthly, there’s another step. So it’s not a real quick 
process but it’s one that we’re committed to following. If an 
interest to purchase that property as its determined . . . at its 
determined market value is obtained from step three, then 
SPMC proceeds with the necessary negotiations and 
documentation to conclude the sale on the transaction. So it 
would be at that stage when there would be someone then 
finally coming to us and saying, there’s an interest; we have an 
interest; this is what we’d need it for. 
 
Now fifthly — and this is where the package, the total package 
would come in — if there is no expressed interest to purchase 
the property at the determined market value from step three, 
then the surplus property is offered to the general public 
through a public call for proposals. So it may seem like a 
lengthy procedure to go through but it does in fact afford 
opportunities for publicly supported agencies, school boards, 
and non-government organizations to make application for 
those properties. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
think there is a lot of confusion around this whole issue because 
it was over a year ago that I actually met with SPMC and was 
told at that time that there was a package that was available 
should interested parties ask about Souris Valley hospital. And 
just a few moments ago you told me that you had turned this 
over to the city of Weyburn. Is the city of Weyburn trying to 
find a use for . . . someone in the public to use it or are they 
trying to find a use for it for . . . through the city of Weyburn? 
I’m a little bit confused here. 
 
It is a large facility and I am sure that the city of Weyburn is not 

in a position to be taken . . . taking over Souris Valley for the 
use by the city of Weyburn. So I would like to know: which is 
it? Is the city of Weyburn supposed to be finding a use within 
the city for it, or are they supposed to be finding a buyer for this 
facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, yes, it is confusing and 
some of these tendering processes and disposal, not unlike some 
of our procurement services and policies and procedures that 
need to be followed are . . . perhaps need to be more . . . we 
need to sit down face to face and go over it and make sure that 
we understand exactly what happens. And I apologize for any 
confusion. 
 
We’re at the stage where the facility, as I mentioned in the 
second step of the process, is to offer it to local government 
organizations such as municipal governments, school boards, 
and university. So if the city in fact wanted to buy it, okay, 
that’s a step. It’s offered to them — either take over the facility 
through a purchase offer and then sell it or utilize it for . . . offer 
it to other agencies, non-government or otherwise. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I’m still not 
clear, Mr. Minister, whether you are trying to get the city of 
Weyburn to purchase this for a use within the city or whether 
you are asking the city of Weyburn to find someone else outside 
of the municipal jurisdiction to buy it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, we’re not . . . If the city has 
a use for it, if they see that they can fulfill its use and they want 
it, that’s fine. If they say no, we’re not interested, we don’t have 
anybody we can offer it to, we don’t want to buy it — then we 
go down to the next step on the list or the procedures and it’s 
then offered to federally funded organizations, federal 
department services, the treaty land entitlement people, and the 
ones that I mentioned earlier. 
 
So we’re at the stage . . . If the city of Weyburn comes back and 
says, look, get rid of that, we’re not interested in that property 
— then we go to the next group of federally funded agencies 
that may be interested in going after that property. 
 
And I think it’s fair that we give the city of Weyburn the 
opportunity to make an offer on that facility, maybe in 
conjunction with some other community organizations that may 
get together with the city and say, perhaps together we can 
purchase this and build it into something that . . . for our 
community needs. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So it’s my 
understanding, and please clarify if I’m wrong, but that the 
proposal now is that the city of Weyburn will find a use for it 
by the city. And should they not want to use it in the city . . . or 
by the city of Weyburn, then they are turning it back to you, 
SPMC, to find a use for it? Am I correct? 
 
The city’s only role in this is if they find a use for it, by actually 
the city of Weyburn? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. We offered 
it to the city for them to determine whether they have any use 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

for it or not. We’re not suggesting that they take it over and try 
to sell it or offer it up for rent to anybody else. 
 
The question to them is now: the facility’s there; do you feel 
you can make use of it or not? If not, then we go to the next 
level of agencies, the federally funded agencies, and offer it to 
them. 
 
If the city of Weyburn turned around and said no, we have no 
use for that building, we can’t afford it, we don’t want it — then 
we go to the next step and deal with the federally funded 
organizations, those that I’d mentioned earlier. 
 
So it’s not trying to impose anything on the city of Weyburn. 
It’s saying, we have this building, it’s not being utilized — are 
you interested in a purchase for whatever use your community 
might have for it? And if the city of Weyburn says no, not 
interested, then we’ll go to the federal government agencies. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I was not 
implying that you were imposing anything on the city. I am just 
trying to clarify what actually the purpose of the committee is 
that has been set up in the city of Weyburn. If it is strictly for 
the city — which I believe you’ve indicated — for the city to 
find a use within the city for, it is not for a commercial entity. 
 
If they do not find a purpose for it within their municipal 
government, then it will revert to you, and SPMC will move on 
to the next step, and they will be responsible to try and find a 
use then at the federal government level. Am I correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — To the member, Mr. Chairman, that’s 
absolutely correct, and I apologize for having indicated or 
suggested that it was an imposition on the city. That was a poor 
choice of words and I didn’t mean it to sound that way. 
 
It was meant to suggest that the city has the first shot at it. But I 
believe you’ve clarified and just exactly the steps . . . the next 
step now. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess the 
reason that I’m asking these questions is because there is a lot 
of concern in the city of Weyburn around the whole use of 
Souris Valley. It is a very historic building. It has a lot of 
meaning in our community. People are very concerned about 
the whole . . . all the events of the past few years and all the 
uncertainty which has surrounded it. 
 
There was great concern when the health district decided to turn 
Souris Valley . . . to close Souris Valley and to move out of that 
facility. And at that time there was felt that there was not clear 
enough communication with SPMC on what was transpiring, 
especially with the residents of Elgin Street who were directly 
impacted because of the things that were happening around 
Souris Valley in the grounds, and the concern about where they 
were taking down . . . SPMC removed trees, they’re going to 
build a pond, and so on. And there were a lot of concerns, and 
the people — the residents of Weyburn — a lot of them did not 
feel that their concerns were adequately addressed by SPMC. 
 
And now we’re in a situation where we could lose the whole 
facility. And the facility not only houses long-term care but it 
also houses the Family Place, Mini Go School, Violence 

Intervention, Big Brothers and Big Sisters, and so on. 
 
And when . . . Because the long-term care component is the 
main tenant of the facility, there is great concern that these other 
entities will be . . . then have to move out of the facility because 
they will not be able to operate and pay for the ongoing utilities 
which are now paid for by the Sun Health District. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, that is why people want to be clear in 
their minds, in the community of Weyburn, how they are going 
to have the opportunity to play a part in what actually happens 
to this facility. Will they have an opportunity to say no, we do 
not want this building demolished? 
 
And that is the great fear because I have a communication from 
Lloyd Searcy, who is the vice-president of operations of the 
new facility in Weyburn, and this is dated May 28, 2001. This is 
almost two years ago, and at that time he is giving an update 
about Tatagwa View. And his fifth point on this — and this is a 
memo to the staff at South Central Health District. And his fifth 
point is, because the northwest wing, referring to the Souris 
Valley facility . . . wing will eventually be demolished, I asked 
Don Rose, who is one of the employees at Souris Valley, to 
acquire a number of bricks from this wing for testing, which he 
got from the old library building. If they are found to be 
suitable, they will be used in construction of the new building. 
 
Now if there is no plan to demolish this building and the people 
of Weyburn and community are going to have a say in what 
actually eventually happens to this building, why is the 
vice-president of operations and finance putting forth letters 
saying that the northwest wing is going to be demolished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I do appreciate the 
concerns that the member is expressing on behalf of the 
community of Weyburn. There are some other concerns and the 
member has alluded to them as well. It’s who is financing and 
who is paying for the costs of maintaining that facility, and I 
believe the member said it was the Sun Health District? 
 
Okay, and it does require considerable amount of funding, of 
monies, for upgrading. I understand. Now that’s one of the . . . 
The hope is that the building is not needed to be demolished 
and that’s why these steps, these procedures are being followed, 
to see if someone in this chain of interested parties perhaps may 
come forward and say we’ll take on the responsibility of that 
facility. We’ll invest whatever — whether it’s hundreds of 
thousands or millions of dollars — to upgrade it. And 
hopefully, we’re hoping that that would happen. Because you’re 
right; it is a building that’s been around for many, many years. 
 
So it’s not the intent . . . The preference would be to not have to 
demolish the building. Now the letter that the member refers to, 
I believe if I’m correct, it came from the health district, an 
employee of the health district. So it had nothing to do with 
SPMC and perhaps, with all due respect to the letter writer, it 
may have been that the bricks look great on this facility. If in 
fact the time comes when there’s no alternative but to take the 
building down, perhaps we can prudently recover, retrieve some 
of the bricks that make up that building and utilize it for another 
building or for a new facility. 
 
So I just . . . I want to make sure that the community of 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

 

Weyburn and the member, Mr. Chair, understands that nobody 
is rushing forward to tear down that building and we’d all like 
to see it taken on by someone that would be prepared to 
maintain the upkeep and any modifications or any upgrades. 
And from what I understand — and the member is probably 
better acquainted than I am; and I have visited that facility by 
the way — and it would need a significant amount of dollars for 
upgrading it and bringing it up to the kind of standards that 
would be required for continuing and offering some of the 
services. And I don’t think the member will disagree with me 
on that. 
 
So it’s not a matter of trying to shovel it off on somebody, not 
by any stretch. And going through this process, perhaps along 
the way, perhaps there may be a federal government agency that 
will come along and say, by golly we can make use of that 
facility and we are prepared to invest whatever. 
 
But we’re looking at the alternatives with the hopes that 
perhaps it might not have to be taken down. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I guess what 
I’m hearing from you today is that there is not a firm 
commitment by this government not to demolish it if it comes 
to that. 
 
I guess the people of Weyburn, and I have to concur with them, 
are concerned because it has been known for several years that 
the Sun Country Health District was planning to move out of 
that facility. And it goes back to my original question: where is 
the package? There has not been, to my knowledge, any 
concerted effort to find a use for Souris Valley. 
 
We are now in the situation where the new facility . . . they 
have already removed trees on the grounds and have prepared 
the site and are moving towards starting construction. And yet 
we’re back at what? Number two on the list of what we should 
do with this facility. And this has been common knowledge in 
the health field and with SPMC for years that this was going to 
happen and that the health district was moving towards this and 
moving out of Souris Valley. And yet there has been nothing 
done in order to prepare for that day. 
 
And it is my understanding from speaking with people that 
work at Souris Valley and are directly engaged in the 
day-to-day maintenance of that facility, that it has been left to 
deteriorate and that it has not been kept up. And that is an 
absolute crime when you think of that facility. 
 
And I know several years ago when I was on the board at the 
Union Hospital, which was called the Union Hospital at that 
time, and we were looking at a way to utilize the health care 
facilities in the Weyburn . . . in the city of Weyburn, that we 
had a study done of Souris Valley and it showed clearly that the 
structure was sound and that that building would be standing 
long after many of the other buildings that were newer in the 
city of Weyburn. 
 
And so the abdication of maintaining that building is simply not 
acceptable. And now we’re faced today with a . . . in a situation 
where we could possibly lose that facility. 
 
And so I want to know where this package is, and what is going 

to happen by SPMC to move forward on this? This committee 
has been struck in the city of Weyburn. I would like to know 
what the terms of reference are for that committee. Do you have 
terms of reference for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we would not . . . it 
would not be SPMC that would be responsible for making up 
the terms of reference for that committee. And I have . . . we’re 
part of the committee. SPMC is part of the public committee 
that’s been formed to explore the options for this particular 
facility. 
 
And I . . . until it was officially announced that there would be a 
new facility, SPMC was not in a position to proceed with this 
process that we’re into now. It would not have been fair to look 
at options for a facility before, in fact, it was formally 
announced that there would be a facility to replace that. 
 
So the partners within this committee, I’m told, are the 
Department of Health, the Sun Country Health Region, the 
Department of Industry and Resources, the city of Weyburn, the 
RM of Weyburn, and the community at large. 
 
And the total goal of that particular committee, whatever their 
terms of reference may be that they’ve agreed upon, is to find a 
viable alternative use for this facility. 
 
And as I mentioned earlier, the maintenance, upkeep, and 
upgrading — and I know what the member’s saying — we 
should be preserving our heritage property. I don’t think 
anybody disagrees with that. But there are communities, and 
I’m aware, very well aware of at least one where facilities that 
have served their purpose and have been utilized for care needs 
have arrived at the point — because of new technology, new 
requirements — that those facilities are no longer suitable for 
the purposes that they served over the years. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So it’s a matter of now what do you do? Do you rebuild, do you 
build something, or do you upgrade? And if you compare the 
costs of one against the other and then some pretty tough 
decisions have to be made. 
 
But getting back to the process for viable alternatives for 
utilizing the building, I do believe, I do believe . . . and I can’t 
think of who would argue with property that’s being . . . that 
SPMC is responsible for, going through a process which allows 
or affords opportunities, as I mention in this list through these 
five steps — provinces, agencies, the community — to come up 
with a viable alternative. 
 
There are costs of upkeep. There’s costs of maintenance, and I 
know the member will understand that. And those costs would 
be the Sun Valley Health District that is responsible for that. So 
it’s not as if that particular building is being totally ignored in 
that respect. It’s a matter of the facility, to serve the needs of 
people in that community, will be replaced with a new facility. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well there’s been a 
whole discussion around the new facility and the needs. And 
I’ve made my position on that very clear over the last few years 
about the irresponsibility of moving out of this facility in the 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

first place and spending some $20 million to have less beds and 
less staff in the city of Weyburn. But that’s a whole other issue 
that deals more directly with Health and not with SPMC. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you then, it is my 
understanding that SPMC has turned this responsibility over to 
the city of Weyburn of which they serve a part of this 
committee. However, there is no terms of reference. You’re 
telling me that you do not have a package that the city can even 
sell to anyone. 
 
Do you have a time frame when the city . . . the committee 
that’s formed in the city of Weyburn is to come back with a 
response? Do you have a cost that you have attached to Souris 
Valley? Do you have criteria around what SPMC will sign-off 
on? What are the terms of reference? What criteria have you 
given this committee? They can’t just be told to form a 
committee with no guidelines. I want to know what the 
guidelines are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Not unlike what we talked about earlier 
about being somewhat confusing, and I perhaps . . . And I 
apologize if my answers are causing more confusion on this 
process. 
 
The committee has been struck and I’m told that it’s only met 
perhaps once or twice and has not indicated any specific terms 
of reference. But now let’s . . . I don’t want to confuse this issue 
any further than perhaps I may already have. That committee 
has been struck and perhaps in advance of our having 
completed the five steps that we need to go through — that I 
alluded to or indicated earlier — offering first to provincial 
Crowns or provincial agencies, local government organizations 
such as municipal governments, federal-funded organizations, 
and if an interest to purchase is determined or obtained from 
step three, then SPMC proceeds with the necessary documents 
and so on. 
 
Now the . . . We haven’t got to that stage yet and we haven’t 
completed all those steps. So although the committee is together 
and looking at possibilities for community use based on the size 
of that facility, what upgrades will be required and so on, when 
all our commitments have been met, when SPMC’s 
commitments have been met to that five-step process in offering 
to all others before it’s marketed, it’ll be . . . the committee will 
then come up with a plan, with SPMC’s involvement, to form a 
marketing strategy to dispose of that facility. 
 
But initially they have the option of seeking out an organization 
— a non-government organization or an agency within the 
community — that may want to purchase the building. If that 
comes to pass, if an interest to purchase that property is 
determined and its market value is obtained, then SPMC will 
proceed through the necessary negotiations and 
documentations. This includes the sale transaction. 
 
Again, and it’s still . . . no decisions on any demolishment of 
that building is being considered or undertaken until, and 
hopefully won’t have to come to that because perhaps by 
following these steps, somewhere along the way there will be a 
use or a buyer that will come forward and will utilize that 
building. 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I guess I find it 
somewhat strange that SPMC owns this facility. They have 
struck a committee in the community of Weyburn which is 
good and fine, but I think it’s a little strange to me that the 
buyer, so to speak, is forming the terms of reference, as 
opposed to the seller. 
 
Surely the government has put together a plan of what they 
want for this facility, the time frame around when the 
committee in Weyburn has to determine whether they have a 
use for it or not, and they actually have a package that they put 
together for the city of Weyburn to make that determination in 
consultation with community groups, whether they want to 
move forward. 
 
This is all . . . There doesn’t seem to be any thought behind this 
or anything put in place. And this is the whole concern, is that 
are the people in Weyburn going to wake up some day and the 
wrecking ball is going to be at Souris Valley, just the same as it 
was tearing down the trees to put the site in place for the new 
facility? 
 
The people of the city of Weyburn were told that there would 
be a certain process before the trees were cut down at Souris 
Valley. I don’t believe that process was actually followed to the 
letter. And that is why there is great concern in the community 
of Weyburn that the same thing is going to happen with Souris 
Valley, and especially in light of the fact that I have this letter 
from Lloyd Searcy stating that the northwest wing will be 
demolished. 
 
Now who is making these decisions and who is going to have 
the eventual say? And how are the community of Weyburn 
going to have an opportunity to play a part in the final decision 
and how much time are they going to be given if a use is not 
found through the processes that you have outlined? When are 
they going to be informed that you, as SPMC, have not been 
able to find a use, and that they are going to have an 
opportunity to find a use for Souris Valley? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the . . . and I don’t think it 
would be fair to put any artificial deadlines on this process. We 
have concerns for the heritage building. 
 
But you know what surprises me somewhat, Mr. Chairman, is 
the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy who is . . . sounds to me 
like opposed, opposed to a new health care facility in that city. 
 
I know other communities that would welcome new facilities to 
care for people requiring health care, so I’m a little confused 
here. We’re trying to do our best, the best we can. There are 
serious costs involved. Renovations. There’s a new facility 
being planned. 
 
The letter you keep referring to did not come from SPMC; did 
not. And I expect . . . and I don’t know what the contents of the 
letter are or what the insinuation might be, but is it that if that 
north wing is demolished or when that north wing is 
demolished and we find out that those bricks can be used for 
another building, we want them? Is that the case? Because 
there’s no direction, there’s no indication here until we follow 
the process, that any action will be taken with that facility. 
 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

 

We share the concerns of the people in that community about 
the heritage site and the facility itself. But at some point, as I 
mentioned earlier, there are considerations that need to be taken 
to ensure the care of people that require the type of care that 
they need in this day and age. 
 
So I’m not sure what more we can do. This process . . . and I’m 
not sure how much further it should go or what the member 
suggests should be done. Really, I would appreciate any 
suggestions or ideas as to what should happen. The community 
is involved — with the leaders of the community, the RMs, the 
city; we’ve got the health district; we’ve got people in the 
Health department . . . and I’m sure they sit down and think, 
look, if we can find a use for this facility, let’s see if we can 
find it. 
 
Now, yes, we might be able to find a use for it but guess what? 
If we’re going to continue using it, you know what we’re going 
to need to spend — I don’t know — 10, 20, 30, $40 million to 
make sure that it’s upgraded to the safety standards and meet all 
the requirements, whatever they might be, to meet all the 
standards that are set for accommodating people who require it 
for health care. 
 
So I really don’t know, but I would invite the member to send 
over some suggestions as to what further should be done in this 
process, that attempts to address perhaps needs of all agencies, 
and without having to, as the member put it, put a wrecking ball 
to that facility. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
guess there has been a misunderstanding around this whole 
committee, because my understanding was it was to find not 
only possibly a use for the community but possibly to find a 
commercial use for the facility. 
 
And what I would like clarified is, is the time frame, and to 
know — so the people of Weyburn know — when their 
opportunity to play a part in this is, and how much time they 
will have when SPMC has made a decision. If that decision is 
that they have not found a use for it, how much time that the 
citizens of Weyburn will then have to find a use for it if they so 
choose? 
 
Mr. Minister, you have indicated that there is a cost to operating 
this facility and that’s why we’re very concerned and want to 
find an anchor for this facility so that we can maintain the other 
services that are utilizing the facility now. And I have to say 
that to their credit the people in Weyburn, which are made up of 
mostly volunteers that initiated the Mini Go school and the 
Family Place, went into Souris Valley into wings that did need 
some renovation and fixing up, and through volunteer labour 
and donations from the community, they went in there and they 
re-did those wings and they put them into a very . . . into use, 
and are serving a great need in our community. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And it would be most devastating to these community 
organizations and to the children that they serve if they have to 
close. And that is what this is all about, is trying to understand 
clearly the process that is taking place so that we are not faced 
with the issue of this building have to be closed, and when the 

Sun Country health district actually moves out that there is 
someone to come in and take their place and to be the anchor so 
that these other community organizations do not have to be 
removed from Souris Valley. 
 
And so I would appreciate, on behalf of the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, a time frame set out by yourself so that 
the people of Weyburn are clear in their mind what the process 
is and what part that they can play in resolving this factor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, sincerely, I 
do not believe, I do not believe it would be fair, in all fairness to 
all these people and the community of Weyburn, to set a time 
frame and say if you . . . something doesn’t happen, somebody 
doesn’t show up for the next six months, we’re out of there. I 
don’t think that’d be fair. 
 
What we want to do is make sure we go through this entire 
process and allow as much opportunity as possible to afford the 
community, to afford other agencies, to afford whomever, the 
opportunity to come in and when the time comes for the move 
to be made, that there will be somebody. So I . . . please accept 
the fact that, in all fairness, I do not believe it would be 
appropriate to say, you’re out of here in one year whether you 
do anything with it or not. We don’t want to do that. 
 
We want to make sure that our process is followed, that the 
community’s given opportunities, and if it . . . And when the 
time comes, the community may very well become involved 
and likely will become involved through the public committee 
to determine what other course of action, perhaps become 
involved in a marketing strategy and hopefully look for people 
that would occupy it, would buy it, occupy it, refurbish it, or do 
whatever. But our hope is the same as yours — to not have to 
take down that facility. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s, you know, 
understandable that you do not want to rush the process. 
However we are in a time frame because the Sun Country 
Health District is moving forward. They are planning to start 
construction this spring. I believe that they’re looking at a year 
to 18 months in order to construct and be moving into their new 
facility. So whether we like it or you like it or not, we are in a 
time frame. 
 
And once the Sun Country Health District moves long-term 
care out of Souris Valley facility, there will not be an anchor 
unless we find someone to replace them. So we cannot say that 
we don’t want to have a time frame around this because there is 
one already imposed on us. 
 
And so I would ask you, Mr. Minister, again could you please 
clearly outline — and I’m not asking for you to do that today — 
but could you outline for me something that I could give back 
to the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy to say, this is the 
process; these are the time frames; this is how you as a 
constituent of this community can have a part in this and will 
have an opportunity to find a solution to this problem? Could I 
ask you to do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, what I will commit to the 
member is to prepare documentation. And forgive me, once 
again, I will not — will not — give any artificial deadlines as 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

far as that facility is concerned. And I would hope that you 
would not expect anybody to do that. We’re going to do 
everything we possibly can by following this process to see if 
we can’t come up with someone to occupy that facility. 
 
But what I will commit is for an explanation perhaps that may 
be of assistance for the processes that are in place and what we 
will endeavour to engage . . . well not engage, but that we will 
implement to make sure we do everything we possibly can to 
help the community find someone to occupy that facility. And if 
that’s acceptable, then I will . . . we’ll get some correspondence 
to you next week to outline what the processes are, and it might 
make it a little clearer. 
 
And if we outline exactly the different agencies and the 
processes that we hope maybe somewhere along this way, you 
know, who knows? Somebody may come along and find good 
use for that facility and will serve, as the member mentioned, as 
an anchor for that community . . . for that facility. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Some questions with 
respect to the accommodation services part of Property 
Management to begin with, if I may, Minister. And specifically 
the question has to do with the property that I would assume 
that SPMC is managing at 800 Central Avenue in Prince Albert. 
And I guess that’s the McIntosh Mall there. 
 
I’m wondering if you could comment please and provide some 
detail as to the planning that’s underway currently in the 
department with respect to that space and any other space in 
that community currently being managed by SPMC and rented 
out to various departments, vis-à-vis the forestry centre that has 
been announced in the Throne Speech and then again in the 
budget. 
 
Specifically, what arms of the government will be — if any — 
what offices of the government in Prince Albert are potentially 
relocating from SPMC properties to the forestry centre? And 
also while you’re on your feet, Minister, if you don’t mind, if 
you could confirm that the corporation, SPMC, will not be 
involved in property management for the forestry centre but 
rather that’s somehow a part of the research centre or research 
park process which is under CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
If you could comment on those matters, please, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I thank the member from Swift Current for 
that question. With respect to the McIntosh Mall in Prince 
Albert, SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) will be vacating approximately . . . well about 
one floor of that facility, and they will be moving to the forestry 
building. Every effort will be made, as is in other vacant spaces, 
to backfill, to offer it, to market it or again, a whole host of 
other agencies or entities that might want to avail themselves of 
some fairly good space. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister. What’s the current 
occupancy then of that location, of that property — 800 Central 
Avenue, Prince Albert? What’s the current occupancy or I guess 
the current vacancy? Either way we get to the same answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to that question 

— and there’s some of these figures that I don’t have readily 
available but I will definitely supply to the member — the 
vacant lease . . . the vacant space currently is 305 square metres 
— 305.14. 
 
Mr. Wall: — And other than . . . My wife’s from Prince Albert 
so I’ve driven by the McIntosh Mall but I don’t . . . I wonder if 
you . . . I’m not sure how many total square metres it would be, 
just by driving by it. So if you have an estimate on that so we 
could figure out a percentage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I’m like you and I would hate to take a 
guess and I apologize for not having that here. But I will, I will 
get that information to you as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister. I wonder if you could also 
answer or provide a response as to whether or not, are there any 
other properties in Prince Albert then the corporation manages 
and . . . owns and manages, whose tenants may also be 
relocating to the forestry centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The other buildings that are managed by 
SPMC, Highways and land titles, and none of those people have 
been indicated as moving anywhere. So it’s the Mac Mall and 
those two facilities. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then the space that is 
currently vacant —the 305-point-something square metres there 
— and the space that will be vacated sometime in the future as 
SERM or as the Environment department moves into the 
forestry centre, you indicated in your answer a couple of 
responses ago, I think, that SPMC will then look to fill that, 
obviously, will look to fill that space. And what’s the policy 
that . . . What’s SPMC’s policy with respect to that? How do 
they . . . How aggressively are non-government, NGOs 
(non-governmental organization), or the private sector pursued 
to rent space in those facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, what one 
thing that SPMC will not do with any of their facilities is 
compete with the private sector in offering space for rent to 
non-government agencies. But I believe we can take comfort in 
the fact that given the growth opportunities and the positive 
activities that are ongoing and being created in this province, 
and particularly in the northern part of the province, there may 
be opportunities for federal agencies, governments, other office 
space that will be required by folks who are taking advantage of 
the opportunities that are afforded here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So as times evolves, it never ceases to amaze me when you 
drive into some of our cities and whether it’s our major cities or 
some of the smaller ones that you keep wondering where the 
people keep coming from when they say, well our population is 
lessening and all you see is new homes being built and built and 
new buildings and all kinds of businesses. So I guess I’m being 
hopeful that we will be able to accommodate people in those 
vacant spaces. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well you know, I want to encourage the minister 
to keep hoping because I think there is reason to hope. There’s 
an election just around the corner. There may be a change, and 



April 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

 

then I think that growth that you’re talking about is really going 
to, really going to take off. So I think your hope is well placed. 
 
But I do have another question with respect to this issue here. 
So I understand . . . My limited understanding of the forestry 
centre is obviously it’s going to do much more than be an office 
space, an office location, at least on the face of it. And so . . . 
But in light of the fact that one of your major . . . one of 
Property Management Corporation’s major tenants, I would 
assume, in the McIntosh Mall is being attracted to that new 
facility, was SPMC consulted then by whatever agency it was, 
whether it’s Industry and Resources, or CIC through the 
research parks? Was SPMC consulted as to the need for the 
space centre, the new centre would be providing or consulted in 
any way on the forestry centre development in Prince Albert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The answer to the member’s question, Mr. 
Chairman, is yes. The SPMC was consulted, was asked about 
the space that was occupied by SERM and the cost of that 
leased space. So there was some consultation in advance. 
 
Mr. Wall: — And did SPMC express then any concerns about 
the loss of this major tenant in the McIntosh Mall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well the way I guess I can respond is sure 
there’s always concern when you, as a landlord, lose tenants. 
There’s the loss of the rental payments and perhaps the need for 
redecorating. However, having said that, there was also some 
fairly good optimism that that space, that particular space, could 
be backfilled. So although that happens, that’s progress, and I 
believe that’s taken into account. 
 
And surely you don’t like to see somebody leave your 
accommodation, your space, but in this case . . . and as SPMC 
continues to be confident that they are able, we are able to 
backfill those facilities because of its location and because of 
the square footage that’s available or the square metres or 
whatever they refer to it. So yes, there’s always concern, but 
there’s always the promise of being able to fulfill the needs of 
others that may need that kind of accommodation. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister. I want to move on here to 
the issue of maintenance. But just before I do that, if you 
wouldn’t mind providing — when you provide the information 
or when officials are providing information with respect to the 
total square metres or square footage actually if that’s possible, 
but I guess we could do the conversion easily enough — but the 
total square metres . . . if they might also provide the total and 
number of square metres currently occupied by SERM that will 
be vacated. I think you mentioned — and if you didn’t, I 
apologize, I don’t want to put words in — but I think you 
mentioned a floor, they’re on one floor or . . . either way though 
if you would just provide those, I sure would appreciate that, 
Minister. 
 
And then to move on a little bit to maintenance. And I’m 
relatively new in these critic duties and my colleague, the late 
Rudi Peters, did a lot of work in this area but my learning curve 
is fairly steep. So I have some basic questions that maybe we 
could start into now. We’re running a little bit short on time but 
they relate to maintenance in the major facilities in all the 
centres across the province and the practices of the corporation 
with respect to maintenance. 

And I guess the first question is, I’m given to understand that 
most of the major facilities, most of the major properties that 
have their own SPMC full-time equivalents who are involved in 
maintenance — and if that’s not correct, by all means correct 
me, but you can correct me — but, Minister, I wonder if you 
could confirm that? And also then if you could confirm what is 
the policy with respect to contracting out the maintenance work 
that’s required — whether it’s electrical, mechanical, whatever 
it happens to be — in the properties that SPMC owns and 
operates across the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, could I just clarify, is that 
. . . when you refer to maintenance — there’s a whole host of 
maintenance areas — specifically? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Let’s just stick with — I mean for the sake of the 
discussions we can move it along — let’s stick with electrical 
and mechanical, and not necessarily, not necessarily sort of the 
janitorial services or anything like that. 
 
But when you have a problem in a property and you have to 
address some mechanical difficulty or some electrical work 
needs to be done or perhaps some structural work needs to be 
done to maintain a property, what is the, what’s the policy there 
with respect to in-house FTEs (full-time equivalents) or 
contracting out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — As the member will appreciate, Mr. 
Chairman, there is . . . there would be constantly — whether it 
SPMC or privately owned buildings — you would have a small 
maintenance staff and we do have. SPMC does have 
maintenance staff that may change light bulbs and do some of 
the minor fixings, if you wish. 
 
But if there are major problems, mechanical problems, then 
those jobs are tendered out. Those are contracted out to — 
whether it’s electrical, plumbing or whatever it may be — so 
the major, any major problems are contracted out. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister, and would you . . . if you 
could give members of the committee some assurance then that 
under no circumstance does . . . do these, do the maintenance 
people at SPMC have on staff, under no circumstance do they 
in fact contract — not themselves but the corporation — offer 
their services out to other non-government organizations in 
terms of maintenance in the area that we’re talking about right 
now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, if the occasion ever arose 
where perhaps the federal government occupying a facility 
owned by SPMC, there may be some contractual obligations. 
But those would be rare to, in fact, respond to some needs of a 
tenant, for example. 
 
And I’m not exactly sure to what extent that the member is 
referring to as far as contracting out. There would be no 
significant SPMC employees that would be contracted out to do 
work for other people. And perhaps I’m confusing it and maybe 
I have the same . . . I’m in the same situation as the member 
from Swift Current. We’re both learning more and more what 
this is all about. 
 
But the contracting out of work would be very unusual unless, 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2003 

 

as I mentioned, it had something to do with a contractual 
obligation for a tenant. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I think I know where the minister is going with 
this and I think what he’s saying is that there would be no 
circumstance where SPMC maintenance officials are offered 
out by the corporation to do work for non-tenants, for someone 
off-site. And I can see that that’s the response. 
 
Well the very last question I probably can fit in here today, Mr. 
Minister, then is still on the subject of maintenance. And it 
specifically has to do with the overall plan of the corporation to 
keep its properties upgraded to the best of its abilities, to keep 
the properties maintained. 
 
I wonder if there has been . . . I’m sure we’re in the midst of a 
long-term plan for keeping properties upgraded and modern. 
And if we are, you know, at what point are we in? Or maybe 
you’ve got in the works a long-term plan in terms of the 
maintenance needs of the buildings. 
 
We hear anecdotally — and it’s only anecdotally admittedly — 
that, you know, some of the properties perhaps have, because of 
budget cut requirements on the part of the corporation, not been 
able to . . . haven’t had the sort of upgrading and maintaining 
that perhaps the corporation would have liked in a better 
circumstance. And if that’s not the case, feel free to clarify. 
 
But I wonder if there’s a long-term plan for these properties in 
the province and where we’re at with respect to that plan? 
 
And if there is a number that . . . a budgeted number, over the 
next number of years, that the corporation has for maintenance 
and improvement and that sort of work with the properties that 
are under the minister’s purview? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
member’s question, there is a strategic plan. And again, as the 
member will appreciate and he’s indicated, that it’s within the 
scope of budgets as well that we’re all faced with. 
 
But the plan focuses on the strategic issues of the state of the 
infrastructure without question. I mean . . . and I know and I’m 
sure that the people that are responsible for that do not want to 
see something deteriorate to the point where it’s going to be 
virtually impossible to repair. 
 
So there is an ongoing — how would you say it — a review of 
. . . not necessarily a review, but at least visual inspections that 
are ongoing. So, you know there’s also the effect, the ongoing 
effect of trying to reduce unit costs of government services in 
whatever means might be available, as well as the effective and 
efficient delivery of service, and increasing the organization and 
employee performance. And, you know, impressing on people 
the need to look after the facilities that they occupy as tenants 
and work with them to make sure that we can maintain and 
upkeep the properties adequately. 
 
The Chair: — It now being near 5 o’clock, the committee will 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
(17:00) 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:01. 
 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................611 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................611 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................611 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................611 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................611 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................611 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................611 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................611 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................612 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................612 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................612 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................612 
  Crofford .............................................................................................................................................................................612, 621 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................612 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................613 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Major Projects Underway in Saskatchewan 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................613 
 South East Saskatchewan Association Awards Program 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................613 
 April is Cancer Month 
  Lorjé...........................................................................................................................................................................................613 
 Valley-West Community Justice Committee 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................614 
 Voluntary Sector is Strengthened 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................614 
 Queen’s Hotel Destroyed in Fire 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................614 
 White City Volunteer Awards 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................614 
 Roundup Ready Wheat 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................615 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Investigation into the Death of Lawrence Wegner 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................615 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................615 
 Confidentiality of Personal Health Records 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................616 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................616 
 Provision of Emergency Health Care 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................617 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................617 
 Supply of Health Care Professionals 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................618 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................618 
 Position on Conflict in Iraq 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................619 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................619 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan’s Centennial 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................620 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................620 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................620 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2003 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................621 



 

 

  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................622 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................623 
 Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................626 
 Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................627 
 Bill No. 5 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2003 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................630 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — Vote 53 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................631 
  Wall ....................................................................................................................................................................................632, 638 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................632 
 


	Supply of Health Care Professionals
	Supply of Health Care Professionals

