















































Hansard: March 31, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 285 
 March 31, 2003 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 
amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before the 
dinner break, I was talking about some of the assumptions that 
the Finance minister made when he was developing his budget 
and pointing out perhaps some errors in some of the 
assumptions that were made. 
 
As I’d indicated earlier, if you look at page 20 in the budget 
document, you’ll see the commodity price outlook and some of 
the assumptions made for 2003. And as I’d indicated in my 
earlier comments, I believe a closer look at current market 
conditions in the commodity markets would indicate that 
perhaps the wheat and canola forecast for this year are some 13 
per cent higher. 
 
Now if you look at the assumption made for barley, this one 
really puzzles me, Mr. Speaker. The only thing I can conclude, 
Mr. Speaker, with the price assumption of about $147 a tonne is 
that this NDP (New Democratic Party) government is assuming 
that all the barley grown across this province in this upcoming 
year will be sold into the malt market because that price that 
they’re using reflects a malt price. 
 
It’s not a wheat price by any means, and yet only approximately 
20 per cent of the barley produced in a normal year goes into 
the malt market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So a more realistic price, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, would 
be about $88 a tonne. So in other words the . . . if you do the 
calculations, the assumptions that were used by the Minister of 
Finance is some 67 per cent too high. 
 
So what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? If you’re using 
assumptions for your budgeting process that aren’t accurate, 
well the obvious result is that your conclusions are going to be 
suspect and not accurate, Mr. Speaker. And one only needs to 
take a closer look at this year’s budget document to illustrate 
that fact. 
 
I’m really quite puzzled when I look on page 12, entitled 
schedule of revenue and under the first heading, taxes — when 
you look at the estimates for corporate . . . corporation income 
tax this year, Mr. Speaker, we see a figure of $340.9 million, 
where last year that same figure was $118.5 million — quite a 
difference, Mr. Speaker; in fact it’s some $222 million 
difference. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that even if you accept their 
projections in GDP (gross domestic product) growth of 6.8 per 

cent, I don’t know how you get some $222 million increase in 
corporate income tax, even with that type of growth, Mr. 
Speaker. So that really leads one to question the accuracy of 
some of these projections, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if we go back to the budget document and we look at page 
23, Mr. Speaker, and we see there a graph on the top of page 23 
— the impact of crop production on Saskatchewan real GDP in 
2003. And we’ll see the first bar there under normal crop of the 
6.8 per cent as I mentioned, and then the 10 per cent below 
normal the GDP drops to 4.5, and the 20 per cent below normal 
crop gives us a 2.2 per cent growth in GDP. 
 
That’s down into the area where a lot of the other economic 
forecasters are saying that in the two and a half to three point 
two — somewhere in there is most likely where our real GDP 
will grow. 
 
So as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the farm producers of 
this province, all across this province, are really hoping that 
these folks know something that no one else seems to know and 
that we are going to have a normal crop. The odds are 
reasonable that we will produce a normal crop. 
 
But to see that kind of economic growth would say that we 
would have considerably higher prices for those commodities 
that are being produced than what the market is telling us at this 
point in time, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve indicated some of the 
errors that these folks have made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if in the budgetary process, if your assumptions are wrong 
then of course your projections are going to be wrong. And 
even with these enhanced and inflated projections, the Finance 
minister is telling us that we will at the end of the year on a $6.6 
billion budget we’re going to have a surplus of $145,000. If you 
put that in terms of a household budget — a family budget — 
it’s like a family sitting down and projecting as accurately as 
they can their expenditures for the year and saying we’ll end up 
with a $1.45 as a surplus or some such foolish thing like that, 
Mr. Speaker. So it seems like this budget once again is certainly 
in that realm of fantasyland, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if we take a closer look at this year’s Highways budget, 
and I know in that little card that accompanied the budget 
information on the first page, Highways and Transportation 
infrastructure was mentioned and this government is pretending 
and trying to tell people that a Highways budget of $296.2 
million is a great investment in infrastructure and it’s something 
new and it’s helping to grow this province and so on. But yet if 
you look at these numbers more closely and we look at last 
year’s budget document, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, and 
we look at the document that was tabled in this House about a 
year ago and we look at the estimates for the 2002-2003 
Highways budget, we’ll see that the estimated budget at that 
time was $300 million — 300.3 million to be exact, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now so how does 296 become such a wonderful budget this 
year when last year they were forecasting or estimating 
expenditures in the neighbourhood of $300 million? Well, let’s 
see what happened there, Mr. Speaker. 
 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

Well I think if we remember back to the debate last year in this 
session over the increase in long-term care fees we’ll recall that 
the Minister of Highways shouted from his seat in a moment of 
heat and passion of the debate making some sort of a comment 
about increasing the fees was the right thing to do. Well . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . for seniors exactly, increasing those 
fees for seniors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when the government finally was pressured into retracting 
those fee increases, they had to scramble to come up with some 
additional $7 million. So where did it come from? It came from 
the Highways budget. So the Highways minister lost one of his 
gravel piles, Mr. Speaker, and his budget was reduced to $293 
million. 
 
And then if we . . . so then if you look on the surface of things 
you would say, well okay last year’s budget was 293; this year 
it’s 296.2. So there is actually an increase. Well there may be if 
you accept those figures at face value. But I recall, Mr. Speaker, 
attending a press conference a number of weeks ago at 
Government House where the Prime Minister was present and 
the minister from . . . the federal minister from Saskatchewan 
where there was an announcement made. The Premier was 
there, the Minister of Highways was there. They had the press 
out and invited a number of people to attend, Mr. Speaker. And 
there’s this announcement that Saskatchewan was getting some 
federal dollars for highway construction. In fact they were 
getting $82 million for highway construction. That was the 
headline. Of course it was over five years, Mr. Speaker, but 
even so, that works out to approximately $16 million. 
 
Well when you look at this year’s budget, you have to ask 
yourself, where is that $16 million, Mr. Speaker? What has this 
government done with it? Have they added that to last year’s 
budget? If they would have done that, we would have seen that 
the budget for this year would have been around 310 million, 
somewhere in there. If they would have added it to last year’s 
estimated budget, it would have been 360, but in fact it’s 296. 
 
So what has this government done with that federal . . . the 
federal money? Well I would suspect, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve 
done the same thing they did with the millennium scholarship 
when the federal government brought that program forward. 
And the announcement was that students were going to be 
receiving these bursaries from the federal government through 
the millennium scholarship. But at the end of the day when the 
smoke cleared, really what happened, the students were no 
better off. Because what in fact happened is that this 
government withdrew their funding from that particular 
program and backfilled it with federal dollars. And I suspect, 
Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what’s happened in this year’s 
Highways budget. 
 
So if we look at and compare apples to apples, even accounting 
for that $7 million reduction in the Highways budget, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re still $13 million short of provincial dollars in 
this year’s Highways budget, Mr. Speaker. And that’s shameful, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We all know the deplorable state that our highways were . . . 
have been in over the last few years. Within the last couple of 
years, we’ve seen some small improvements. We have to give 
the government credit for that. They did take some of those 

extra revenues from oil and gas that they received a year or two 
ago and they did allocate some of that funding to Highways. 
But this year where they called a press conference, they 
gathered all the . . . gathered the Premier and the Highways 
minister along with the Prime Minister and the minister of . . . 
Saskatchewan’s representative in the federal cabinet, people 
thought that, perhaps well we’re going to see at least a 10 or 
$12 million increase in the Highways budget. Not so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If in fact, as I said, we actually have seen a $4 million reduction 
if we’re comparing estimates last year initially to estimates that 
we have this year, now what could this . . . what could be done 
. . . what can you do with even 4 or $5 million under a $6.6 
billion . . . a $6.6 billion budget? It’s not large dollars in 
comparison to the total expenditures but it could make some 
real differences in certain areas. 
 
It could for instance, Mr. Speaker, at least temporarily address 
the traffic problem that the city of Regina faces over on Victoria 
East where we have the congested traffic due to growth of 
commercial space in that area and activities in that area, and we 
have the traffic that’s coming in from No. 1 East and trying to 
get around Regina through the bypass, and we see the long 
lineups, and so on. A simple thing some expenditures of 1 or $2 
million, perhaps with some city funding, could put an additional 
turning lane in there. It’s certainly not the long-term fix to that 
solution but it would alleviate . . . be an intermediate term fix 
until a bypass could be built and so on, which is certainly much 
more expensive, Mr. Speaker. But it would at least provide 
some . . . address the problem somewhat, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s some of things that could be done with . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and the minister . . . I must have hit a nerve, 
Mr. Speaker, because the Minister of Highways is chirping 
from his seat there, Mr. Speaker. So perhaps a light came on 
and he said, that sounds like a good idea and perhaps I’ll take 
that back to my department folks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if we go on, Mr. Speaker, and talk about this year’s 
agricultural budget, Mr. Speaker, and look at what is this 
government’s record this year as compared to the last four 
years, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll see that this year’s budget is 
considerably less than what it has been in the past. 
 
And that’s not to be unexpected from these folks, Mr. Speaker, 
in that they realize that they’re really in the upcoming election 
they’re not going to make any gains in rural Saskatchewan. 
They know that, Mr. Speaker, and it’s very evident in this 
year’s budget. So why would they want to spend more money? 
 
But somehow there’s a parody here, Mr. Speaker, because 
they’re depending on agriculture to power them out of this 
fiscal problem that they have. They’ve said a normal crop is 
going to lead to 6.8 per cent growth, yet they end up spending 
considerably less money in agriculture this year than they have 
in other years. They’re down to $251 million from a high of 
$333 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you look at the . . . but then we hear . . . Do you know what 
the answer is, the answer we hear from the Minister of 
Agriculture? Well we put $70 million last year into CFIP 
(Canadian Farm Income Program) and that money is sitting 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

 

there waiting for farmers to access it. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Well what about this coming year, Mr. Speaker? When you 
look at the expenditures in that department and go through, go 
and see what they’ve allocated to farm stability, it’s . . . it really 
makes one wonder as to what . . . as to what this government is 
thinking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You look at the area of the budget, on budget estimates on page 
28, Mr. Speaker, under the area of farm stability and adaptation, 
and we see under the . . . under farm sector initiatives we see 
last year a budget of $70 million. And that . . . and the Minister 
of Agriculture has said in the press and said in this legislature 
that that’s the money that his government put into the CFIP 
program last year. 
 
Well what’s there? Well what’s there this year? Well CFIP as 
. . . The minister was correct; CFIP is . . . dies its death tonight. 
So what do we see to replace it? Well we see something in the 
agricultural policy frameworks initiative of $18 million. Well 
the agriculture policy framework initiative has five components 
to it, business risk management being one of them, and this is 
the area where the minister has consistently told us over the last 
number of months that crop insurance, an enhanced crop 
insurance and a super NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) were going to be the programs that are going to 
replace the AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) 
and the CFIP. 
 
Well they must be quite the super programs, Mr. Speaker, if the 
CFIP program required funding of 70 million and this new 
super NISA — which is supposedly a better program, supposed 
to react more quickly and target the funding more accurately — 
it only requires $18 million. I really want to see this program, 
Mr. Speaker. The little bit that I’ve seen through the Internet 
and through the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) presentations, I really have my doubts, Mr. 
Speaker. I would suspect that that $18 million is . . . in this 
budget is probably . . . addresses the four other envelopes in the 
APF (agricultural policy framework) initiatives — the 
environment, the food safety, the science and innovation, and 
renewal, and those type of things. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where’s the rest of it then? 
 
Mr. Hart: — It isn’t here. And you know, I’ll tell you why it 
isn’t here, Mr. Speaker. It’s because this government, they 
weren’t part of the process in designing the new programs. 
They agreed . . . So in Saskatchewan we’re going to, once 
again, just like we did with AIDA and CFIP, we’re going to 
have to live with programs that have been designed by other 
provinces and the federal government. But the way the new 
programs — as I understand them — the way they are to work 
is that the farmers put their money upfront to buy this risk 
insurance and protect . . . I believe the catchphrase is to protect 
their production margin. That’s the new catchphrase in this new 
program. 
 
So the farmer puts his money upfront but the governments, like 
the NISA and some of these other programs, their money 
doesn’t come forward until it’s needed. So what happens? In the 

example that I sat in on, Mr. Speaker, they used an example 
farm where they had a production margin of $100,000. So if the 
producer wished to protect that $100,000 production margin, he 
had to put up $26,000 — a $26,000 premium for $100,000 
worth of coverage. Sounds like quite a program — 26 per cent 
premium, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What does the government have to put in? Well if you look on 
page 28 under farm sector initiatives, for this year the estimated 
expenditure for this government . . . Do you know what it is, 
Mr. Speaker? It’s zero — nothing — and that’s what the 
government has to put up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Minister of Agriculture says, don’t worry, we’ve got 
some money squirreled away in an old program that you may or 
may not be able to access and so on. Well I don’t think that’s 
good enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you look around and look at the global forces that are 
impacting on our agricultural industry, Mr. Speaker, I think we 
need to be more proactive and have some funding in place 
because with the vagrancies of the marketplace and the 
vagrancies of the weather, Mr. Speaker, we can’t cross our 
fingers and hope for a normal crop. 
 
We’re going to get 6.8 per cent growth, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 
all be fine. It just doesn’t work that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is coming near to the end 
and for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I certainly will not be 
supporting the motion but I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to enter into the budget debate this year, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
start by talking about the fact that this budget presented by the 
Minister of Finance is a balanced approach to meeting the needs 
and aspirations and expectations of the Saskatchewan people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, over the last decade the Government of 
Saskatchewan has followed a very balanced approach to its 
budgeting. Our fiscal management style has been one of not 
reacting to every little change that comes across in the 
economy, quarter by quarter, month by month, but, in fact, 
putting a plan in place and staying the course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what that’s done for 
Saskatchewan. What it’s done is delivered now 10 balanced, 
consecutive balanced budgets. 
 
Now I can understand why the members opposite aren’t happy 
with that, Mr. Speaker, because all they do is they go out and 
they talk to people and they tell them what they want to hear. 
They promise all things to all people without having to worry 
about delivering anything, Mr. Speaker. All the time they’re out 
there talking to people telling them exactly what they want to 
hear, promising everybody everything, without the ability to 
deliver it, Mr. Speaker. 
 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the 
environment in which we’re putting a budget forward. Mr. 
Speaker. I want to talk about the challenges we faced in 
2002-2003 when the Finance critic for the opposition called last 
year’s budget a fudge-it budget. It couldn’t add up. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in 2002-2003 we had the second year of 
extensive drought throughout Saskatchewan. Two years in a 
row of excessive drought throughout Saskatchewan. We spent 
47 million additional dollars fighting forest fires, Mr. Speaker. 
Then the federal government announced 300 million reduction 
in equalization payments. 
 
Throughout the year, commodity prices fluctuated, particularly 
in the oil and natural gas sectors, Mr. Speaker. Individual 
income revenue was much higher than expected. Of course we 
all know that oil and natural gas revenues came in much higher 
than expected, particularly in the fourth quarter of the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite all these challenges — despite all these 
challenges — this government brought in a balanced budget 
with a $2 million surplus without even . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, without even touching a single cent 
from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And that’s what the Finance 
critic for the opposition calls a fudge-it budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he clearly, he clearly doesn’t understand that the 
people of Saskatchewan want that type of performance from 
their government. They don’t want what they’re promising: all 
things to all people and delivering nothing, Mr. Speaker. They 
want a government that has a balanced approach in meeting 
their needs, their aspirations, and their expectations for the 
future. 
 
They don’t want a government that would be out there 
promising to give them everything and not being able to deliver 
any of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a couple of minutes to talk a little 
bit about where we came from. And to do so I’m going to use 
an article entitled “The Alberta advantage slowly disappearing.” 
This is a column by Bruce Johnstone, April 6, 2002, and I’m 
quoting Mr. Speaker: 
 

Let’s go back to 1993, when Saskatchewan taxes were at 
their peak, and look at the Alberta advantage. 
 
For families earning $50,000 a year, moving to Alberta 
(they) would see their provincial tax bill (including income 
and sales taxes, health care premiums and other taxes) cut 
in half — from $5,246 in Saskatchewan to $3,497 in 
Alberta. (This) . . . would be a saving of about $1,750 
annually. 
 
Skip ahead to . . . (2003) (after two years of tax reform in 
Saskatchewan and a tough budget in Alberta). 
Saskatchewan’s provincial tax bill for the same family 
(assuming their income hasn’t increased) has fallen to 
$3,789 versus $2,896 in Alberta, a difference of just under 
$900. 

In other words, the Alberta advantage has been virtually cut 
in half in less than 10 years — for middle-income families, 
at least. 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

While taxes have gone down in both provinces, utilities, 
such as power and home heating, and other charges have 
gone up (more than 50 per cent here, (and) more than 100 
per cent in Alberta) over the last nine years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, still quoting: 
 

The result is the Alberta advantage (including provincial 
taxes, utilities and other costs, like auto insurance) is now 
less than $100 for middle-income families . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s where we came from and that is where 
we’re going. We’re making steady progress. 
 
So that was talking about the Alberta advantage, and how they 
had an advantage and how we worked hard as a government to 
cut that advantage down by changing the royalty structures for 
oil and gas last year, and for making progressive tax changes 
over the last decade. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a minute then and talk about 
the Saskatchewan advantage. As reported on June 18, 2001, 
Western Catholic Reporter out of Edmonton, Alberta. It says: 
 

The soul of a nation, or any other group of people can be 
seen in how it treats the most disadvantaged. 
 
In Canada, in recent years, we have made one significant 
improvement. It’s called the National Child Benefit and 
increased funding is helping to bring a lot of children out of 
poverty. Twelve years ago, the House of Commons passed 
a resolution to do its best to eliminate child poverty by the 
year 2000. 

 
It goes on to quote: 
 

A report released earlier this month by the Canadian 
Council on Social Development found that Saskatchewan 
has done a much better job than either Alberta or Ontario in 
reducing child poverty, especially among single-parent 
families. Between 1993 and 1998, Saskatchewan cut the 
incidence of poverty among single-parent families from 51 
(per cent) to 20 per cent. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the Saskatchewan advantage. It goes on to 
say, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like the members opposite to pay 
special attention to this, Mr. Speaker. 
 

In 1998-99, Saskatchewan spent $37 million on child 
benefit programs compared with $6 million in Alberta, (6 
million in Alberta, Mr. Speaker) a province with a 
population three times as large. 
 
Alberta Children’s Services Minister Iris Evans downplays 
the CCSD report and says her department has doubled its 
budget since 1998. However, we likely still have a long 
way to go to match the record of a province with far fewer 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

 

economic resources than Alberta. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to bring into this debate the fact 
that it’s about choices when you’re putting a budget together. 
And the choices this government has made is to help those who 
need it most in society. It’s about choices in reducing taxes to 
help average families in Saskatchewan, but it’s also a choice 
about helping those who are most in need of the services of 
government within your province. And Saskatchewan has done 
a much better job than Alberta in the last decade in dealing with 
those issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just refer to a couple of news reports that 
came back on the budget. The members opposite continue to 
talk negatively about the budget and that nobody liked it. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out to them there are some 
people who liked this budget in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to start with an article or media release that says “Good 
news budget for people with disabilities,” Mr. Speaker. Those 
in our society who need our help believe they’re getting it, Mr. 
Speaker. It goes on to say: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan is to be commended for 
its commitment to advancing the full citizenship of people 
with disabilities in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the difference between this government and 
the members opposite — that this government cares for people. 
It’s going to put its priorities for those who need the services of 
government most, first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a minute to also talk about another 
group of people who thought very highly of this budget. I have 
an e-mail here. It says: 
 

On behalf of all the early childcare directors in Sask. I 
would personally like to thank you for addressing childcare 
in the budget . . . I am celebrating what your gov’t is going 
to be doing for the children of Sask. Your gov’t has ‘dared 
to care’. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I talked about this government 
daring to care, putting people first, putting those who need our 
help in society — children — children first, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think that’s a very, very important thing for government to do. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a number of other 
things, but I think I want to just highlight a couple of things that 
I think are important as I talk about some of the economic 
indicators and some of the progress that we’re making. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to understand the 
environment in which this budget was put together, both . . . 
discussing the upcoming budget and it is important to note what 
is happening both fiscally across Canada and around the world. 
Mr. Speaker, after September 11, we’ve had an economy 
around the world that’s had a difficult time bouncing back, but 
Canada has done a remarkable job in leading the world. 

Of all the G-7 countries, only Canada is in a surplus position, 
Mr. Speaker. Most US (United States) states are currently in a 
deficit position, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve had 10 balanced 
budgets. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about some of the 
criticisms that members opposite have about some of the 
assumptions that the budget is making. When we talk about 6.8 
per cent economic growth, they laugh, they make faces, they 
make gestures that it isn’t possible. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
talk about what some of the experts in the field are saying. 
 
For example, CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) 
World Market notes: 
 

. . . the associated level of real output falls within the band 
foreseen by economic forecasters . . . 

 
So they’re not laughing at 6.8, they’re saying it’s within the 
band of possible . . . that the forecasters are predicting, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Bank of Montreal doesn’t question the 6.8 per cent 
forecast. They simply note it’s based on the return to normal 
crop levels after two years of severe drought. So they’re not 
questioning it; only the members opposite are questioning it. 
 
The Conference Board of Canada has said, if we have a normal 
crop, I don’t think 6.8 per cent economic growth is overly 
optimistic. It’s just based on the assumption of a normal crop, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite, they can laugh and they can make all 
the gestures they want, but the sad point is, Mr. Speaker, they 
simply don’t want to hear good news. Because good news, good 
news hurts their vision and view of the world. Because they 
want to criticize, they want to be negative, and they want to put 
down the people of Saskatchewan, and they want to put down 
our province. They want more people to continue leaving 
because then they can point to the doom and gloom as to why 
they should form the next government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan are 
that naive. I honestly don’t think they’re that naive, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a few other facts that I 
think they should understand. Mr. Speaker, what is the 
interprovincial debt to GDP comparison in Canada? I want to 
point out to the members opposite that Saskatchewan has the 
second best debt ratio to GDP in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now the members opposite, they talk about all 
the negativity. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is significant progress 
from 1991. Significant progress. Today we sit at about 24.6 per 
cent of debt to GDP. In ’91, it was over 40 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. A significant improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s the interprovincial debt per capita 
comparison? Well, Mr. Speaker, in debt per capita we are the 
third in the nation, Mr. Speaker. The third in the nation. And, 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Third lowest, third lowest. 
 
Mr. Yates: — We’re talking about third lowest in the nation. 
That’s right. We’re the second lowest in GDP per . . . GPP per 
capita, as a percentage of debt and the third lowest per capita, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I’d like to talk for just one second about the cost of living 
in Saskatchewan compared to other major cities in Canada. 
When you do a comparison of provincial income tax, tax credits 
or rebates, health premiums, retail sales tax, gasoline tax, rent, 
electricity, telephone, auto insurance, Mr. Speaker, lo and 
behold, lo and behold, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan is the cheapest 
city in Canada for a single male adult at 25,000 total income. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Least expensive. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Least expensive, pardon me. Did I say most 
expensive? Thank you for helping me out. I mean least 
expensive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have the least expensive cost of living for 
a family of $50,000 in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is so excited over there 
that we’re just enthused. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Speaker, and for a family of $75,000 
total income, lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, we are still the 
cheapest in Canada, the least expensive to live. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite they 
want to talk about the doom and gloom all the time. They want 
to talk about the negativity all the time, Mr. Speaker. But we 
don’t want to talk about that, Mr. Speaker. We want to talk 
about the good things that are going on in this province and the 
potential for the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to another article, this one 
out of The Herald from Herbert, Saskatchewan, Wednesday, 
May 24. It says: 

 
. . . a study conducted by the Canadian Institute for Health 
Information ranked Saskatchewan first or second among 
Canadian provinces in most surgical procedures. 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

How can that be? 
 
As every person in Saskatchewan knows our health care 
system is falling apart, the worst in Canada. 
 

The Sask Party says it every day. It goes on to say: 
 

How can we explain this apparent contradiction of 
information? 
 
We know it can’t be true. Our politicians have told us our 

health care system is in shambles. 
 

This is a rural seat and the Sask Party politicians have tried to 
convince them that our health care system is in shambles. We 
have told ourselves that the health care system is poor. 
 

For the last twenty years we have proven to ourselves that 
our health care system is the worst in Canada. 

 
Because we’ve gone and told ourselves that, and the opposition 
continues to preach that, Mr. Speaker. 
 

We haven’t stopped at the health care system. Our 
perception is that everything about our province is terrible. 

 
We hear it from the opposition day in and day out. They’re 
doom and gloom — doom and gloom — nothing positive. 
 

We have the worst of everything. 
 
Every other province is better. I hear that from the members 
opposite daily, Mr. Speaker. They’re richer; they’re smarter 
than we are. 
 

Just ask your neighbor, or your friends in Alberta (it says). 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say that none of this is true, 
that all that’s happened is that certain people have gone out and 
they have talked about the doom and gloom to a point they’ve 
convinced themselves that that’s the way the province should 
be; and that they portray that image then they should be the 
government because they can fix all that when the reality is and 
this report goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is all a myth — 
that we’ve convinced ourselves that things aren’t so good and in 
reality it’s a very, very good place to live. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have gone on and 
continued to try to convince Saskatchewan people that we can’t 
make progress where in fact we have made a great deal of 
progress. Mr. Speaker, we are a province that has made 
significant progress. We are a province that brought forward 10 
balanced budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — This is a government with a new Premier, a new 
Premier who’s setting a new direction. And we’ve seen it in 
many ways. We’ve seen it in reductions in royalties to natural 
gas and oil, Mr. Speaker, in the last year. We’ve seen it in 
changes to royalty in mineral structure. 
 
We’ve seen it in the way that we’re approaching the delivery of 
benefits and services to people. We are putting people first, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s what it’s about. When I talked about the 
Saskatchewan advantage, that was our province that we have 
put forward that advantage in, Mr. Speaker, and we dare to care. 
We have a government and a Premier who cares first about 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — We’ll put people first, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 
always take a balanced approach to delivering services, tax cuts 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

 

to meet the expectations, the needs, and the future of the people 
of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re not interested . . . we’re not interested, Mr. Speaker, in 
the negativity because only through a positive attitude can we 
move forward, only through innovation and ingenuity and 
creativity can we move forward into a new Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, a Saskatchewan where every citizen is considered 
equal — where there’s equal opportunity for all of those in our 
province not based by how much you have in your pocket, Mr. 
Speaker, how much money you have in your pocket, but the 
fact that this is a province that’s open to all people. There’s a 
diversity of ideas we have in this province and a future that is 
wide open for every citizen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is the 
province that we want to have. And this is the province . . . Our 
Premier’s leading us towards a goal. A goal, Mr. Speaker, of a 
province that every citizen wants to talk proudly of; not like we 
hear from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell you as long as there’s breath in this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to give — we’re not going 
to give — 1 inch of ground to the Saskatchewan Party. Because 
we believe in a positive future for this province, not a negative 
one. And, Mr. Speaker, we believe that every citizen of this 
province should be treated equally, that every citizen should 
have opportunity, and it shouldn’t be based upon how much 
money you have in your pockets. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s without doubt I think, after my remarks, 
that I am going to support the budget. And I’m not going to 
support the amendment. Because, Mr. Speaker, this budget is 
about progress for the people of Saskatchewan and the 
amendment is again about negativity. And on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to talk about progress and 
moving the agenda forward for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move at this time that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 19:41. 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................287 
 


