















































Hansard: March 18, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3059 
 March 18, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

The Speaker: — It is my duty to inform the Assembly of the 
following vacancies in the representation in the constituency of 
Carrot River Valley due to the death of Mr. Carl Kwiatkowski; 
in the constituency of Saskatoon Fairview due to the resignation 
of Mr. Chris Axworthy. 
 

MOMENT OF SILENCE IN HONOUR 
OF CARL KWIATKOWSKI 

 
The Speaker: — Out of respect for a colleague, I will ask that 
we observe a minute of silence in memory of Carl 
Kwiatkowski, a member of this Assembly for the constituency 
of Carrot River Valley from September 16, 1999 to February 2, 
2003. 
 
Will members please rise. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — To ask for leave to make a 
statement of a personal nature. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Following the release of the deputy minister’s report 
regarding SPUDCO last month, I apologized to the people of 
Saskatchewan for not having been as forthcoming as I could 
have been regarding the details of the business relationship 
between Sask Water and Con-Force. I indicated at that time that 
it was my intention to offer that same apology in the Legislative 
Assembly once the session resumed. 
 
I stand today in this Assembly to offer my apology to the public 
and to all members of this House for not having exercised 
greater vigilance in my responsibilities as minister of Sask 
Water. I should have paid more attention to certain details and I 
should have insisted on greater clarity in all the communication 
associated with this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have admitted that I made mistakes, accepted 
responsibility for those mistakes, and apologized publicly. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I offer to you and through you to all 
members, my personal apology. 
 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I am advised that 
Her Honour is here for prorogation. 
 
 

PROROGATION 
 

At 10:07 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. 
 
Her Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislature: 
 
It is my duty to release you from further attendance at the Third 
Session of The Twenty-Fourth Legislature. 
 
In thus relieving you, I would like to thank you for the work 
you have done. 
 
This Session’s work is a positive step towards ensuring that the 
wealth of Saskatchewan’s human and natural resources creates 
opportunities for the citizens, communities and industry of our 
province. 
 
You passed The Ethanol Fuel Act, which creates the necessary 
climate for the private sector to lead the way in developing a 
vibrant ethanol industry in Saskatchewan – the first jurisdiction 
in Canada to establish the legal framework to allow for 
mandating the use of ethanol-blended gasoline. 
 
In response to the recommendations contained in the Final 
Report of The Action Committee on the Rural Economy, you 
passed The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act. 
 
This Bill encourages development in both the livestock industry 
and our value-added sector by removing the existing farm 
ownership restrictions for Canadian residents, Canadian 
citizens, and Canadian-owned corporations. 
 
You recognized that safe drinking water is an essential element 
of a healthy environment and strong economy. 
 
In this regard, you passed The Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority Act, The Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act, 
and The Environmental Management and Protection Act, to 
ensure that the citizens of Saskatchewan have a sustainable, safe 
and clean supply of drinking water. 
 
You also addressed other environmental measures necessary to 
ensure sustainable economic growth by passing The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act. 
 
This Bill ensures that province-wide standards are applied to all 
forest operations in Saskatchewan. 
 
In keeping with your commitment to provide quality health care 
to the people of Saskatchewan you passed several Bills which 
strengthen our health system. 
 
The Health Quality Council Act creates the Health Quality 
Council – a first in Canada. The Council will provide objective, 
timely, evidence-based information and advice for achieving the 
best possible health care within the available resources. 
 



3060 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2003 

 

The Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation Act 
establishes the Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation to 
manage and allocate much of the province’s health research 
funding. 
 
You also passed The Regional Health Services Act which 
improves coordination, province-wide planning, and 
accountability in the health care system. This Bill also allowed 
for the formation of 12 new regional health authorities from the 
previous 32 health districts. 
 
To achieve your goal of building the province of opportunity, 
you worked with municipal governments, who have expressed 
interest in increasing their autonomy and authority to deliver 
quality public services to their communities. 
 
In this regard, you passed The Cities Act, which provides cities 
with more flexibility to govern, regulate, license and deal with a 
variety of local matters, and fully recognizes their evolution and 
independence as larger municipal governments. 
 
Amendments to The Urban Municipality Act, The Rural 
Municipality Act and The Northern Municipalities Act, were 
also passed that enhance the authority and accountability of 
local governments. 
 
You passed The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, which will allow for three major 
improvements to services provided by Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance. 
 
A Safe Driver Rewards Program will provide insurance 
premium discounts to safe drivers. 
 
Improvements will be made to the Personal Injury Protection 
Plan. 
 
As well, Saskatchewan drivers will be given the choice of 
alternative insurance coverage that allows for judicial resolution 
of accident claims. 
 
You also took major steps forward in protecting our most 
precious resource – our children. 
 
You passed The Emergency Protection for Victims of Child 
Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act, which clarifies and 
strengthens Social Services’ response to children sexually 
exploited on the street, enhances the capacity of outreach 
workers to provide victims with proactive intervention and 
increases deterrents of those who victimize children. 
 
Also, to help ensure that children receive the financial support 
to which they are entitled, regardless of where they live in 
Canada, you passed The Enforcement of Maintenance 
Orders Amendment Act, The Inter-jurisdictional Support 
Orders Act, and The Family Maintenance Amendment Act. 
 
Finally, in taking leave of you, I wish to thank you for the 
diligent manner in which you have devoted your energies to the 
activities of the Session, and wish you the full blessings of 
Providence. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the 

Legislative Assembly: it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 
prorogued until later today, the 18th day of March, 2003 at 2:30 
p.m. This Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 
 
Her Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:15. 
 
 


	Prorogation March 18.pdf
	In response to the recommendations contained in the Final Report of The Action Committee on the Rural Economy, you passed The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act.
	You recognized that safe drinking water is an essential element of a healthy environment and strong economy.
	You also addressed other environmental measures necessary to ensure sustainable economic growth by passing The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act.
	Also, to help ensure that children receive the financial support to which they are entitled, regardless of where they live in Canada, you passed The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, The Inter˚jurisdictional Support Orders Act, and The Fam


