















































Hansard: June 18, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1769 
 June 18, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and district who 
are concerned about the lack of dialysis services. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition again are all from the 
city of Moose Jaw and I’m proud to present on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who have deep concerns over the condition of 
Highway 47 South between Estevan and the Boundary dam 
resort. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Estevan and 
Bienfait. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
again to rise on behalf of residents in my constituency who are 
proposing something constructive to accomplish a new 
permanent CT (computerized tomography) scanner for Swift 
Current instead of the used one, which I was told just this 
morning by my friend Curly Hofer that some people can’t even 
fit in and use. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider its plan to allocate a used CT scanner to Swift 
Current and instead provide a new one. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current and the village of Waldeck. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise today 
on behalf of citizens of west central Saskatchewan concerned 
with the state of health care in the area. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the entirety of this petition is signed by the good 
folks from Kindersley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 2003 
premium increases. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases, restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Hanley and Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on concerns of the deterioration of Highway 
14. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Wilkie to Biggar and take the necessary steps to reconstruct 
and repair this highway in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Your petition is signed by folks of Wilkie and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
concerned with the condition of Highway 22, particularly that 
section from Junction 6 to Junction 20. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to make necessary repairs to Highway 22 
in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition, Mr. Speaker, all the signatures come from the 
community of Earl Grey. 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan and Alberta, and their concerns are 
with the government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Shell Lake, 
from Lloydminster, Marwayne, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition signed on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are 
concerned that deregulation and privatization in the electrical 
industry is causing electrical rates to dramatically increase in 
other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Whereupon your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Regina. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 18, 36, 114, 116, 119, 120, 124, and 141. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving a motion 
that the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be concurred in, but before doing that I should just 
like to make a few remarks concerning the report. 
 
This report deals primarily with recommendations the Crown 
Corporations Committee has adopted with respect to the public 
disclosure of payee information by Crown corporations. 
Although there are long-standing rules of the Legislative 
Assembly for the public disclosure of payee information by 
government departments, Crown corporations have operated 
differently. There has always been a sense, Mr. Speaker, 
because these Crown corporations must operate as commercial 
enterprises, that they should operate on an arm’s-length basis 

from government. 
 
It is fair to say that these recommendations in the report, Mr. 
Speaker, will enhance significantly the public accountability of 
Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations and bring them more into 
line with government departments, while respecting their need 
to protect commercially sensitive information and the 
competitive environment in which they operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make a few comments as to the 
background for this report. There is a detailed description of the 
history leading up to today’s report in a report to the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations regarding disclosure of 
payee information by CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) Crown corporations and related entities. This is 
a report dated February 2003 by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
It’s fair to say that this matter has had sporadic attention paid to 
it by the legislative committees, both the Public Accounts 
Committee and the Crown Corporations Committee, over the 
years. This became more focused a couple of years ago, in 
2001, when the Provincial Auditor in his Spring Report outlined 
a very specific process for disclosure that might be followed by 
Crown corporations. 
 
When the Crown Corporations Committee met in December of 
that year, they referred the matter to the Provincial Auditor and 
the Crown Investments Corporation and asked them to submit a 
report. Each entity submitted a report and an opinion was also 
received from the Information and Privacy Commissioner, who 
is also an independent officer of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly will know 
that this is one more step in many steps that have been taken 
over the course of the last 12 years or so to improve the public’s 
understanding of and the accountability of our Crown 
corporations. 
 
Annual reports and financial statements have been strengthened 
over the course of these last 12 years or so. For example, the 
government is now required to publish summary financial 
statements which provides an overview of all government 
financial activities, including those of the Crowns. Reporting 
standards and practices have improved. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the process of 
accountability, it’s important to note that the independence of 
the Provincial Auditor’s office has been strengthened 
significantly. And of course the Saskatchewan rate review panel 
has been established by the Government of Saskatchewan to 
conduct independent reviews of rate change requests from 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Members and the public will also appreciate the fact that there 
has been external recognition of the government practices, 
reporting and disclosure policies of the Crowns by groups such 
as the Institute of Public Administration, the Commonwealth 
Association for Public Administration and Management, and 
most recently, Mr. Speaker, by the Provincial Auditor for the 
province of Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I should like to thank the Provincial 
Auditor and all of his staff, the Information and Privacy 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

 

Commissioner, the Crown Investments Corporation, and the 
various Crown corporations who helped the committee in its 
deliberations in this matter in reporting and also in the 
discussions. We thank them for their assistance and 
co-operations. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I should like to pay a tribute to all of 
the members over the years who have worked in this matter and 
have brought this file forward to today. And that includes both 
members of the opposition and the government, and I thank 
them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I would move, seconded by 
the member for Swift Current: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well just very briefly 
on behalf of the opposition, we will be supporting the motion 
that’s before the Assembly. We just want to make some 
clarifications as to the work that was done at committee and 
what the opposition was saying at committee with respect to the 
process that’s in this report for determining what information, 
what pay information, should be disclosed and what should be 
considered confidential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would have preferred if the Privacy 
Commissioner, the independent officer of this Legislative 
Assembly, would be automatically inserted into the process and 
that his concurrence would be required before any information 
was withheld from members of the committee and therefore 
from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. The difficulty that we had, 
Mr. Speaker, was that there was no way yesterday when we 
were resolving the issue to determine if that would cost the 
taxpayers more money if more resources would be required by 
the Privacy Commissioner. 
 
We did let the commissioner and members of the committee 
know, however, that when that information is available, when 
we have a cost estimate and in fact if it’s cost neutral as the 
commissioner thought it may be, that we in the Saskatchewan 
Party would want to bring that forward again just so the 
committee can rely on an independent officer of the legislature 
to ensure that all of the information that can and should be 
made public to taxpayers is. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, and with that commitment to 
reopen this in the future if that information is forthcoming, the 
opposition will be supporting the motion and I’ll be seconding 
it before the Assembly here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 66 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Industry and Resources minister: could the minister 
please provide the percentage of oil that was drilled in 
Saskatchewan and that subsequently went to the United 
States in the calendar year 2002? 
 

And also similar questions for 2001 and 2000. 
 
And also a similar question dealing with natural gas. 
 
I so present. 
 
(13:45) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 66 ask the government the 
following question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s . . . I proceeded to 
introduction of guests, and I would ask on behalf of the member 
for us to revert back to notice of motions and questions. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 66 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: within the catchment area of the 
Humboldt Hospital, how many people travelled to 
Saskatoon or other centres for renal dialysis in the year 
2000? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the year 2001 
and 2002. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I would like to introduce sitting in your gallery, a group of 
students, 11 . . . grade 11, and also 11 students from the grade 
11 from the town of Kenaston are here today. With them is their 
teacher, Mrs. Kerpan, and also chaperones, Laverne Ringdal 
and Della Siroski. 
 
I hope that they will find the proceedings very informative and 
very entertaining. And through you and members will join me 
in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure this morning to . . . or this afternoon to introduce to 
you and through you to all of the members of the Assembly 
some very distinguished guests in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. These are representatives from a number of excellent 
Hutterite colonies from across the province. They are here on a 
tour with the Legault Agro, a Swift Current-based business and 
will be attending the Farm Progress Show later this day. 
 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

I had a chance to meet with the gentlemen earlier this morning 
here at the legislature and I don’t think the whole group is here 
right now; there was a larger group. And I will tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that I don’t know if all of these colonies are 
represented still now in the legislature but I’ll run them down 
for members in any event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, represented here today are folks from the Swift 
Current colony, Hodgeville, Bone Creek, Tompkins, Earview, 
Simmie, Waldeck, Main Center, and Spring Lake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know all members will want to join with me in 
welcoming them. I know I want to especially welcome Curly 
and Pete from the Swift Current colony just north of the city of 
Swift Current, and ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them here to the Assembly today and wishing them 
well at the Farm Progress Show later this day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: —Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 
member from Swift Current in welcoming the colonies to the 
Assembly this afternoon. We had scheduled a meeting as well 
with them through my office. They’re here for the Farm 
Progress Show. 
 
I was unable to meet with them, Mr. Speaker, because I was on 
a national conference call as it relates to the BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy), but my officials had the 
opportunity to meet with them. 
 
The colonies across the province provide a tremendous 
contribution to not only the industry of agriculture, but I know 
make many contributions to the benefits of communities as they 
have the dialysis unit, I believe, in the Swift Current area. And I 
have had the pleasure of working with the colony during the 
Vanguard flood a couple of years ago when I was the minister 
of Municipal Affairs, and we had a great deal of support from 
the colony in helping us with the Vanguard flood. 
 
So we’ll set up another opportunity to meet, and I too ask all 
members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming them 
to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker and 
members, I’d like to direct your attention to the east gallery 
where the entire gallery is occupied by people from the 
wonderful community of Tisdale. They’re representatives of the 
Tisdale Elementary School. 
 
There are 66 students from grade 4 and 5 here today. And 
they’re accompanied first of all by their teachers, Mr. Rodney 
White, Mrs. Lorna Ratushniak, and Ms. Diana Martinson. And 
then in addition they’ve got a contingent of, I think, parent 
chaperones to keep an eye on things. They’re Mr. Trachsel, Mr. 
Brown, Mrs. Ellis, Mrs. Weber, Mrs. Edmunds, Mr. Gabriel, 
Mrs. Cantelon, Mrs. Armstrong, Mrs. Oleksyn, Mrs. Fairburn, 
Mrs. Barnett, Mrs. Verboon, Mrs. Walton, Mr. Buttars, and 
Mrs. Kendall. 
 
And I hope that the number of chaperones are no indication of 

the challenges of dealing with these grade 4 and 5 students 
because I’m going to meet with them later and I’m going to 
need all the help I can get. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, and members, would everyone please 
welcome this contingent of wonderful people from Tisdale. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Athletes Bound for National Hockey League 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations 
go to two young local sports celebrities that are originally from 
the Rosetown-Biggar constituency who are on their way to the 
NHL (National Hockey League). 
 
Recently 19 year-old Dan Baum from Biggar signed with the 
Edmonton Oilers. Dan has spent the last four years playing with 
the Prince George Cougars of the WHL (Western Hockey 
League) as an assistant captain. If Dan doesn’t make the Oilers 
lineup right away, he will play for the Oilers farm team, the 
Toronto Roadrunners. We know that Dan will find this different 
and more of a challenge but it will be the chance of a lifetime 
and a challenge that we’re sure he’s up to. 
 
Also last Wednesday, 24-year-old Quintin Laing, originally 
from Harris, signed a contract with the Chicago Blackhawks. 
Clinton played four years with the Kelowna Rockets of the 
WHL and then was originally drafted to the Detroit Red Wings. 
From there he became a free agent. After his junior years, he 
joined the East Coast Hockey League, the Norfolk Admirals, 
which is owned by the Blackhawks. 
 
I would like to congratulate Dan and Quintin, and being a 
hockey fan, I look forward to watching both of my constituents 
play in the NHL some day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

2003 Saskatchewan First Nations Summer Games 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m absolutely 
thrilled to invite everyone to Meadow Lake this summer for the 
2003 Saskatchewan First Nations Summer Games, to be hosted 
by the Flying Dust First Nation. The games take place July 5 to 
10. 
 
The 2003 Saskatchewan First Nations Summer Games will 
bring approximately 3,400 athletes, coaches, officials, and 
visitors to the Meadow Lake area next month. It is estimated 
that this event will inject no less, Mr. Speaker, than $2 million 
into the local economy. 
 
The Summer Games will include competition in various sports, 
however, they are about much more than sports. The 
Saskatchewan First Nations Summer Games provide a venue 
for the promotion of First Nations culture. They also serve as a 
forum to increase awareness of healthy lifestyles. 
 
The Saskatchewan First Nations Summer Games provide an 
opportunity for communities to work together — in this case, 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

 

the Flying Dust First Nation, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, 
the town of Meadow Lake, and the Meadow Lake School 
Division. It’s groups like these and events like this that truly 
ensure Saskatchewan’s future is wide open. 
 
So again, Meadow Lake is the place to be this summer and 
2003 Saskatchewan First Nations Summer Games is the event 
to be at. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

City of Regina Centennial 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
she’s going to be 100 years old tomorrow, and I doubt there’s a 
member on either side of the House who won’t agree with me, 
who says that she grows more beautiful with each passing year. 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, I’m referring to Regina, the Queen City 
of the plains. 
 
From its humble beginnings as a mere pile of bones on the bare 
Canadian prairie to the bustling economic engine that it is 
today, Regina has proven itself to be as innovative and 
resourceful as the many people who have been happy to call 
this city home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tomorrow — June 19 — marks the official 100th 
birthday of Regina, and in usual Western style, citizens of this 
great city are taking four days to celebrate. There are all kinds 
of events and ceremonies being offered — from Thursday’s 
activities in Victoria Park to Sunday’s multi-faith forum in the 
City Hall. And so we encourage Regina residents and their fams 
to take the time to enjoy of many of the venues as possible. 
 
Over the years Regina has proven itself to be a bold 
entrepreneur, a city of opportunity and promise, a city of vision. 
At the same time, Regina hasn’t forgotten what built this city, 
nor has it forgotten the people that helped to build it. Regina is 
a busy, sprawling centre with many of the amenities of a much 
larger city with a small-town pace and community focus. 
 
To list all of Regina’s many achievements and great successes 
this past century would be . . . take too long, but I cannot forget 
to mention the distinguished Legislative Building, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the occasion of Regina’s 100th anniversary I think 
something we can all agree on, I ask that we all congratulate 
Regina and wish her many more years of success and 
prosperity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Team Saskatchewan Goes to Washington 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, Team Saskatchewan, a trade 
delegation including representatives from government, industry, 
and the universities, is heading to BIO 2003 in Washington, DC 
at the end of this week. 
 
BIO 2003 is the largest biotechnology conference in the world. 
Since Saskatchewan is a world leader in biosciences and home 
to 30 per cent of Canada’s biotech industry, it’s important that 
we attend. 

Team Saskatchewan will have an opportunity to make contacts 
with other members of the international biotechnology 
community, showcase our achievements in agricultural 
biotechnology research, and promote Saskatchewan as an 
investment destination for businesses in the biotechnology 
sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, BIO 2003 is a forum for Saskatchewan companies 
to build strong business relationships, attract new business 
partners, and increase international awareness of the 
opportunities Saskatchewan has to offer the world. 
 
Pyxis Genomics, Prairie Plant Systems, Phenomenome 
Discoveries, Saskatchewan Drug Research Institute, the 
University of Saskatchewan, and the Canadian Light Source 
will all be accompanying the Minister of Industry and 
Resources on this mission. 
 
I’m sure that all members of this Assembly will join me in 
wishing Team Saskatchewan every success in efforts like theirs 
that ensure Saskatchewan’s future is wide open. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Royal Visit 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since 
our province’s inception at the turn of the century, 
Saskatchewan has enjoyed a long history of being honoured by 
the royal visit from various members of the monarchy. 
 
From the names of our cities and towns to the names of our 
streets and buildings in Saskatchewan, distinguished and 
celebrated connection to the Commonwealth can be found in 
communities throughout our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a royal visit was always eagerly anticipated by the 
public and meticulously planned by the protocol office on both 
sides of the Atlantic. Where royalty is concerned, it goes 
without saying that time is of essence and there can be little 
room for error, keeping in mind, Mr. Speaker, that all members 
of the Assembly know that for the past six months 
Saskatchewan has been preparing for the visit of Your Royal 
Highness Prince Edward, Earl of Wessex. 
 
From June 19 to June 22, Prince Edward will be visiting 
communities as of Regina, Lloydminster, Melfort, Prince 
Albert, and Moose Jaw in preparing a number of official events, 
among them celebrating award presentations and opening 
ceremonies. 
 
And as in the custom with the royal visit, Mr. Speaker, Prince 
Edward’s itinerary has been arranged according to themes — 
history, heritage, youth, Aboriginal people, and arts. On this last 
theme, Mr. Speaker, we note that the Earl of Wessex has been 
the royal patron of the Globe Theatre here in Regina since 
1992. This is the first and today the only patronage appointment 
he has granted in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it has been with past royal visits and as it will 
undoubtedly be for the royal visit yet to come, Saskatchewan 
will welcome His Royal, member of . . . Earl of Wessex with 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

our trademark warmth and Western spirit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the province prepares for his arrival in Regina 
today, we take the opportunity to wish him all the best. May he 
thoroughly enjoy the visits in our wonderful province. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

End of Session 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a 
moment here to clarify for our television audience that despite 
the repetitive nature of some of the recent proceedings in this 
Assembly, they are not watching a summer rerun. We are live. 
Do not adjust your set. 
 
But little business is being conducted. Indeed this session’s 
business is pretty much concluded. If the Sask Party wanted to, 
we could wrap up in a few hours and save the taxpayers 
thousands of dollars a day. Instead, day after day, it’s the same 
questions being repeated over and over again; questions they 
already know the answers to. 
 
But the real question, Mr. Speaker, is why? Why are we still 
sitting? Why are taxpayers footing the bill to keep the 
Assembly in session when there is little reason? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I submit that we are sitting in here because 
the Sask Party wants the legislature in session until the 
by-election in Carrot River Valley is over in the hope of 
furthering their cause every day during question period. It’s 
pure politics — not even a hint of responsible opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, and at a cost to the taxpayers of thousands of dollars a 
day. 
 
(14:00) 
 
So you viewers at home, do not adjust your TV sets but get 
ready to adjust your wallets and ante up your share of these 
extra costs because apparently, for their own political reasons, 
the Saskatchewan Party wants us here for at least another seven 
days or so, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Team Diabetes Canada 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to talk about a remarkable young lady from Regina Beach 
who’s plan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to talk 
about a remarkable young lady from Regina Beach who’s 
planning to travel to Iceland this summer. Sixteen-year-old 
Jillian Barber will travel to Reykjavik, Iceland, in August 16, 
2003 as part of the Team Diabetes Canada running team who’ll 
be running a 22 K marathon in that country. 
 
Ms. Barber who learned that she was suffering from juvenile 
diabetes this past April is working hard towards raising money 

that will go towards diabetes research. Presently Jillian is 
training for the run along with her friend, 17-year-old Craig 
Gaube of Lumsden who’ll be running with her in the marathon 
titled, Fire Meets Ice. 
 
Indeed the marathon will begin from areas of geysers and 
volcanoes and end at a glacier icefield. The training these young 
people do to get ready for the marathon consists of running 10 
kilometres five times a week in preparation for the Iceland 
marathon. Ms. Barber said that we are by far the youngest ones 
on the marathon team, at least from our area. 
 
Jillian is very confident about raising the 5,500 each of the 
runners need to participate in the marathon. It’s a lot of money 
and goals that we have to meet but I know we can do it, Jillian 
says. She went on to say that her and her friend Craig are both 
excited about going to Iceland. Clearly we have two very 
committed young Saskatchewan people who are working hard 
to raise funds for diabetes research around the world. 
 
I would ask all members of the Assembly to join me 
congratulating Jillian Barber and Team Diabetes Canada for 
their remarkable efforts in the fight against the illness. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Support for Beef Industry 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that the 
member from Regina Victoria can’t recognize the significance 
of what may be the biggest crisis that this province has ever had 
to face. And maybe he has nothing to do, but I think the 
Agriculture minister does. And my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. 
 
Cattle producers and feedlot operators across Saskatchewan are 
anxiously waiting for details regarding the national BSE 
compensation package announced yesterday by the federal 
minister. Yet even this morning details from the province are 
scarce. The Saskatchewan Party has obtained a Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization briefing note on the 
federal-provincial BSE package. It describes the BSE 
compensation package that was apparently presented to the 
federal cabinet yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this document states that, although this will be a 
national program, the individual provinces will administer it. 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that the province of 
Saskatchewan will be administering the compensation program 
and, if so, explain how. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the recommendation 
from the federal government and discussion with the provincial 
ministers is that it may very well be administered by the 
provincial government. The federal government and the 
provincial governments have yet not determined on what 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

 

formula or on what manner in which the compensation package 
will be administered because we’re still not finished our 
negotiations. 
 
We had a discussion again this afternoon or at noon today with 
all the Ag ministers across the country and Mr. Vanclief. And 
the administration piece is part of that discussion along with a 
couple of other issues that remain unresolved, which we 
anticipate will be resolved within the next hour or two when we 
go on to yet one more conversation with the federal minister 
and agricultural ministers to complete our negotiations. 
 
That’s the process that we’ve been using to date, Mr. Speaker, 
and there are no solid confirmations yet to be made as it relates 
to administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The document states that the compensation 
package will be capped at a total of 460 million. The slaughter 
portion is projected to cost 420 million; the purchase segment, 
30 million. And 10 million is allocated for administration costs. 
The document also states the program will end either when the 
US (United States) border opens or when that $460 million is 
gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how are the dollar amounts for each segment of 
this package arrived at or what is being negotiated to arrive at 
those dollar amounts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the federal 
minister announced that this package would be $460 million. 
Yesterday the federal minister announced that there would be 
allocation to three areas — that there would be allocation to 
producers, that there would be a cost for administration, and 
there in fact would be an allocation for packers. That’s where 
the $460 million comes . . . how it comes to. 
 
The level of participation today by the provinces and the federal 
government has been determined. 
 
What has not yet been determined, Mr. Speaker, is the timeline 
from which the package will be offered up and the degree in 
which we’re asking for compensation and the opening . . . and 
the language that we’re going to be asking for as it relates to the 
compensation to the industry vis-à-vis what the requirements 
will be as it relates to the request that the federal government is 
making to the opening of the border. 
 
Those are the issues that remain unresolved which we hope that 
we’ll have some resolution within the next couple of hours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this briefing note states that 
this program will cover fed cattle, culled cows and bulls, and 
veal calves. And that payments will be available to all cattle 
sold and slaughtered after May 20. 
 
Although the minister told reporters yesterday that his 
understanding was that this package was essentially the same as 

what the premiers had proposed two weeks ago, there’s a big 
difference according to this briefing note. That difference 
involves a sliding scale deficiency payment rather than a 
constant deficiency coverage of 90 per cent as proposed by the 
premiers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain what the sliding scale 
deficiency payment will mean for producers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when the federal 
government and the provinces have concluded their 
communications and their discussion on what the package will 
be ultimately, I will be calling a press conference later this day. 
There will be a communiqué from the federal minister, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ll outline not only the details of the package 
but we’ll also outline the level of funding that will be made 
available to each sector which will be covered. I’ll have the 
industry sitting beside me who will also articulate the 
involvement that the industry has had. 
 
And I intend to do that as soon as I come off the conference call 
later this afternoon with the industry and my officials from my 
department, and personally to outline the details of the package. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, is a sliding scale deficiency 
payment being considered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There are a whole host of options that 
have been considered and there are a whole host of options that 
are being discussed. I am not about to negotiate a national 
package on BSE in the floor of the Legislative Assembly with 
the party of the opposition. I’m not prepared to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we’ve been doing, Mr. Speaker, is negotiating a package 
for the industry and we’ve been doing that in consultations with 
the federal government and all of the provinces. And to date, 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition has been co-operative in how 
we’ve been allowed to do our work. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition today should wait 
until we complete our work at the national level and after we’re 
finished with that work, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be pleased to advise 
the members of the opposition. We’ll invite them to the press 
conference. They can take that detail, Mr. Speaker, and they can 
provide that then in the same fashion that we’ll know it. 
 
But we should be quoting information that will be accurate and 
reflective of what the Canadian package is, as opposed to the 
member standing up today and proposing that she may have at 
her disposal today all of the detail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, if I’m hearing the minister 
correctly, in other words he appreciates the opposition 
co-operating but we’ll discuss this only when it’s a done deal, 
and that’s a decision made by his side of the House. 
 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, unlike the proposal put forward by the premiers, 
this sliding scale deficiency payment means producers will still 
absorb a greater portion of the losses if the market price 
declines. According to the briefing note, there is apparently 
concerns that the 90 per cent coverage, as suggested by the 
premiers, would create, and I quote: 
 

. . . moral hazard problems in the industry. 
 
This suggests that markets would be distorted by the beef 
industry trying to take advantage of the government assistance. 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain the concerns surrounding 
moral hazards? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that’s 
further from the truth when the member opposite stands up and 
says that we only consult with people after the deal’s done. 
That’s absolutely not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because when you take this issue of BSE, there isn’t a 
individual in Canada who pays attention to the information 
that’s been provided by the governments across the country — 
provincially and federally — and provided by all of the medias 
across Canada, and exceptionally, Mr. Speaker, by this 
province. We’ve had exceptional reporting. 
 
That the member opposite should say, and stand up in the 
House today, that what happens is that they find out about this 
thing when it’s a done deal — nothing further from the truth, 
Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker, today is that we’re discussing and negotiating a 
package of national issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, they will have 
consequential repercussion at the international trade table. And 
we should be extremely careful about how we share information 
today that is . . . that needs to be . . . That we need to be sure, 
Mr. Speaker, that it’s absolutely accurate. And we should not be 
surmising, Mr. Speaker, what that is. 
 
And you’ll know, the Leader of the Opposition will know, as 
everybody else will know when we finish and complete the 
negotiations that include not only the provinces and the 
industry, Mr. Speaker, who’ve been at the table the whole time, 
and the federal government who needs to negotiate a trade 
package with the US. Then we’ll all know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a 
comment on the moral hazard since the minister won’t 
comment on my question. 
 
The idea that the beef industry may be, some way, be able to 
manipulate the slaughter system is absolutely ridiculous. First 
of all, this is an industry that prides itself on it being self-reliant 
and thrives on a free market system. Secondly, when cattle start 
moving, Mr. Speaker, the slaughter plants are going to have a 
limited capacity to handle the volume of the cattle offered. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, does the province agree with the sliding scale 

of the deficiency payment that’s being proposed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t want to go here, but I 
am going to now because the member opposite has said, on a 
number of occasions on behalf of her party, things that have 
been harmful to the industry across Canada and agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker — harmful. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, it is exactly that very same party of 
which that member opposite stood in this House on a number of 
occasions and said that we needed to do what crop insurance is 
to reduce the level of years of recovery to eight to nine years as 
opposed to fifteen. It’s that member who said that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s that member, Mr. Speaker, over there who said that the . . . 
asked us how much the provincial government is going to pay 
to NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account). The provincial 
government pays nothing to NISA; the money goes from the 
federal government to the accounts, Mr. Speaker, of the 
individual producers. 
 
And it is not . . . That member, Mr. Speaker, also said on behalf 
of her leader and that party that we should be sharing, Mr. 
Speaker, today . . . we should be sharing today in trade injury. 
It’s that member on the support of her leader, Mr. Speaker, who 
doesn’t believe in national subsidy. And we’ve heard him, as 
the Canadian Alliance leader, on many occasions. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, do not push the moral issue 
button with the United States. Do not do that, Mr. Speaker. 
Because what we’re doing is negotiating through the national 
government to make sure that when we go to lift the borders 
and provide the compensation, it does not provide injury to the 
industry. And that’s the advice we’ve got from the industry and 
from the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it saddens me to hear such a 
desperate answer from that minister because it had nothing to 
do with the question. So I’ll ask it again. Does the province, 
does this government, agree with the sliding scale for a 
deficiency payment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to support 
at the end of the day a package that’s going to be concluded 
through the work of all of the provincial ministers across the 
country — Agriculture — and the federal minister. 
 
And we’re going to support a package at the end of the day of 
which the industry has led, Mr. Speaker, and that the premiers, 
in fact, have in fact endorsed, Mr. Speaker, not only in 
Saskatchewan but across the country. That’s the package that 
we’re going to support. And in a couple of hours, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll have that package concluded. 
 
And I say to the member opposites, do not get in the way of a 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

 

negotiated package at a national level because you have a 
history and a record here, Mr. Speaker, of every time you 
intervene at . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would remind 
the member to make all of his statements through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, every time that the 
Saskatchewan Party has intervened on a national policy — and 
I’ve said this on many occasions and it holds true on every front 
— it has cost the Canadian producers and agriculture producers 
money, Mr. Speaker. It comes out of their jeans. And so I say to 
the members opposite that they should stay out of this debate 
completely until they have the facts and the information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a part of the 
compensation package that is a huge concern to the beef 
industry, and that is the quick end to the program. The program 
ends the earlier of the day that the US border reopens for 
Canadian beef or cattle less than 24 months of age or August 
31, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely unacceptable and particularly 
affects the feedlots because they would have just a few hours 
after the border opens to move their animals and qualify for 
compensation. These are animals that they would have already 
suffered significant losses on, yet this program is not going to 
provide any help for them at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister agree to the abrupt end or is 
he going to agree to the abrupt end of the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to agree to a 
package at the end of the day that will be agreed on by all of the 
ministers and the industry across Canada and the federal 
government; that’s what I’m going to agree to at the end of the 
day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to say this to the member opposite, that they should remember 
that the negotiation and compensation has been, has been 
directed, Mr. Speaker, has been directed by the industry. And 
we, Mr. Speaker, have been part and parcel of the development 
of that package all along with our industry. 
 
And so when the member opposite stands up today or the 
member from Cannington chirps from his chair and says what is 
to be brought to the table, I’d like to ask the member from 
Cannington what he’s brought to the table on agricultural policy 
in the last four years, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you what he’s 
brought — he’s brought exactly the same thing as the member 
from Biggar has brought, Mr. Speaker, and the member from 
Watrous has brought. They brought zero to agricultural policy, 
Mr. Speaker, in the last several years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the briefing note also states 
that some provinces have expressed concern about equitable 

access to limited slaughter facilities. It states an industry and 
government committee will be established to monitor the 
equitable access issue. That’s definitely true for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell us what role Saskatchewan 
will have on this committee, when this committee will start its 
work, and when it will be expected to come up with a plan to 
deal with this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what will be required 
here is that when the package is concluded and the 
compensation has been determined to which levels it will be 
made and to what degree the formula will apply and how long 
the compensation package will be in place, what we’ll need 
then, Mr. Speaker, is that across Canada we have a good 
inventory on all of those feedlots that are over 1,000 head 
upwards. We have a good inventory of those. And we have a 
good inventory, Mr. Speaker, on all of the packing houses. 
 
What we do not have in Canada, Mr. Speaker, is a good 
inventory of those family farms today that have small numbers 
of feeding animals. 
 
And we want this package to be equitable and fair and 
transparent. And the way in which we believe that that can best 
be done is by establishing within provinces working 
coordinated committees led by the industry, then working 
through coordinated interprovincial committees through the 
packers to be sure that those people who are the small operators 
in Canada, the small family farms, will have the same access to 
the packing plants in the domestic market as do the larger 
feedlots. That’s the intention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine 
Spongiform Encephalopathy 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Yesterday Japan gave the US and 25 other 
beef export countries a July 1 deadline to start certifying their 
beef products as BSE free. That is an enormous concern. How 
the US reacts to Japan and South Korea’s demands will directly 
impact the US market for Canadian cattle and beef products. 
Yet our producers have heard nothing from our government 
about how we intend to address Japan’s concerns, both as an 
exporting country to those Asian markets but also as . . . to the 
US. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us what Canada and 
Saskatchewan’s response to Japan’s concern will be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the negotiations of trade at 
the international level is conducted by the federal levels of 
government. And we have said on a regular basis, in our 
correspondence and in our discussions with the federal 
government, that it will be imperative for us to be able to access 
the international marketplace in the way in which we have in 
the past. 
 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

The dilemma that the federal government is finding today is 
that they now have a request from Korea and from Japan in 
which they are indicating that we should, in order for them to 
buy product . . . or the American product into the future, what 
needs to happen is that they have to purge themselves of 
Canadian beef. This would be an unfortunate exercise, Mr. 
Speaker, if Korea and Japan, in buying US product, would have 
to purge all of their product of Canadian beef. 
 
The federal government has now had a number of conversations 
with the Japanese governments. The Minister of Agriculture 
federally has had a conversation with the levels of government 
from Korea. I expect that the trade ministries that are involved 
in each of those areas have also had those kinds of discussions 
because, Mr. Speaker, it is an international level of dialogue 
that occurs at our national level. 
 
And I know that our Minister of Agriculture nationally has been 
speaking on behalf of Canadians to try to ensure that we can get 
the movement of beef product back into the international 
marketplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Metis Addictions Council of Saskatchewan  
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Health. How much money did the provincial government 
provide to the Métis health and addictions council of 
Saskatchewan in the 2003 budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have that 
specific amount with me but I will get that and provide it to her. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the Health department provided 
the Métis health and addiction council with $2.2 million in 
2002. And in that year the Métis health and addiction council 
budgeted nothing for corporate publicity, but actually spent 
$17,000. They budgeted $78,000 for staff and board travel and 
meals, but they actually spent almost double that amount, 
132,000. Meanwhile the council budgeted 72,000 for client 
recreation and education activities, but actually spent just 
$5,300. And while they budgeted $81,500 for food to serve to 
needy clients, the council actually spent just $71,000 on food. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP (New Democratic Party) allowing 
the Métis health and addictions council to drastically increase 
promotions, publicity, staff and board travel costs, while at the 
same time making huge cuts in the level of service and support 
the council provides to its clients? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I will check into the 
information that the member has provided and provide a 
response in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has already received 
this information. It is filed in the financial reports that are tabled 

and that are available in the library. 
 
And the minister also received a letter which he has also replied 
to, and I’d like to quote from the letter that the Minister of 
Health received from a person that is concerned about what is 
going on at the Metis Addictions Council. And I quote: 
 

There has been serious misappropriation of funds and 
mismanagement within the Council and it is continuing and 
will continue until some action is taken. 

 
This information has been sent to the Minister of Health, and 
it’s the same old reaction from the NDP. They turn a blind eye 
and refuse to do anything. Again no accountability of 
taxpayers’ dollars — $2.2 million from the Department of 
Health and the Minister of Health refuses to ensure that the 
dollars are spent appropriately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are the NDP covering up now and who are 
they protecting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to this specific 
matter I will look into the questions that the member has asked. 
 
But what I would say to that member is that we work with 
people and with organizations and we figure out ways of 
making sure that they’re accountable. When there are concerns 
that are raised, we investigate those concerns and deal with 
those concerns. That’s how we operate on this side of the 
House. We have some basic respect for people and how they 
organize things. 
 
And we’re going to continue to do that because that’s what 
works in Saskatchewan. What works here is that we work 
together with people to provide the kind of care that’s needed 
and when there are problems, we sit down and we figure out 
how to fix them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister knows full well what 
is going on and if he doesn’t, he shouldn’t.  
 
This information is tabled. It is their financial documents from 
the Metis Addictions Council. I received this document by 
going to the library. It shows clearly the misappropriation of 
funds. The money is not spent as it was budgeted for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has acquired a memo 
dated May 8, 2003, written by the program director to the 
Regina office staff of the Métis health and addictions council of 
Saskatchewan. The title of the memo is, Snacks For Clients. 
And here is what it says, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Please be advised that once again I am telling staff that 
TOAST IS NOT to be served for snack. Clients are to eat 
left overs from what was served for the day . . . We are 
going through to much bread and we are on a tight food 
budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP allowing promotion costs and 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

 

board travel and food costs to skyrocket, while at the same time 
the money spent for clients on food is being cut and the clients 
are told that they are eating too much bread? And I’d be happy 
to table the memo. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, if we need any evidence that 
this session has gone on too long, I think that last one is exactly 
an example of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happens in our province is that we have 
many organizations that provide services and we continue to 
work with those organizations . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in this province we need to 
work together with our First Nations, Métis, Aboriginal people 
because they are a very important part of our future. 
Unfortunately that member’s questions on a daily basis go to 
attacking all of these people who are working hard to try to 
develop programs for their people. 
 
The people in the New Democratic Party who form this 
government want to do everything that they can to make sure 
that that type of attitude, that type of question, is not a part of 
Saskatchewan and never will be. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
stay and work hard with our friends and with the people that we 
want to provide services in the province because that’s the 
important thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

ExpressAddress Service 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The talent and 
ability of Saskatchewan people to work together is one of the 
province’s greatest strengths. It continues to be the building 
block of innovation that begins right here in our province, 
becoming the model for others to follow. I’m pleased to rise in 
this House to tell the members of such a leadership and launch 
this morning of a new Web site in Saskatchewan, one that’s on 
the leading edge of customer service and co-operation. 
 
This on-line service, ExpressAddress, is the result of an 
innovative partnership of the province’s two largest cities and 
four Saskatchewan Crown corporations. I had the pleasure of 
joining Saskatoon mayor, Jim Madden, and councillor Mike 
Badham, representing the city of Regina, in announcing this 
service which is indeed groundbreaking. It marks the first time 
that the cities of Saskatoon and Regina, together with the four 
Crowns — SaskEnergy, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), SaskPower, and SaskTel — have partnered to 
introduce a major customer service enhancement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Web-based customer service solution is 
cost-effective in a service that offers site visitors the 

convenience of communicating a move to all the partners at the 
same time. It is through this co-operative effort in pooling of 
expertise and financial resources that Saskatchewan is now the 
first province in Canada to offer a multiple organization on-line 
address change service. 
 
This contribution to the province’s growing reputation as a 
vibrant centre for advances in technology and technology-based 
services reflects a Saskatchewan moving forward with 
confidence and a future wide open with opportunity. 
 
Using this one-stop service, Saskatchewan people can easily 
connect, transfer, or disconnect residential services for 
telephone, electricity, natural gas, and water. Site visitors can 
also easily update their address or their driver’s licence, vehicle 
registration, and various city services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, out-of-province visitors to ExpressAddress can 
use the site to apply for any of these services when moving to 
Saskatchewan, making their move to our province much easier. 
ExpressAddress can be accessed, I should say, by visiting 
www.expressaddress.com directly or by linking through one of 
the Web sites of the participating partners. 
 
This is a significant accomplishment, Mr. Speaker, given that 
the founding partners came together just over a year ago and 
began developing the on-line address change service shortly 
thereafter. Crown corporation investment in this project reflects 
a commitment to working to provide value to customers and to 
Saskatchewan through continuous improvement of service and 
offering customers further choice in accessing services. The 
partners are inviting more organizations, cities, or towns to join 
ExpressAddress which will make it an even more valuable 
service. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
the cities of Regina and Saskatoon and our Crowns on this 
tremendous accomplishment. I’m sure we can look forward to 
future customer service developments that will result from their 
continuing effort and co-operation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to the 
minister and his officials, Mr. Burgess, for providing us with a 
copy of the statement here this afternoon in advance of the 
minister rising in the House today. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is, I think, what 
most people would consider a relatively positive thing. I think 
there are some questions that automatically come to mind. 
When they talk about this service being provided to the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon, certainly that’s a good thing; it’s a 
positive thing. 
 
But there are other cities in the province of Saskatchewan where 
this also might . . . the service might work quite well and also 
where all of the Crowns have a presence. And so it will be 
interesting to hear in the days ahead from the government as to 
their intention to expand this service to the rest of the province 
because if it is as effective as it sounds like it may be in Regina 
and Saskatoon, then the same is true . . . then the same would be 
true for the smaller but equally important cities of the province, 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

including my own hometown of Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the other thing that this announcement demonstrates 
again — and mind you it’s a rare demonstration that we get 
from this government — but it demonstrates it again that when 
our Crown corporations focus on the province of Saskatchewan, 
as they have with ExpressAddress, when the major Crowns, 
SaskTel, SaskEnergy, SaskPower, and SGI, the very Crowns 
we’re talking about today in this member’s statement, when 
they focus on Saskatchewan, when they stick to their knitting 
— instead of worrying about people changing addresses in 
Newcastle, Australia they worry about helping people change 
addresses in Saskatoon and Regina — when that happens, good 
things happen in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s what the Saskatchewan Party has been saying for a very, 
very long time, that good things happen when our Crown 
corporations work on things and work together. As the minister 
has pointed out, they worked co-operatively to get 
ExpressAddress up and running here at least in two cities. 
They’ve worked together and what have they been worried 
about? They’ve been worried about Regina and Saskatoon, not 
Atlanta and not Nashville, as the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
would have our Crowns worried about. 
 
So we hope that the government and the people of the province 
take from this yet another, yet another positive proof of the 
good that can come when our major Crowns focus on this. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as the minister mentioned, this particular 
service is going to allow people to, with ease, change their 
addresses here in the province of Saskatchewan and send out, 
rather, notification of address change to all of the various 
agencies that you’d want to do that when you move, Mr. 
Speaker, to all of the agencies you want to notify of a pending 
move. 
 
But as the minister noted in his remarks, in addition to that, Mr. 
Speaker, this Web site that’s provided is also going to enable 
those outside the province wanting to move into the province to 
arrange for hookups of their utilities and their services that they 
want; to notify the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
That is very interesting and a positive development, Mr. 
Speaker. Because right now under the NDP government there 
are precious few people moving into the province so not a lot of 
demand for that service. But soon, and very soon, Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan Party in government in just a few months will 
enact its plan to grow Saskatchewan and to attract new people 
here. And then that service that the minister announced today 
will be welcomed indeed and will be used mightily by people 
wanting to move into the province. 
 
And even the member from Athabasca is kind of reclined in his 
chair but he’s agreeing, Mr. Speaker, because he knows it’s 
true. The service, this ExpressAddress is going to be a positive 
development especially when all of the people will be . . . come 
pouring into the province under a Sask Party government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be watching this closely to see that the 
service can expand to other centres if indeed it’s working. We’ll 
ask questions I think as to why, why other cities weren’t 
included in . . . at the outset, and hope that that can occur, and 

know that the lines will be burning when the election’s called, 
the government changes, and people will be moving into the 
province wanting to utilize this service. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Southeast 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — With permission, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I draw your 
attention to your gallery. I would like to introduce to you and 
through you two visitors to Saskatchewan from India, Dr. 
Sanjay Krishna and Manjula Krishna. They are visiting the 
Hindu temple here. I would also like to introduce their host who 
lives in Regina, Mr. Airi. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have travelled throughout India from the very 
north by the border of Nepal right to the south to Cape 
Kanniyakumari where I witnessed the sunset at the confluence 
of the major oceans of the world. I’ve also seen first-hand the 
reverence and respect of the various deities, and I see that 
reverence and respect reflected here in Saskatchewan in our 
own Hindu temples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 
our visitors and wishing them a pleasant visit in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cannington on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Along with the 
member opposite, I would like to welcome our guests from 
India to the Saskatchewan legislature. I hope you enjoy our fine 
city of Regina and the province, especially since you’re here 
during Farm Progress Show. There are lots of things to do in the 
city and with Regina’s 100th anniversary this weekend it gives 
you lots of opportunities to visit. 
 
And again we’d like to welcome you to Regina and 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

 

pleased today to stand on behalf of the government and table 
responses to written questions nos. 744 through 748 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — 744, ’45, ’46, ’47, and ’48 have been 
submitted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I at this 
time move that we convert for debates returnable question no. 
749. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 749 converted to orders for return 
(debatable). 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased to once again stand on behalf of the 
government and table response to written question no. 750. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 750 has been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
purpose of the motion is to delay the proceedings of the House 
and also the conclusion time of the House tomorrow by one 
hour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I think all of Saskatchewan is aware, we are 
anxiously awaiting the arrival tomorrow morning of His Royal 
Highness, The Earl of Wessex, as Prince Edward comes to pay 
Saskatchewan a visit. He’ll be arriving in the morning. All of us 
here as members of the legislature will be included, invited to 
take part in the reception of His Royal Highness here at the 
Legislative Building. 
 
And then at noon hour, Mr. Speaker, a very important event in 
the history of Saskatchewan, particularly the history of the 
capital city here in Regina. As we all know, the city of Regina 
is celebrating its centennial and very much welcomes the 
presence of His Royal Highness here to take part in that 
celebration. 
 
As part of that celebration tomorrow, at 1:05 to 2:35 is a 
luncheon that is being hosted by the mayor of Regina. And the 
mayor has very graciously extended an invitation to Regina 
members and also the Premier, I believe, to join with the mayor 
and His Royal Highness in this centennial celebration of the 
city. 
 
In order to accommodate the centennial celebration here in 
Regina and not to impinge on the function of the Legislative 
Assembly, then, Mr. Speaker, I’m simply asking that the House 
will delay the starting time and also the concluding time of the 
House tomorrow by one hour. And therefore I move, seconded 
by the Government House Leader: 
 

That, notwithstanding rule 3(1), the sitting hours of the 
Assembly on Thursday, June 19, 2003 shall be from . . . 

 
Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I’ll move that again: 
 

That, notwithstanding rule 3(1), the sitting hours of the 

Assembly on Thursday, June 19, 2003 shall be from 2:30 
p.m. until 6 p.m. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, Order, please. Order. 
Order. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(14:45) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 43 — The 
Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure this afternoon to rise and make a few comments on Bill 
No. 43, a Bill, Mr. Speaker, to amend The Forest Resources 
Management Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken, on this side of the House, taken some 
time to take a look at this Bill thoroughly. We’ve, unlike the 
minister, have taken an opportunity to meet with people from 
the forestry sector to get some input on this Bill. We’ve actually 
. . . are still awaiting, Mr. Speaker, some responses from the 
forestry sector as to their opinions on this Bill and how it may 
help or hinder, Mr. Speaker, the forestry sector in this province. 
 
And certainly I think, Mr. Speaker, we need to make a few 
comments upon . . . on the statements that the minister made 
when he did second reading on this Bill the other day. And I 
think it’s important that people of Saskatchewan, we have to 
understand clearly how this minister has again not followed 
through on his responsibility as a minister enabling the forestry 
sector to become a significant, a significant force in the setting 
up of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can imagine to our surprise when this Bill was 
first introduced for first reading and we all received a copy of it, 
and we made a few phone calls into the forestry sector to ask 
their opinion of it and what they thought of it, imagine our 
surprise, Mr. Speaker, to find out that the forestry sector had no 
idea, had no idea that this Bill was actually on the table. 
 
Apparently, Mr. Speaker, this minister, the minister of 
Environment and Resource Management had made a phone call 
to a couple of the players in the forestry sector in this province, 
asked them a question or two about how they thought things 
were going with the softwood trade injury that the United States 
has imposed upon the Canadian and the Saskatchewan forestry 
sectors, and from that, from that, Mr. Speaker, the minister was 
able to deduce that he had done consultation with the forestry 
sector. 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, my advice to the minister is that 
consultation actually means sitting down with the forestry 
sector and going through the Bill and helping them to 
understand where this government wants to go, helping the . . . 
the forestry sector helping the government to understand how 
the trade injury tariffs have been applied against Saskatchewan, 
have created a great deal of concern in the forestry sector to 
those who both invest in it and those who work in it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what consultation is about, is that you’re 
talking to the forestry centre. Simply making a phone call to 
them and saying, good day and how are you, is not consultation. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is the response that we are starting to get 
back from the forestry sector. 
 
And I’m going to say, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, that we are 
doing further consultation in the forestry sector and if we 
continue to get that kind of a response, that no real consultation 
has taken place to date — and in fact, no real consultation is 
going to be taking place at any time in the near future — then 
we’re certainly, on this side of the House, we’re going to be 
holding the minister responsible for that lack, that lack of 
respect due to such a huge industry in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, industry that provides thousands of jobs, an industry 
that brings hundreds of millions of dollars into this province, 
and the lack of respect showed to that industry by this minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, today is after the middle of June now, and 
certainly it’s reaching that time when all members start to think 
about, we’ve been here long enough, that it’s time to start 
thinking about spending some time with our families, giving us 
a time to reflect upon our constituencies and the good people 
that live in it. And what does this NDP government do? Well 
today, Wednesday, June 18, we’re getting in . . . finally getting 
into serious debate of Bill No. 43. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here we go again with an NDP government 
trying to make significant changes to how we do business in 
this province on the eleventh hour — an eleventh-hour 
government trying to desperately hang on to power with 
eleventh-hour solutions. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as we look at this Bill and the timing of it — 
after all it was only a week ago approximately that it was 
introduced — and now, now we hear that the members on the 
other side, the member from Regina Victoria, he wants to go 
home. The member from Regina South, he wants to go home. 
The member from Moose Jaw North wants to go home. 
 
This is rather odd, Mr. Speaker, because I can remember at a 
time when the member from Moose Jaw North and the member 
from Regina Victoria — at this time, in the late ’80s — did not 
want to go home. They wanted to stay here day after day. Day 
after day they wanted to stay here, Mr. Speaker. And so on the 
eleventh hour, on the eleventh hour they bring Bill No. 43, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s going to have significant impact on the forestry 
sector, and then they say to the House they want to go home — 
we’ve had enough; we want to go home. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if they really want to do 
something and really want to go to work, they should be willing 
to start earlier in the year — introducing Bills such as Bill No. 
43 earlier in the year — so that we can have significant input 

from the forestry sector, from those people who will most be 
significantly affected by this Bill, prior to the eleventh hour, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what we should be doing; we should be 
starting earlier. 
 
And if they’re going to come in the middle of June, Mr. 
Speaker, with a Bill that is going to have such a dramatic effect 
on the forest industry in this province, then this NDP 
government should be prepared to stay here till the middle of 
August, just like the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re going to stay here and make sure this Bill is done right 
and it benefits the forestry sector. And not, and not, Mr. 
Speaker, like this minister, the member from Athabasca, who 
has no idea — and I think he has no idea, Mr. Speaker — 
what’s in this Bill or otherwise, otherwise, they’d be willing to 
start tabling it, Mr. Speaker, leave it on the order table, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’ll bring it back next year under a 
Saskatchewan Party government where this Bill will be 
designed right to benefit the forestry industry, to benefit the 
workers in the forest industry, Mr. Speaker, to benefit those 
who invest in the forest industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s what, that’s what should be done, Mr. Speaker, have that 
member talk to his leader. That’s what he should do, Mr. 
Speaker, when you bring Bills like this — talk to your leader 
who will then go across the pond to Frank Hart and ask for 
permission to call an election. That’s what this minister should 
be doing, instead of bringing a eleventh-hour Bill such as Bill 
No. 43. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening with this Bill is that the 
government — in their wisdom or lack of it, lack of advice from 
their support staff in this Department of Environment and 
Resource Management, Mr. Speaker — has decided to come 
with a Bill that will try to encourage, encourage the federal 
government in Canada and the United States federal 
government to try to resolve the issue of the injury tariff that the 
United States has applied against the forest industry in Canada 
and Saskatchewan, and its entire forestry sector right across the 
main here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So now, Mr. Speaker, what we know is that the United States of 
America has decided that because of the way we do forestry 
business in this country, where the primary amount of forestry 
in Canada is actually owned by the Crown — and that’s right 
across all the provinces and the territories and it’s just the way 
it is in Canada and no one is arguing that point — what the 
United States government is saying, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
see that there’s an opportunity here for an unfair advantage for 
dumping by the Canadian government and its provinces into the 
United States softwood market. 
 
Let me explain that a little bit, Mr. Speaker, because in Canada, 
because in Canada the provincial governments and the 
territories arbitrarily set stumpage fees, the stumpage dues that 
are applied to the forestry sector to attain the rights to harvest 
softwood lumber and hardwood lumber in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And whether it’s this province or it’s our neighbours 
to the west or the east or to the north, we use the same processes 
very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our largest consumer for forestry products, the 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

 

United States of America, they do business a little differently. 
What they do, Mr. Speaker, is that they look at this as a 
resource to benefit the people of their constituencies. And so 
then, rather than just arbitrarily set a rate for what the stumpage 
fees will be, Mr. Speaker, they put it up for bid. So a tract of 
forestry land — and whether it’s controlled by the state or 
whether it’s controlled by the federal government, which there’s 
some of that in the United States or whether it’s controlled 
privately — if someone wants to be able to have an opportunity 
to go into those mature forests, Mr. Speaker, several companies, 
several logging companies will actually bid on those tracts of 
land. And the highest bidder then is awarded the opportunity to 
go in there and harvest that timber. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what the United States is feeling — and after 
all it’s their country and then we’re the ones trying to do 
business there — is that because there’s a significant spread 
between what the forest companies in the United States are 
having to pay at different times for allotment and what happens 
in Canada, they feel as though the Canadian forest companies 
have unfair advantages because at different times, depending 
upon market conditions in the United States, is that stumpage 
fees can be significantly lower in Canada. That’s what they’re 
saying. 
 
Now the reality of course is that WTO (World Trade 
Organization) has stated that it’s not really an unfair advantage. 
But there’s really no way to enforce a WTO ruling and we’re 
kind of stuck with the whims and the wishes of our largest 
consumer for our softwood products. 
 
So what we’re having to do, what we’re having to start doing in 
Canada is try to find a way to negotiate our way around this 
dispute, friendly dispute, but still an irritant, Mr. Speaker, 
between ourselves in Canada and our friends to the south who 
still want to consume our product. 
 
Now we know, Mr. Speaker, that the American consumer is 
paying a slightly higher price for housing in the United States 
now because of this injury trade duty. Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard 
numbers somewhere in the vicinity of about $1,300 per house. 
And certainly the federal government in Ottawa has prepared, 
prepared, Mr. Speaker, an advertising campaign into the United 
States to help the American consumer understand that it’s 
actually costing them a little more for housing in the United 
States because of the injury tariff. 
 
Of course we’re not seeing any breakthrough in that area yet so 
obviously the message is not getting out as significantly as we’d 
like it to but at least it was a step in the right direction, Mr. 
Speaker, helping the American consumer understand that 
they’re paying more, they’re paying more, Mr. Speaker, for 
their finished homes than they would if the injury trade tariff 
was not there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what it seems to be starting to happen now 
across Canada is that there’s discussions going on as to maybe 
what we need to do is get away from the old way of doing 
business in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and go to a new way of 
doing business. Now, Mr. Speaker, of course this is a bold step 
for Canadians to take, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, for the NDP 
government it’s a very bold step. 
 

And so then today we see this Bill, Bill No. 43, An Act to 
amend The Forest Resources Management Act, Mr. Speaker, 
that talks about addressing or talking about . . . they want to talk 
about talking about the changes that may need to take place in 
the forestry sector. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the forest resources in Saskatchewan are the 
sole responsibility of the people of Saskatchewan. This Bill 
talks about putting Saskatchewan in a stronger position as a 
negotiator to go to the federal government to get Saskatchewan 
at the table so that the federal government can negotiate around 
the trade duty that’s been applied, the injury trade duty that’s 
been applied against all the entire forestry sector in Canada. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, lo and behold and much to the surprise of 
the Saskatchewan Party, the forestry sector’s not in favour of 
that at all, Mr. Speaker. And the ones we’ve talked to so far are 
disappointed that this Act actually does not go anywhere near 
where they feel, Mr. Speaker, this Bill needs to go. 
 
(15:00) 
 
I want to give you an example, Mr. Speaker, of where we could 
go, where we could go, Mr. Speaker, with the forestry sector in 
Canada, and specifically in Canada . . . or in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, in relationship to the forestry sector, a sector that 
provides huge dividends for the people of Saskatchewan 
through its stumpage fees, through the income tax earned from 
the workers in the forestry centre . . . sector, through the 
corporate taxes that are paid by the corporations working here 
although a lot of them aren’t making a lot of money right now 
because of the injury duty and that’s unfortunate for us in 
Saskatchewan. But there’s huge dividends to be paid here into 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some jurisdictions in Canada who are 
looking at changing the way they do business in the forestry 
sector between government and business — those people in the 
forestry sector who get out of bed every day and create wealth 
for their province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these jurisdictions are looking at going to a 
quasi-system that faintly resembles the way the American 
forestry sector does business for softwood lumber, but it would 
be a made-in-Canada solution. And we applaud that, Mr. 
Speaker. There are jurisdictions in this country that are looking 
at a made-in-Canada solution that will help, that will help their 
jurisdictions from a position of strength and be able to eliminate 
this trade injury duty that is being applied against the forestry 
sector in the different jurisdictions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it appears as though if a jurisdiction in 
Canada now — whether they be east of us or west of us or north 
of us — decides to change the way they do business in the 
forestry sector that will give them an upper hand, the rest of us 
are going to pay a price for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What’s going to happen here is that they’re going to be able to 
put themselves in a position of strength to be able to get their 
softwood lumber into our largest customer, into our largest 
customer, the United States of America, and offset this trade 
injury duty, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

Now Bill No. 43 should be allowing the people of 
Saskatchewan and the forestry sector the opportunity to be able 
to be on the front lines, Mr. Speaker; of getting the co-operation 
of the federal government in the United States away from the 
trade injury duty and allowing Saskatchewan’s softwood 
lumber into the United States without the trade injury duty. 
That’s what this Bill should be doing. 
 
It’ll give Saskatchewan such a significant upper hand, Mr. 
Speaker, that retailers, wholesalers and retailers will want to 
come to Saskatchewan to buy our product — not only because 
it’s a very good product, Mr. Speaker, and I think everyone in 
Saskatchewan understands that Saskatchewan people create 
very good products — but they will come here because we will 
be very, very competitive. Also because we will have 
eliminated this significant trade injury duty that the United 
States has applied against our province and all provinces 
because of the way we do business here and they don’t like the 
way we do things. 
 
And so we need to adapt. After all, they’re the customer. 
They’re the customer, Mr. Speaker. We need to adapt what we 
do to the wants of the customer and not have the customer adapt 
to what the seller wants. After all, Mr. Speaker, if I was to 
decide that I wanted to buy a half-ton, I’m certain that the car 
salesman isn’t going to try to sell me a limousine if I want to 
buy a half-ton. He’s going to sell me a half-ton because that’s 
what I want to buy. 
 
And the same principle applies here. They want our product but 
they want to be seen as buying our product on a level playing 
field with their people in the United States, with their forestry 
people in the United States. That’s all they’re asking for. 
 
It’s actually not a big deal. It probably, Mr. Speaker, it probably 
will not create in the province of Saskatchewan any difference, 
any difference to the coffers of the provincial government. In 
fact, in fact, Mr. Speaker, we are having debate on this side of 
the House as to whether or not this may even increase, increase 
what is brought into the coffers of the Saskatchewan 
government if we just change the way we do business with the 
forestry sector just a little bit. 
 
Now we have a jurisdiction in Canada, Mr. Speaker, that is 
making a bold decision. They are deciding that of all their 
allotments, all their allotments in their province, they’re going 
to have those forestry companies that have been granted these 
allotments to put up 20 per cent of those allotments, Mr. 
Speaker, on a bid system. 
 
Now how this is going to work then, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
company that has this allotment will also be allowed to bid, but 
other forestry players will also be able to bid on those 
allotments too. The highest bidder wins. 
 
What it does, Mr. Speaker, is that it establishes a benchmark in 
that jurisdiction, right across the industry, as to what that timber 
is worth, what that timber is worth for stumpage, Mr. Speaker. 
That stumpage will flow into government coffers. 
 
In reality, Mr. Speaker, it may actually raise stumpage fees in 
those jurisdictions. It may actually raise them, Mr. Speaker; 
more money into government coffers. What it has in all intents 

and purposes of creating, Mr. Speaker, is getting around the 
trade injury duty that the United States has applied against that 
jurisdiction. 
 
Now that jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, they’ll be paying a little 
higher stumpage fees but if you get rid of that trade injury duty, 
it’ll actually be cheaper doing business there. It’ll actually be 
cheaper to do business there. 
 
What does that mean for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, what it means is, is that some of 
our players in the forest industry who sell into the United States 
. . . And there are a few of them and they sell very large 
volumes into the United States — I can think of Carrier 
Lumber; I can think of NorSask Lumber in Meadow Lake; 
Carrier Lumber, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert; I can think of 
Weyerhaeuser in Big River; very, very large players in this 
province. Not huge players from what the United States see as 
bringing product into the United States, but certainly creating a 
tremendous amount of jobs here in Saskatchewan and with very 
efficient mills, Mr. Speaker. These are three of some of the best 
forestry companies in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what it’s going to do is . . . They have 
long-term customers in the United States. Weyerhaeuser has a 
very good client, retail/wholesale client in the United States. 
Carrier Lumber has a very good, long-term, retail/wholesale 
customer in the United States. NorSask Lumber has a long-term 
consumer in the United States; it’s retail/wholesale, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now if that consumer, if that consumer, Mr. Speaker, suddenly 
finds out that we have a neighbour in Canada that can provide 
that product just a little bit cheaper, well you know how 
business is done, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to go there. 
They’re going to go there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what is that going to mean to the people of Saskatchewan? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the forestry industry then is going to have to 
take a hard look at being able to do business in Saskatchewan 
when we have another player in Canada that is usurping all the 
rest of the other provinces. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is what this Bill should be talking of. It 
should be providing the forestry sector in Saskatchewan a 
significant leg up so that we are not usurped, by one of our 
neighbouring jurisdictions and other provinces, in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but providing a level playing field 
so that we can actually get a leg up. And what’s wrong with 
that, Mr. Speaker? Provide the forestry sector in Saskatchewan 
with a leg up on their other competitors in Canada. Now we 
want to wish them all the best in the business world, the rest of 
the forestry sector in Canada, but, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
people of Saskatchewan should look after the people of 
Saskatchewan. What’s wrong with that, Mr. Speaker? Why not 
. . . Why can’t we, as a government in Saskatchewan, give our 
forestry sector a leg up? 
 
That’s what this Bill should be talking about. That’s what this 
minister should have been bringing before the House rather than 
have his, rather than have, Mr. Speaker, have his officials bring 
to us a Bill that kind of talks about giving the forestry sector a 
leg up but doesn’t spell anything out in here. 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

 

He talked about, in his speech to the House the other day, Mr. 
Speaker, he talked about regulations. We’ll do it by . . . We’ll 
talk about this stuff, we’ll have this Bill in place, we’ll have this 
Bill in place, and he talked about in his speech, we’ll have this 
Bill in place. We may not just proclaim it, but we’ll have it 
sitting there, you know, we’ll pass it and we’ll have the 
Lieutenant Governor agree to it and . . . But we may not just 
enact it right away; we’ll just have it sitting on the books just in 
case we need it. But what it’ll do is . . . and it’ll give the federal 
government a little more strength to operate from. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know on this side of the House how 
much we should be depending upon the federal government to 
bail us out. And we heard this afternoon about how well the 
federal government is looking after us, and the provincial 
Minister of Agriculture saying well he doesn’t know what’s 
going on and the federal government hasn’t notified him of too 
much yet and there are some things being proposed and he 
doesn’t know very much about it. 
 
Well, so you can imagine our enthusiasm — or complete lack 
of enthusiasm is the right term, Mr. Speaker — that if we have 
this kind of a wishy-washy Bill, Bill No. 43, that it’s going to 
give this provincial government a bit of a leg up in order to help 
the federal government negotiate with the Americans. 
 
Well what we should be doing, Mr. Speaker, is having the 
province of Saskatchewan and the Government of 
Saskatchewan looking after the people of Saskatchewan and not 
crossing their fingers and pointing at Ottawa to solve our 
problems here. That’s what this Bill should be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we read through the Bill and had it looked 
at by the forestry sector, and we’re continuing to receive 
responses from the forestry sector, we don’t see anything in 
here that’s going to guarantee to the forestry sector any 
opportunity to get that trade injury duty sidelined. There’s 
nothing in this Bill to indicate that. This Bill talks about helping 
the federal government. Well the federal government won’t 
help us; we should be looking after us. 
 
This Bill should be talking about setting aside allotted forestry 
lands on a yearly basis; on a yearly basis, Mr. Speaker, to help 
out the forestry sector get around the trade injury duty put on to 
us by the forestry sector. 
 
We have talked to some of the players in the forestry sector. 
What they see needs to happen is to go to a big system. We 
need to go to a big system for some of our forestry sector. Not 
all of it. They don’t think it’s necessary to bid on every tree out 
in the provincial forests. What they think is that a portion of 
that, a portion of that, Mr. Speaker, could be put up for bid — it 
could be on an annual basis; it could be on an five-year basis or 
a ten-year basis — to try to provide, try to provide for the 
industry a base point, Mr. Speaker. It could be applied to this, to 
the province of Saskatchewan, to it’s . . . (inaudible) . . . a base 
point of what that timber is actually worth standing. 
 
Now nothing in this Bill, nothing is in this Bill to indicate to us 
that that’s exactly . . . that’s what’s going to happen. Now the 
provincial government should be taking the initiative on having 
some land set aside for bid that will help us, Mr. Speaker, 
establish a base price as to what that timber is worth. 

That’s what happens, Mr. Speaker, when . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. And 
it appears as though we’ve hit a sore spot with the NDP 
government. They’re just not comfortable, just not comfortable 
with getting into this idea of business. They don’t seem to have 
a grasp of how business works. They want to control business. 
They want to own business. They want to run business. Their 
success rate has been less than minimal at best. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, after all, when we take a look at this track 
record of this government, SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) comes to mind and certainly 
the member from Northcote will remember that, the success of 
SPUDCO. 
 
This Bill should be talking about the success, the expansion of 
the forest industry. Mr. Speaker, that’s what this Bill should be 
addressing. 
 
The forest industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is really only 
taking baby steps. And we need to grow the forestry sector in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, where . . . Actually, this side of the 
House believes we could grow the forestry sector by another 
10,000 jobs, not cut by 5,000 jobs as indicated in this province 
by the NDP government but actually grow it by 10,000 jobs. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when you grow an industry by 10,000 
jobs, the service sector grows by 20,000 jobs. That’s what 
happens, Mr. Speaker — 30,000 more jobs in Saskatchewan. 
Young families working in Saskatchewan, paying taxes, 
contributing to Saskatchewan coffers, the Saskatchewan 
government coffers. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now the member from Athabasca thinks that that’s amusing, 
Mr. Speaker. He thinks that having people living and working 
in Saskatchewan is a joke. Well, Mr. Speaker, on this side of 
the House, we know, we know that young people want to come 
to Saskatchewan and participate in the forestry sector. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that there are investors in the forestry 
sector that want to come to Saskatchewan and do business. But 
are they coming, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well where’s the Alberta newsprint company? They aren’t even 
on the radar screen any more. They actually wanted to set up 
shop, Mr. Speaker, in the Prince Alberta area. Nobody even 
knows where they are. What happened to them, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I think, you know, some time in the near future, this 
government and this minister is going to have to answer that 
question. What happened? What happened to the Alberta 
newsprint company? 
 
Is there anything in this Bill, anything in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
that will encourage corporate players, corporate investors — 
like the Alberta newsprint company — to come to 
Saskatchewan? Well on this side of the House, we don’t see 
anything in this Bill. 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these are the type of concerns that we as a 
Saskatchewan Party have about this Bill. This government 
should be using this opportunity to create business expansion in 
the forestry sector in this province. And instead at the last 
minute this NDP government hesitated, Mr. Speaker. They just 
couldn’t give up control of business in this province. This 
government wants to control business in this province. 
 
We say, Mr. Speaker, that the people who work in the forestry 
sector, that those people who invest in the forestry sector, have 
the best knowledge to create wealth in the forestry sector, Mr. 
Speaker — and not the NDP government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I followed the comments by the minister, 
I noticed that the minister talked about the people of 
Saskatchewan receiving a fair return, a fair return for our 
resources. 
 
And certainly on this side of the House we want to try to find 
out through the next few days, and should this Bill ever get to 
Committee of the Whole — and, Mr. Speaker, of course we 
know that we’ve started to hear rumours that there may be some 
pressure on the government to just leave this sit on the order 
table — we want the minister to be able to explain to us how 
this Bill is going to be able to provide to the people of 
Saskatchewan a fair return for the harvest of Crown timber. 
 
What this Bill talks about, Mr. Speaker, is the provincial 
government, provincial government having a forestry player in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, prepare a plan to harvest timber, 
bring it into their yards, and then decide well we really have no 
use for this, for this timber so maybe what we’ll do is we’ll ask 
the government if we can put it up for tender; we’ll put it up for 
tender. The government calls this establishing a fair market 
value. 
 
Well that timber, Mr. Speaker, is in someone’s yard. Fair 
market value for that timber needs to be established for a 
mature forest standing, Mr. Speaker. That’s how this Bill needs 
to be structured. We don’t see that anywhere in this Bill. This 
Bill talks about harvested logs, harvested sawlogs to be used for 
softwood lumber. This Bill needs to be talking about 
unharvested, unharvested sawlogs for the softwood industry. 
That’s what this Bill needs to be talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why couldn’t, why couldn’t this government take the chance, 
take a chance, and allow some of the yearly harvest allotment 
be put up for tender? It wouldn’t be a big deal, Mr. Speaker; 
there are fully qualified people in this province who would be 
able to handle that chore for them. They would be able to set up 
an on-line system maybe, Mr. Speaker; something real simple 
where we wouldn’t have to gather the entire forestry sector in a 
single building somewhere and point out tracts of land and they 
could bid on it to be able to harvest that over the next five years 
and what have. They could probably do this on-line, Mr. 
Speaker, they could simply do it from their office. 
 
Now do you imagine that, Mr. Speaker, being able to continue 
to do business as a businessman from your office. Now it’s 
certainly, of course, something that the NDP wouldn’t 
understand because they would prefer to jump on the 
government planes and fly all over the province and cut 
ribbons. 

But, Mr. Speaker, this Bill should have provided an opportunity 
for the government to establish fair market value for our 
standing timber. It would, Mr. Speaker, give the forest industry 
in Saskatchewan such a significant advantage in the softwood 
lumber sector, Mr. Speaker, that maybe, just maybe, Mr. 
Speaker, we would be able to usurp that trade injury duty 
applied to the forestry sector in Saskatchewan so that we can 
reduce that huge cost to the forestry sector. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that would allow the forestry sector to be 
able to compete on a playing field with their counterparts, with 
their major counterparts in the United States of America — 
those are the people we have to do business against. That’s 
where our competition is coming from. Not only competing 
with companies and provinces in Canada, Mr. Speaker, we have 
to compete much, much more globally then. 
 
This Bill could have gone down that road, Mr. Speaker. It could 
allow the forestry sector to have such an advantage in the 
consumer retail market with our largest customer, the United 
States, that there would be investment pouring into 
Saskatchewan, that people would be moving to Saskatchewan, 
that the Saskatchewan Party agenda to grow the province by 
100,000 people in 10 years would be too small a number, that 
we could actually double the population of Saskatchewan in the 
next 30 years. Can you imagine that, Mr. Speaker — doubling 
the population of Saskatchewan over the next 30 years? This 
Bill could have led us in that direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But no, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s office was not comfortable 
with that. They weren’t comfortable with the opportunity to be 
able to give the forestry sector the opportunity to compete in the 
global market. Mr. Speaker, it is this lack of vision, it is this 
lack of vision by this NDP government that is going to bring a 
great deal of concern, a great deal of concern to the forestry 
sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that the member from Cumberland 
is not clear on what this Bill is about. So why don’t, why don’t 
we spend a little time, Mr. Speaker, helping to enlighten him? 
We know that in the constituency of Cumberland there’s a 
significant amount of forestry that could be taking place — it 
could be taking place, Mr. Speaker — and in fact there was a 
company that wanted to come here and do business. But at 
every turn, every turn, Mr. Speaker, there was a roadblock put 
in front of them. 
 
That member had every opportunity to be able to help that 
company negotiate into Saskatchewan to provide jobs, provide 
jobs in his constituency — good quality, high-paying forestry 
jobs in his constituency — and he didn’t do, he didn’t do one 
thing to help his constituency. Instead he put roadblocks up on 
this company so that they couldn’t come here and invest, and 
now they’re not here. 
 
When you get an opportunity to help your constituents, Mr. 
Speaker, it is incumbent upon you to do that, and not as the 
member from Cumberland did and put roadblocks in front of 
investment in the province of Saskatchewan and in your 
constituency. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we want to . . . We also want the people of 
Saskatchewan and present members of the NDP government to 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

 

understand that what’s lacking in this Bill . . . Now of course 
we hear the member from Meadow Lake wanting to participate 
in the debate. And certainly sometime in the next few days 
we’re going to give him an opportunity because, after all, I’m 
sure that there are forestry sector people in his constituency that 
are going to be very concerned about this Bill. They may have 
already let him know, Mr. Speaker, what they think of this Bill. 
 
And maybe in debate, Mr. Speaker, in the next few days on this 
Bill, the member from Meadow Lake will be able to get up and 
explain to this House what the forestry sector in the 
constituency of Meadow Lake thinks of this Bill. That’s what 
he should do, Mr. Speaker. Because certainly we’re starting to 
hear, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House that those people in 
the Meadow Lake constituency who are involved in the forestry 
sector have a great deal of concern about this Bill. 
 
Now they’re going to be sending to us their written comments 
in the next few days. And we’re looking forward to that because 
we think it’s important, we think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, 
that their concerns be brought forward to this legislature so that 
the people of the constituency of Meadow Lake, that the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan understand that this Bill does 
nothing more than talk about the trade injury duty, Mr. Speaker, 
and it really, it really has nothing to do with helping the forestry 
sector. It really . . . (inaudible) . . . to help the forestry sector to 
get around, around forestry investment in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this Bill, in this Bill there are, there’s some 
portion . . . there’s one portion that actually the minister decides 
to define what a sawlog is. Well we find that hugely amusing 
because we certainly know that in his department we have 
concerns about some of the advice he might be getting as to 
what a sawlog is. We’re thinking, Mr. Speaker, on this side of 
the House that the forestry sector kind of knows what a sawlog 
is. Because after all, this, Mr. Speaker, is where the trade injury 
duty is being applied. It’s being applied to softwood lumber. 
 
It’s not being applied to OSB, oriented strand board. It’s not 
being applied to ply board, plywood created in Carrot River. 
It’s not being applied to finger joint material. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s when you take the ends of trees — and some are two feet 
long, some are three feet long, some are four feet long — you 
cut them into two-by-fours or two-by-threes and then you splice 
them together to create a two-by-eight or a two-by-ten. And that 
trade injury duty does not apply to those materials. Mr. Speaker, 
it does not apply to some finished products, to the finished 
product. 
 
What if a small company . . . and I know of some that, Mr. 
Speaker, that want to do some small-scale manufacturing. I met 
a gentleman who wanted to build rafters, and be able to ship 
them into a retail market, in northern Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this product is considered a finished product and is not 
subject to the trade injury duty. So, Mr. Speaker, we should be, 
we should be helping those companies to try to do what’s best 
to get into . . . around the trade injury duty. 
 
But this government says that they want to define a softwood 
log. But you know, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to a softwood 
log, you find some of the larger softwood species in this 
province — and we could take a look at white spruce or black 

spruce and some of them get to quite a large diameter in this 
province — the bottom part of the tree, Mr. Speaker, is actually 
considered in the logging industry as a peeler. And that 
material, Mr. Speaker, is used for plywood. Well plywood, Mr. 
Speaker, then is not subject to the trade injury duty. 
 
So the bottom part of that tree then needs to be very carefully 
eliminated, eliminated from, Mr. Speaker, this bid system 
because it doesn’t apply, Mr. Speaker. Because the Americans 
are only concerned about our softwood lumber, dimensional 
softwood lumber — two-by-threes, two-by-fours, two-by-sixes, 
three-by-fours, three-by-sixes, three-by-tens — that’s what 
they’re concerned about. They’re concerned that we’re 
providing an unfair advantage in that market. 
 
So we have to be very careful in the definition of a softwood 
log, a sawlog, so that we don’t apply, don’t apply across the 
entire main what this could be, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 
about the softwood trade injury. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we also know that the softwood duty does not 
apply to OSB, but then OSB, Mr. Speaker, is created from a 
hardwood. And I just want the member from Athabasca to 
know that the trade injury duty is only applied to softwood 
lumber, not hardwood, Mr. Speaker. And OSB, Mr. Speaker, is 
not subject to the trade injury duty because it is made from a 
hardwood, one. And number two, Mr. Speaker, it is also a . . . 
more of a finished product, value added, and therefore is not 
subject, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I thought I’d just help the member from Cumberland to 
understand that, Mr. Speaker, so that he knows that places such 
as Carrot River don’t need to worry about that. Tolko Industries 
have less to worry about the trade injury duty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:30) 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, it is this kind of lack of clear definition 
when it comes to defining, defining softwood sawlogs that is 
raising some concern in the logging industry, in the forestry 
industry in Saskatchewan. This government wants . . . leaves 
this section of the Act, this clause so wide open that it could be 
interpreted by a different minister on a different day, 
differently. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s why you have legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
You outline in the legislation very, very clearly how this is 
going to apply. You don’t leave it up to . . . you don’t leave it 
up to regulations that can be changed in a minister’s office at a 
whim. 
 
You want it clearly outlined in legislation so that our consumer 
— our consumer, the United States of America — can see it 
upfront, clearly. This is what the Government of Saskatchewan 
is doing, this is how they’re going to get around the softwood 
tariff, Mr. . . . the trade injury duty, Mr. Speaker; and we can 
play ball with the forestry sector in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what needs to be clearly outlined in this 
Bill. 
 
Which keeps me on a point here that, Mr. Speaker, when we 
talk about . . . (inaudible) . . . jurisdiction in Canada, wanting to 
clearly define the establishment of a base price for their stand of 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

trees. 
 
If we don’t clearly outline, Mr. Speaker, the exact amount of 
how much the forestry sector is going to be put up for bid, Mr. 
Speaker, on a yearly or a five-year basis, then we still haven’t, 
we still haven’t been able to demonstrate to our consumer — 
our number one consumer, the United States of America — that 
we are establishing a clear and identifiable base price for 
softwood lumber and the stumpage, Mr. Speaker, so that they 
know that we have usurped their argument for an unfair trade 
advantage. 
 
That’s what, that’s what needs to be very clearly defined in this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker. And I think that if this government had done 
that, say they’d have put 5 per cent . . . We’ll say we’ll put up 
. . . 5 per cent of our allotment every year will be put up for bid, 
and we’ll use that say for this year. And next year we’ll put up 5 
per cent for a five-year allotment, and it’s just wide open for 
bidding; anyone can bid on that. 
 
Of course this government should know about bidding. After all 
they’re the ones that wanted to get involved with some . . . with 
some Clickabid opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, this government should know enough 
about that that if we’d have done that, if we’d have set up a 
portion of our forestry sector aside to a bid system — a clearly 
defined allotment of X amount of hectares or an X amount of 
cubic metres — if we’d have went down that road, we would 
have been able to establish a definitive base price that could be 
applied, Mr. Speaker, across the main to the softwood lumber 
industry which, Mr. Speaker, would then be able to give the 
forestry sector such an advantage over our competitors to the 
east of us, to the west of us, to the south of us, to the north of 
us, that consumers would be coming to Saskatchewan to get our 
high-quality Saskatchewan products, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s what could have happened if this Bill had been done 
right — done right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are some concerns that the minister, 
and whoever that may be in the near future, Mr. Speaker, is 
going to give himself some pretty significant powers to nullify 
an agreement with a specific member of the forestry sector. And 
the forestry sector, they must have some concerns about this I 
would assume. 
 
Let’s take an example, Mr. Speaker. What if a management 
company — Mistik Management comes to mind — has put 
together a five-year plan for harvesting a sector of the 
Saskatchewan forest in the northwest. And they’ve invested 
significant amount of dollars in this, Mr. Speaker. There will 
have been environmental impact studies done, which they do 
out of their own corporate coffers, and there have been planning 
done for roads, Mr. Speaker. They may even have gone so far 
as to do some road building in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then with 15 days notice — with 15 days notice — the 
minister can come along to a forestry partner such as this and 
say to them, in writing, just send them a note, saying we’ve 
decided that this chunk of forest over here, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
decided to put that up for bid. Or we want you to put it up for 
bid because the government is not putting anything up for bid. 

They want the forestry sector to sell amongst themselves to 
establish a base price. 
 
And that we find a great deal . . . (inaudible) . . . So a company 
or a management partner such as Mistik Management has put 
significant financial input into developing access to this 
property so that they can harvest our over-mature Saskatchewan 
forest to create jobs in the northwest, to create wealth in the 
northwest; and the minister with 15 days notice can simply say, 
well no, we’ve decided to do something a little different. 
 
So what is in this Bill that will provide any enthusiasm to the 
forestry sector should the minister decide to do that? Well the 
minister has said, well we’ll reimburse, we’ll reimburse their 
stumpage fees that they’ve invested in it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they’ve invested more than the stumpage fees 
in this. They’ve had people working there with good . . . 
high-quality trained people, good salaries. That’s lost. They’ve 
had environmental impact studies done; and you take Mistik, 
that must cost them hundreds of thousands of dollars a year to 
do this. That’s lost — no reimbursement for that. They simply 
do this out of the goodness of their heart. 
 
I would be suspicious, Mr. Speaker, that Mistik Management 
won’t be that terribly excited about this. In fact they may have 
already contacted the member from Meadow Lake and the 
member from Athabasca on this, that they have some concerns 
about these kind of things. 
 
I think that might have already happened because I know we’re 
going to hear back from that, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to be 
hearing back what they think about this and who they’ve talked 
to and when they were talked to about this Bill. The forestry 
sector is going to be telling us when they were talked to about 
this Bill. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government is going to get 
quite a shock when they find out that the Saskatchewan Party 
again has done their job and opened this government up to the 
light of day, Mr. Speaker, because after all, we know, Mr. 
Speaker, that this NDP government wants to go home. They 
want to go home. They’ve had enough of this. They’ve had 
enough of question period. They’ve had enough of reporters 
asking them questions. They want us to go home. 
 
Well actually, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want 
them to go home right after the next election. So they can just 
call an election, Mr. Speaker, anytime they want and then they 
can go home for as long as they want because there’ll be a 
Saskatchewan Party government running this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And the people of Saskatchewan are more than 
looking forward to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we certainly won’t be bringing, we certainly won’t be 
bringing inconsequential Bills, Mr. Speaker, like Bill No. 43, 
Mr. Speaker. And that member from Prince Albert Northcote 
knows full well that this Bill No. 43 is one of the most 
inconsequential Bills to help the forestry sector that ever came 
in this province. This is not going to help the forestry sector, 
Mr. Speaker. This is only going to help the NDP government 
maintain control of Saskatchewan’s forest industry. 
 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re not sure why the government, at the 
eleventh hour again, would come with the Bill with such a 
significant impact on the forestry sector, a Bill, that we’re 
starting to hear back now from our forestry partners in the 
province, that is going to have more hindrance, more hindrance 
to the forestry sector than is already placed upon them. 
 
Now let’s talk about some of the hindrance in the forestry 
sector, Mr. Speaker, so that people of Saskatchewan can realize 
how this Bill, Bill No. 43, is going to further burden the forestry 
sector in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did you know that there’s a mill just outside the 
city limits of Prince Albert — I guess it’s on the edge, I’m not 
sure if it’s in the city or just on the edge of the city — 
Wapawekka Lumber. It’s preparing to start up again. Because 
of the slowdown in the forestry sector because of the trade 
injury duty, it was temporarily closed so that they could clear 
up some of their lumber they had sitting around, and now 
they’re going to be calling workers back to work. 
 
But every day, every day that mill was closed, Mr. Speaker, 
they paid corporate capital tax. That mill didn’t earn one dime 
but it earned money for this NDP government through the 
corporate capital tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re talking about another mill being closed 
down in this province for a short period of time to help alleviate 
supplies, Mr. Speaker. It too will continue to pay the corporate 
capital tax, Mr. Speaker, and so that this . . . Mr. Speaker, this 
government will continue to drive away investment in this 
province because of their insensitivity to the forestry sector. 
 
Bill No. 43 does nothing, Mr. Speaker, to alleviate those 
concerns. It is these type of concerns, Mr. Speaker, that is 
holding back, that is holding back investment in the forestry 
sector. 
 
Now certainly the government has taken, has taken significant 
credit — has taken significant credit — for what’s happened in 
the forestry sector. Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, most of 
those plans — most of those plans — started to see the light of 
day in the 1980s. They started to see the light of day in the 
1980s and were finished in the 1990s and this NDP government 
is taking credit for something that was developed prior to that. 
They’re taking credit for the forest industry’s wanting to be 
here in Saskatchewan doing business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Do you know that, Mr. Speaker, that what happened when a 
company tried to come to Saskatchewan and this government 
told them, this government told them that the only way that they 
would be allowed to do business in this province is if they took 
government money? Nobody ever found out from this 
government. We’ve asked questions whether this company even 
wanted government money. The government insisted: if you 
want to do business here, you have to take our money. 
 
That’s taxpayers’ money at risk, putting taxpayers’ money at 
risk for absolutely no reason other than these . . . this NDP 
government wanting to be tycoons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is this lack of faith — it is this lack of faith, Mr. 
Speaker — in the forestry sector that is going to have the 

businesses and investors taking a hard look at investing 
elsewhere rather than in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill isn’t doing anything to alleviate those fears. 
 
This government continues to operate at the eleventh hour; this 
isn’t the first time it happened. They want to do a little project 
in Prince Albert. The only way they could see, the only way 
they thought they could pull that off, Mr. Speaker, was on the 
eleventh hour. At the eleventh hour of course they had to get 
something going, you know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
After all they don’t seem to be able to do anything in the light 
of day. In fact they want to all go home. They all want to go 
home, Mr. Speaker, rather than this. This should be a significant 
Bill, this should be a significant Bill to promote the forestry 
sector in the province of Saskatchewan and this government 
wants to go home. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if they think this Bill is so significant then 
they should be prepared to stay here for the next few days and 
continue to debate from their perspective the merits of this Bill. 
We certainly, we’ve certainly gone through the minister’s 
remarks. There’s nothing in his remarks to enthuse us on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is going to benefit 
the forestry sector in this province. 
 
It is that kind of lack of initiative to promote the forestry sector 
in this province, Mr. Speaker, that concerns the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that concerns the forestry sector, 
that concerns those people who work on a daily basis, Mr. 
Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s, that’s why 
we need to have some significant debate on this Bill, Bill No. 
43, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why the Saskatchewan Party is going to continue to 
work with the forestry sector to get their input on this Bill. And 
that’s why the Saskatchewan Party will ensure that the people 
of Saskatchewan are going to be able to get an opportunity on a 
daily basis, on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, to see how this NDP 
government operates, or more appropriately, doesn’t operate. 
 
Which is why, Mr. Speaker, this government wants to go home, 
because they don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to see how 
they operate. They want to go home, operate by orders in 
council so that the people of Saskatchewan do not see what this 
government is doing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, investment in the forest industry is a 
significant, significant sector in the province of Saskatchewan. 
It brings jobs; it brings wealth into the Saskatchewan 
government coffers, Mr. Speaker — that’s what the forestry 
sector does. 
 
So what’s in this Bill to encourage private sector investment in 
the province of Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Speaker, what we 
appear to be seeing in this Bill, what we’re seeing in this Bill is 
an opportunity to actually drive private industry investment out 
of the province of Saskatchewan. That’s what we’re seeing in 
this Bill. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Why wouldn’t, why wouldn’t this NDP government — or even 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

more appropriately, Mr. Speaker, the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote who actually has a pulp mill in his 
constituency and a paper mill in his constituency — be out 
supporting, supporting, Mr. Speaker, the forest industry rather 
than supporting a Bill that attacks the forestry sector? 
 
Now why wouldn’t the member from Prince Albert Northcote 
be doing that, Mr. Speaker? That’s what would seem to be 
appropriate. When you have a pulp mill and a paper mill in your 
constituency, you’d think that you’d be working hard — I 
would be, Mr. Speaker, I would be working hard for that sector 
— on their behalf because it brings high-paying, quality jobs, 
long-term jobs, careers, careers to constituents in your 
constituency. 
 
But no, what happens, Mr. Speaker? The minister is 
approached, the member from Prince Albert Northcote is 
approached with concerns about the forestry sector. And what 
does he do, Mr. Speaker? He runs, he runs to the bureaucracy 
and saying what should I do about this? 
 
Well who’s running this province, Mr. Speaker? On this side of 
the House we believe that the government should be running 
the House, not party hacks and flacks. Is that where this came 
from, Mr. Speaker? Is that where this Bill came from? Does this 
Bill come from a group of people who are more concerned 
about controlling the forestry sector rather than creating 
opportunity in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re seeing in this Bill. We’re 
seeing a government that is so afraid to turn a little bit of 
control over to the private sector — to create jobs, to create 
wealth, to create opportunity — that they come with a 
wishy-washy Bill that talks about the trade injury duty but does 
not clearly define how it can be overcome. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, the forestry sector doesn’t want to 
talk about trade injury duty. They want hard-core solutions. 
There are no hard-core solutions in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why the Saskatchewan Party wants to continue to 
work with the private sector, the private forestry sector, to come 
up with solid solutions. To not only save the forestry sector but 
to create such an advantage in Saskatchewan — a natural 
advantage, one of our clear natural advantages that we have 
over a multitude of other jurisdictions — that consumers will 
want to buy our products, that investors will want to come here, 
Mr. Speaker, and invest in Saskatchewan, create quality, 
high-paying careers in Saskatchewan, so that the forestry sector 
will be a significant part of helping to grow Saskatchewan by 
100,000 people in 10 years. 
 
That’s what this Bill should be trying to address, Mr. Speaker, 
rather than having a government-appointed bureaucracy at the 
upper levels who are more concerned about protecting their jobs 
on a day-to-day basis rather than looking after the forestry 
sector. That’s what’s not addressed in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that a Saskatchewan Party is going 
to be willing to work with the forestry sector. The 
Saskatchewan Party and a Saskatchewan Party government will 
make the decisions. We’re not going to have party hacks and 
flacks that are appointed to make decisions for us. We’re 

perfectly capable of making decisions. You know very well, 
Mr. Speaker, you take members like the member from 
Rosthern, perfectly capable of being able to work with the 
private sector to make sound business decisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in order that we can grow Saskatchewan, one of the areas 
will be the forestry sector. One of the most significant areas will 
be the forestry sector, Mr. Speaker; that’s what we need to 
happen. Even the member from Kindersley — although, Mr. 
Speaker, we know that there’s not a lot of trees in the 
Kindersley constituency — at least he understands the business 
concepts to promote the forest industry, that this could be a big 
saviour, that this sector could be a big saviour for the province 
of Saskatchewan. That’s what we need to see in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what we want to do is I would like to 
go through the forestry sector on a more localized basis to see 
how it kind of helps . . . how this helps . . . how this Bill is 
going to help or hinder, Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote, the Government House Leader, on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
I’ve been listening very closely to the member opposite, the 
second reading of this Act which is an Act that is intended to 
assist this province and the industry, the forestry industry, in 
assessing the American markets, The Forest Resources 
Management Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the debate coming from that member is 
clearly nothing to do with this piece of legislation. It’s dealing 
with trade, it’s dealing with access to trade, and rules by which 
the allocation in the forestry industry operates here in this 
province. 
 
And I would ask you to rule and to ask that member to stay at 
least close to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, with leave to respond. I’ve 
been listening with substantial interest and attention to the 
speaker and the issues that need to be addressed that are in that 
particular Bill. And that’s what we’re discussing, where this 
deals with the Bill. It deals with trade, it deals with access, it 
deals with softwood, it deals with companies and what they can 
do with their particular allotment of lumber, when they can pass 
it on and when they can’t — all very critical, Mr. Speaker, to 
growing this province, all very critical to having a change in 
how the softwood and how the industries are being dealt with. 
 
And so I find that absolutely everything he said relates to this 
particular Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank members for their intervention. On 
second readings we ordinarily allow a great deal of latitude. I 
want to ask the member however to tighten up his script a bit, 
and I also ask the member to refrain from denigrating anybody 
in the civil service in the course of debating policy in the 
House. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So I think 
it’s important, I think it’s important from my perspective, and 
forestry is a big part of the constituency of Saskatchewan 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

 

Rivers. This Bill, Bill No. 43, is going to have significant, going 
to have significant impact on it. 
 
And certainly if the member from Prince Albert Northcote 
wants to participate in the debate, the Saskatchewan Party 
opposition will be most pleased to allow that opportunity in due 
course. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers, 
the trade injury duty is having a great deal of negative effect 
upon the smaller forest sector participants, and because of that 
trade injury tariff is that what we’re seeing is that small logging 
operations, forestry operations — whether they were primary 
producers right in the forest harvesting the trees or whether they 
started into value-added, doing some sawing, Mr. Speaker, and 
whether there was also planing involved — when you get into 
the significant trade injury duty that was put on the forestry 
sector in this province, Mr. Speaker, I think, I think it’s 
important that the people of Saskatchewan and the NDP 
government understand the negativity that has been brought 
upon my constituency specifically. And so I think it’s important 
that we just take a few minutes to go through that. 
 
Now on the east side of my constituency, Mr. Speaker, we have 
out in an area — Love, Garrick, Choiceland, White Fox — we 
have some small forestry operators out there that over the years 
have done, have done some good work in providing a little bit 
of employment for their neighbours. You know they need some 
of the young people to operate the skidders, they need some of 
the young people to work in the timber yards where they’re 
sawing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you end up with such a significant 
tariff such as this trade injury duty has impacted on the province 
of Saskatchewan, they suddenly, they suddenly, Mr. Speaker, 
reach a level where this duty has put them at risk of being able 
to operate, and that’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because these 
small operators provide jobs on a more localized basis. They 
bring wealth back into small communities. 
 
Maybe it’s not the huge wealth of a Mistik Management, 
NorSask lumber, or Carrier Lumber, or Weyerhaeuser, but they 
still bring, they still bring . . . have a significant impact upon 
their small communities. There’s jobs created. Young people 
working in Saskatchewan. 
 
When those opportunities are lost, when they get a little bit of 
timberland for their forestry operations and then suddenly, you 
know they’re trying to sell into a market that is so negatively 
impacted, and it’s felt right across North America, Mr. Speaker 
— this trade injury duty is felt right across North America; it’s 
not only selling into the United States, it’s felt here — is that 
what happens then is that these small operations need to tighten 
their belts and they tighten their belt right to the point, Mr. 
Speaker, where they need to start laying people off. 
 
And suddenly the spending power in those small communities 
is immediately impacted. If you have a small operator who is 
suddenly, you know . . . who had hired maybe six, eight, or ten 
people and he’s got to go down to two or three, that’s going to 
have a significant impact on a small community. 
 
Because after all we’re not talking about communities the size 

of Swift Current or Melville, we’re talking about communities 
the size of . . . you know that of 150 or even 75, like you take 
the community of Love. And all of a sudden you know, Mr. 
Speaker, this has a significant impact on the local repair shop, it 
has a significant impact on some of the other smaller local 
businesses, Mr. Speaker, because those people aren’t there 
spending money in their community. 
 
These young people, for all their vim and vigour, you know 
they . . . Friday night comes, they want a box of beer, well 
suddenly they don’t have the money for a box of beer. So what 
do they do, Mr. Speaker? Well there’s nothing for them at 
home; they go to Alberta. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, we’re not supposed to talk about our 
young people going to Alberta and how right things are there. 
But the Saskatchewan Party would like to see these young 
people staying here, working in the forestry sector in 
Saskatchewan and not Alberta. 
 
That’s why Bill No. 43 needs to have a hard look at it, a hard 
look at by the forestry sector, by the forestry sector, Mr. 
Speaker, so that the people of Saskatchewan understand that 
this Bill is really not going to have the impact that it needs to 
have for the forestry sector, that is needed to protect jobs in our 
communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, closer to my home community at 
Paddockwood-Christopher Lake area, there’s a couple of 
smaller operators in there who actually have found some niche 
markets with hardwood. They’re moving along with that. 
They’ve also found some . . . They had found, up until this trade 
injury duty, some niche markets in the softwood lumber area. 
 
One of the foresters was able to get an allotment for softwood 
sawlogs, Mr. Speaker, so that he could . . . He was building . . . 
or cutting material, Mr. Speaker, for the pallet industry in the 
United States and was doing quite well at it. So you can 
imagine his alarm, Mr. Speaker, when all of a sudden this trade 
injury duty was applied to the province of Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan lost its exemption from the softwood tariff that 
had been generally applied prior to that and was suddenly . . . 
and suddenly you know he was out of business, Mr. Speaker. 
He couldn’t compete any more because he was having to pay 
the softwood tariff, the trade injury duty, Mr. Speaker, to his 
American competitors. And it provided to the American 
competitors an unfair advantage. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, jobs were lost because of that in my 
constituency. Maybe they weren’t big-paying jobs but they 
were reasonable; the young people were quite happy with them. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it provided an opportunity for these 
young people to earn a quiet living in my home area. They 
spent their money. Many of us understand quite clearly that 
young people are quite liberal in their spending habits. That 
money stayed in the local communities — it was spent in the 
local grocery stores; it was spent in the local hotels. They 
needed more clothes so they were buying, they were buying, 
Mr. Speaker. They needed a better vehicle. That money was 
staying in our home communities. Those jobs are lost. We lost 
those young people to Alberta, Mr. Speaker; they went and 
found other opportunities. That’s sad. 
 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

This Bill does not address that, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
concerns the Saskatchewan Party. That’s what concerns the 
people of Saskatchewan. That’s what concerns the forestry 
sector. That this Bill is so wishy-washy, it’s just not strong 
enough to protect our forestry sector from those external forces. 
 
We need to understand, Mr. Speaker, that this is a global 
market. We’re not isolated. As much as the NDP, Mr. Speaker, 
would like to build a wall around this province and to keep 
people out, the fact of the matter is what we need, Mr. Speaker, 
is we need to be tearing down those walls. We need to join that 
global market. We need to show the people of North America 
and the world that we have a Saskatchewan . . . we have a 
Saskatchewan advantage. You know what, Mr. Speaker? That’s 
what we see. That’s what we need. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And certainly from the, certainly from the remarks we’re 
hearing from the government side of the House, on this side of 
the House we clearly understand that they have no idea what’s 
in this Bill. They have no idea. They have no idea what that . . . 
That’s why the Saskatchewan Party, unlike the NDP 
government, is carrying out due diligence. 
 
So what’s the government’s response? We got backbenchers on 
the other side with disparaging remarks. That’s what we’re 
getting from this NDP government. Mr. Speaker, if that’s the 
best they can come up with is disparaging remarks, imagine 
what the people of Saskatchewan are thinking — imagine what 
the people of Saskatchewan are thinking. This is a government 
that got into power by accident, that has tried to set an agenda 
to move this province even further left. And instead, when 
people question them on their motives, we come up with 
disparaging remarks. 
 
What they should be coming up with, Mr. Speaker, is a clear 
and definitive plan, not asking the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker — not asking the Saskatchewan Party — to solve their 
problems in the forestry sector. They should be coming up with 
the solutions themselves. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on the west side of the constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers, forestry is big business — big business, 
Mr. Speaker — hundreds of jobs, very well-paying jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. And so what’s happening there, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What has this trade injury duty done to that community? It has 
created such an aura of uncertainty that there is . . . that the 
people in this area are unsure whether they should try to stay 
with the forestry sector in Saskatchewan. Should we stay with it 
just in case it improves? Should we stay with it in case there’s a 
quick election, Mr. Speaker, and this NDP government is gone, 
or should we start looking, should we start looking for careers 
elsewhere? 
 
It is these kind of people that are going to take a look, are going 
to take a look at this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and say, what’s in this 
for our community? What’s in this for my family? Is this, Mr. 
Speaker, is this the type of Bill that is going to put confidence 
in the industry in my community that we’re going to be able to 
stay in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Is that what’s in here, Mr. 
Speaker? These people aren’t going to see that. They’re not 

going to see that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is there going to be the confidence that we’re going to establish 
a definitive benchmark for the pricing for stumpage fees outside 
the government, Mr. Speaker? That’s what these people are 
looking for on the west side of my constituency. They’re calling 
me and saying, we got this Bill coming . . . you got this Bill 
coming, you’re going to have to debate it. What’s in it for me? 
 
Well we’ve been going through this, we’ve been going through 
this, Mr. Speaker. We’ve read this Bill. We’ve sent it out to the 
forestry sector. We can’t find . . . Good news is not coming 
back on this, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I can’t . . . I’m going to, in all 
honesty, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have to tell these people that 
this government is not bold enough, is not bold enough, Mr. 
Speaker, to be able to set a definitive direction in forestry that 
will ensure long-term careers, long-term investment in the 
forestry sector in Saskatchewan. That’s unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, what I’m going to have to tell them. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not looking forward to that day, and that day is on 
me right now and I’m going to have to do that. 
 
I’m not the only member that’s going to have to do that. Right 
across the Parkland area and into the North, we’re going to have 
to do that. The future member from Meadow Lake is going to 
have to do that — Ron Dosdall. The future member from 
Athabasca, Greg Ross, is going to have to do that. The member 
from Rosthern-Shellbrook is going to have to do that. I’m going 
to have to do that. Allan Kerpan, the next member from Carrot 
River Valley, is going to have to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re all going to have to say to our constituents that this Bill 
is so weak and this government was so unwilling, so unwilling 
to be able to work with the forestry sector, to work with the 
forestry sector to create strength, to create strength in the 
forestry sector, Mr. Speaker, so that the people of Saskatchewan 
would be able to go into the global markets, Mr. Speaker, with 
so much of an advantage, with a natural Saskatchewan 
advantage that we would be able to usurp, we’d be able to 
usurp, Mr. Speaker, we’d be able to usurp what other 
jurisdictions are not doing in their part of the world. 
 
We need to start looking after Saskatchewan first and not 
worrying about what other jurisdictions are doing. Examples 
have been set. They’re going to get a leg up on us, Mr. Speaker, 
and we can’t allow that to happen in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the member from Prince Albert Northcote 
thinks that this is such a good Bill. If this was such a good Bill, 
why wasn’t it introduced — oh — in say, April? It could have 
been introduced in April . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now 
the member from Regina South is talking about, we couldn’t get 
a deal reached. Well imagine that, an NDP government unable 
to reach a deal. 
 
We heard the Minister of Agriculture get up on a daily basis; he 
can’t reach a deal on anything. We get the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote getting up and having to apologize to the 
House. This is the . . . for the deals that he’s made. The people 
of Saskatchewan are extremely leery about this government 
trying to make deals. 
 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

 

We had to wait to the last minute . . . They had to wait to the 
last minute to make a deal. They just couldn’t get a deal made. 
We don’t who they made the deal with. We certainly know that 
the forestry sector is not excited about this Bill so obviously 
they couldn’t have arranged a deal with them. So who’d they 
reach a deal with? They reached a deal with the federal 
government. They want the federal government to save our 
forestry sector. 
 
The federal government can’t even save themselves, Mr. 
Speaker. They can’t save Western Canada from problems with 
the livestock industry. So how much, Mr. Speaker, are we 
supposed to . . . How are we supposed to trust this government 
to be able to turn to the federal government to save the 
softwood trade dispute? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is not prepared to 
wait for the federal government and Bill No. 43 . . . and this 
weak and ineffective Bill No. 43 to save the forestry sector. 
 
What we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is that this Bill should have 
been strong enough, this Bill should have been strong enough 
right from the get-go that we would bypass, we would bypass 
the federal government. And we would have, that we would be 
at the negotiating table — not the federal government on our 
behalf — not having us, not having this government sending 
representation to the softwood debate meetings, and not even 
being informed where the meetings are being held and being 
left outside in the rain. We would actually be at the table 
because we’d be the ones negotiating. 
 
So that’s what, that’s what should have been in this Bill. But 
what now . . . But, you see, this government, and the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote he said, well it’s somebody else’s 
responsibility to look to after . . . it’s somebody else’s 
responsibility to look after our softwood lumber. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s sooner going to find out in the next 
provincial election that it was his responsibility to look after the 
softwood lumber injury in this province. And he should have 
been the one looking after the softwood lumber sector in his 
constituency and he dropped the ball again. That’s what he’s 
going to find out in the next provincial election. 
 
That’s why, that’s why those members over there should have 
been sitting down with the minister from Environment and 
Resource Management and saying, you better structure a Bill 
that’s strong enough to protect our forest industry and not be 
wishy-washy, and not be dancing around the issue, and not 
saying we’re going to hold meetings, and not saying we’re 
going to talk about this some more and we’ll bring some stuff 
up to the table, and who’s going to bring the doughnuts and 
who’s going to bring the coffee. 
 
This Bill should have been definitive. We’ll have X amount of 
allotment that’s going up for bid on a yearly basis or a biannual 
basis or a triannual basis. That’s what this Bill should have been 
saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is nothing in here to say that there’s going to be anything 
to solve the softwood trade injury duty for the province of 
Saskatchewan. All they’re saying is, is that we’ll put this in 
place and maybe, and maybe the federal government will be 

able to use this as a, see Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan is 
thinking about this, they’re thinking about it. 
 
We don’t sell softwood lumber to Ottawa. Our consumer, our 
primary consumer is the United States of America. You know 
that’s what we need, Mr. Speaker. We need to prepare a Bill in 
this province that will deal with our consumer and not worry 
about, not worry about what the federal government may or 
may not do for us. Because we certainly know to date, Mr. 
Speaker, we certainly know to date that the federal 
government’s ability to look after the people of Saskatchewan 
when it comes to the softwood trade injury duty, that the federal 
government has not done one thing to solve that problem. 
 
So having a Bill that’s saying we’re concerned about it is not 
good enough. Why, why cannot we join what other jurisdictions 
are thinking about, why can’t we be the first to the plate saying 
we want into that American market, we want into that American 
market with enthusiasm, Mr. Speaker, so that we can have a 
competitive advantage, a competitive advantage for the people 
of Saskatchewan, for the people who work in the forest 
industry, for the people who invest in the forest industry? That’s 
what this Bill should have been about. 
 
But as usual the minister from Environment and Resource 
Management was unable to do that, was unable to convince his 
department, was unable to convince his department that forestry 
is important in Saskatchewan. Can you imagine that, Mr. 
Speaker? A department that looks after forestry that doesn’t 
think forestry’s that important. You want to hold meetings so 
you find ways to restrict the forest industry. They don’t want to 
give us a leg’s up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that the members on the 
government side of the House understand clearly the 
devastation that has already been wreaked on the forest industry 
in Saskatchewan; that further damage will happen to the 
forestry sector unless we get aggressive and start to think about 
saving it, we start to think about growing it. Bill No. 43, Mr. 
Speaker, doesn’t indicate any of that. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the forestry sector is starting to tell us that 
this Bill is an attack on the forestry sector, that this Bill will 
further hinder the ability to do business in Saskatchewan. We 
can’t afford — we can’t afford, Mr. Deputy Speaker — to 
hinder the forestry sector in this province. 
 
We’re already hindering mining development. We’re already 
only doing nothing more than discussing what could be 
happening in the diamond mining sector. The government’s 
only willing to talk about it. We need to be aggressive. 
 
The chance was here, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
chance was here. Bill No. 43 could have set a vision. We could 
have set a vision, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would have given 
Saskatchewan’s forestry sector such an effective advantage 
when it comes to doing business in a global market. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, people would have been pouring into Saskatchewan to 
do business here. We’d of had to fix our highways because 
they’d have been coming in here so fast; that’s what we’d been 
having to do. There’d be so much money pouring into 
government coffers from forestry revenues, from personal 
income tax, from corporate taxes, that this is . . . a 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

Saskatchewan Party government would have to pay down debt. 
That’s probably what we’d have to do. 
 
That’s what this Bill should have been talking about, Mr. 
Speaker, growing the forestry sector so that it becomes such a 
significant impact in this province, Mr. Speaker, that the 
forestry sector will be second to no one in a global market, Mr. 
Speaker. We would be second to no one. 
 
When you start doing business, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a global 
market, Mr. Speaker, then what, what happens is, is that you’ve 
got to, you’ve got to be able to go out and be aggressive in that 
global market. Saying that no, no, in Saskatchewan we like to 
do things differently, we like to control the forest industry and 
we like to hinder economic development — that’s not good 
enough. That doesn’t create jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bills 
like this don’t help to create jobs. 
 
There is concern, there’s real concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the forestry sector that this is going to stop jobs. It’s going to 
slow . . . not only slow down job creation, it’s going to actually 
eliminate jobs in the forestry sector. It’s going, it’s going to put, 
it’s going to put that part of the forestry sector at such 
significant risk we may never see it again. We may never see it 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We can’t afford to lose that section of the forestry sector to 
another jurisdiction who suddenly decides, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to be more aggressive than we are willing to be; that 
we are willing to put faith in our forestry sector, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
(16:15) 
 
If this government is unwilling to get out of the way, then 
maybe what we should do, Mr. Speaker, is have an election. 
That’s what we . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Maybe that’s what we need to do. We don’t 
have to worry about the government getting out of the way 
then, this NDP government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The people of 
Saskatchewan will take care of that for us. 
 
Because a Saskatchewan Party government is certainly, is 
certainly going to be very hesitant about putting roadblocks. We 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the business sector has much 
more empowerment, much more empowerment, to be able to 
create wealth and jobs in the forestry sector than the 
government ever could. 
 
In fact, in fact what is being demanded and not seen in this Bill, 
is that if we put the rigid regulations in place, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, so that the forestry sector knows how to play the game 
in this province, that they will come. They will come here. They 
want to know what it’s going to take to do business here. They 
don’t want to have to guess at it on a yearly basis. They want 
clear, definitive legislation that says, this is how you’re going to 
do forestry business in this province. That’s what they want, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They want to know that the people of Saskatchewan are 

concerned about the forestry environment. They want to know 
that in clear, definitive legislation, if you go into a provincial 
forest, Mr. Speaker, that they’re going to know exactly what the 
rules are to protect that environment for the long term, for the 
long-term safety of that . . . And, Mr. Speaker, if they had that, 
a clear vision, Mr. Speaker, they would be here. 
 
Instead, instead what they’ve got is they’ve got such a 
regulatory, regulatory regime in this province that is undefined 
on a daily basis. It’s such a nightmare, Mr. Speaker, that what 
happens, Mr. Speaker, is that they have to define forestry 
business and the forestry sector has to define their own, define 
their own regulatory processes. 
 
Let me explain that: why this Bill is not going to help the 
forestry sector, Mr. Speaker. I had a gentleman phone me, has 
done business with the Lac La Ronge First Nation for a 
multitude of years. He refused to tell me how long it was 
because then it would start to indicate how old he is and . . . 
Although I do know how old he is. 
 
But and so then, Mr. Speaker, what happened was he had been 
doing business with the Lac La Ronge Indian Band for a forest 
product. He had an agreement with Weyerhaeuser. He had a 
good working relationship with the people in La Ronge to be 
able to move product from . . . that was left behind by 
Weyerhaeuser that they couldn’t use, product that they couldn’t 
use, and he hauled that product to Lac La Ronge and it was 
used by the Lac La Ronge First Nation. 
 
Imagine to his surprise that even though Weyerhaeuser had 
already spent significant amount of their own resources for . . . 
and environmental processes, Mr. Speaker, to deal with this 
allotment that, imagine his surprise when he found out that he 
was going to have to go through the same process a second 
time. 
 
They wanted to know, like, how large his camp was going to 
be, when he didn’t have one. They wanted to know how he was 
going to dispose of the used oil when he changed oil in his 
skidders, when he doesn’t have any. They wanted to know what 
he was going to do with the waste product from having people 
staying in the bush for any significant amount of time. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, imagine the surprise when there wasn’t any. 
 
After all, this gentleman had a small operation. It’s called a 
picker truck, Mr. Speaker. One man goes up into the forest and 
loads it up with his own . . . with the picker right on the truck, 
ties up the load, and drives away with it. Nice, neat, and clean. 
Nothing left behind; environmentally friendly; making . . . 
maximizing use of the product in the forest. So imagine his 
surprise when they asked for an environmental review of what 
he was doing, when he wasn’t doing anything that needed to be 
reviewed. 
 
So we had to work with this gentleman and the department to 
help the department to understand that this gentleman was 
running an upfront operation that had been in business for years 
in Saskatchewan’s forests, that had no impact environmentally 
on Saskatchewan’s forest. And when they were able to accept 
that, he was able to go back to work. But in the meantime, in 
the meantime he lost a lot of time; he lost a lot of time. 
 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, how is this Bill going to help this gentleman 
have the certainty, to have the certainty that he is going to be 
able, be able to go into the Saskatchewan forest on a daily basis 
with the long-term safety that is required, required for him to 
want to do business, to want to do business in Saskatchewan. 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, in no way addresses that concern. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is this . . . I think this, what it does for us, 
what it does for us is clearly define that the Saskatchewan Party 
is willing to provide leadership, willing to provide leadership in 
the forestry sector and the NDP government is waiting for the 
Saskatchewan Party to give them some sort of a hint as to 
where we need to go with the forestry sector. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not quite as enthused about that as we 
used to be. After all, it was our idea to go to a 110-kilometre 
speed limit and they finally borrowed that. 
 
And so then, Mr. Speaker, I think, I think the NDP government 
because of its tiredness, its lack of ability to want to look for a 
new vision is starting . . . they’re really not prepared . . . is 
really not prepared to bring forward legislation that will show a 
definitive direction for forestry in this province. In fact, in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think this NDP government can see the 
forest because of the trees. And it’s because of that, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’re so blinded by what is in front of them, that 
they’re not being able to see beyond it. 
 
And the reality is, is that as much as Saskatchewan is a bright 
light, as much as Saskatchewan is such a bright light, just a pair 
of sunglasses will dim that light, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we can see into the future. We can see that the forestry 
sector will have such a tremendous impact in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And if this Bill, Bill No. 43, if this government, this minister 
would have had the intestinal fortitude to be able to bring such a 
definitive Bill, the Saskatchewan Party, well, we’d have had to 
vote for it. I would have been willing to support that. 
 
If they would have said, Mr. Speaker, if this government would 
have said we’re going to set aside an allotment that is going to 
go up for bid every year so that we can establish a base price for 
standing timber so that we can alleviate the fears of our largest 
consumer, the United States of America, that we are not 
establishing an unfair trade advantage, the Saskatchewan Party 
would have accepted that. We’d have been vocal in supporting 
it. 
 
We would have been vocal . . . supporting that because, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s part of our policy to support the forest industry. 
We want to support the forest industry. We don’t want to put 
roadblocks in front of them. We don’t want to say to them well, 
you know, today we’re a little concerned that you’re cutting 
those trees over there and we need to hug them for another few 
more days. 
 
The reality is those trees are going to come back. Those trees 
are going to come back, Mr. Speaker. It is a renewable resource. 
If managed appropriately, if managed appropriately, we’re 
going to have in this province a forest that will be second to 
none anywhere, Mr. Speaker. But it needs management. 

We need to know that when harvesting is taking place, that in 
due course that forest is replaced with healthy seedlings; 
healthy seedlings, Mr. Speaker, that are going to replace the 
canopy that was recently lost. A canopy, Mr. Speaker, that is 
going to do a little bit of carbon sequestration, if I may be so 
bold. Imagine that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What’s in this Bill to help alleviate those fears? There isn’t 
anything here. In fact the forest industry is concerned that 
because of the attack on it, because of the continued attacks on 
it, is that . . . They’re concerned that they’re not going to be 
able to do business in this province. How are we going to have 
people, corporations here, and businesses, small businesses 
wanting to work in the forestry sector investing, investing, 
investing in Saskatchewan so that we can provide a high-quality 
product, a high-quality product, Mr. Speaker, for the United 
States market that this government is not that concerned about 
losing? They don’t seem to be that concerned about losing it. If 
they were concerned about losing it, we wouldn’t be seeing this 
Bill. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, if the forestry sector was so excited about 
this Bill, we would have received completely, completely 
different comments back from them. 
 
Now if the government has some comments that they’d like to 
share with the Saskatchewan Party opposition on the support for 
this Bill from the forestry sector, from the forestry sector — 
those that actually go out and cut the trees and turn them into 
lumber or into paper or into plywood — we’ll certainly, we’re 
certainly willing to take a look at them. In fact maybe the 
members opposite would like to table those letters, Mr. 
Speaker, so that we can all have a chance to take a look at how 
much support, how much support there is in the forestry sector 
for this Bill. 
 
I think the members opposite have a golden opportunity here to 
be able to provide to the Saskatchewan Party, provide to the 
Saskatchewan Party clear support for this Bill. It’s an 
opportunity for them to do that, Mr. Speaker, after all. But you 
know, but maybe we’re going to end up in the same place we 
have been in the past, Mr. Speaker. After all the Deputy 
Premier said he had letters of support and then when he went to 
table them, well then he kind of didn’t. Just kind of . . . well 
because they weren’t really letters of support. They were just 
letters, you know, from his mother saying that she loved him. 
We need more than that. We need more than just saying that 
yes, we’re a forestry sector and things need to change. That’s 
not support. That’s not support from the forestry sector. 
 
Support from the forestry sector is saying this is a Bill that’s 
doing a good job for the forestry sector; that we’re going to be 
able to become more competitive in the North American and 
world markets. That’s what . . . the kind of letters we want to 
see. But maybe the minister, maybe the minister and his 
colleagues have letters definitively saying that. 
 
Actually I don’t see any arms waving over there, holding up 
letters, saying we’re . . . we’ll show them that . . . those letters. I 
don’t see any hands up over there. So we’re kind of suspicious 
that even though they say we’ve got letters of support, that the 
fact of the matter is that maybe there isn’t. Maybe there wasn’t 
any letters. 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

And so then what this government should have done — worked 
hard, diligently with the forestry sector, worked hard and 
diligent with the forestry sector so that the forestry sector could 
have had clear and definitive input into where this Bill needed 
to go. 
 
Have we heard any of that? Well the minister got up and said, 
well we talked, we consulted with the forestry sector. Well 
imagine the surprise of the forestry sector that they didn’t even 
know the Bill was coming. We have heard comments from the 
forestry sector they didn’t even know the Bill was coming, Mr. 
Speaker. Now what kind of consultation is that? That’s not 
consultation. 
 
So if you talk with someone and you pass the time of day 
talking about the weather, that’s not consultation, Mr. Speaker. 
Real consultation is pulling all the players together, all the 
players together in the forestry sector — the primary producers, 
the manufacturers — it is bringing those people together with 
the consultants in the forestry field, pulling them all together 
and having a brainstorming session with them. And having a 
brainstorming session with them to talk about what’s needed for 
the forestry sector. 
 
Instead, instead, we see a Bill that the forestry sector is saying 
well, maybe they actually . . . We’ve had members of the 
forestry sector thanking us for providing them with a copy of 
the Bill because they didn’t know the government was even 
going to introduce it. The government didn’t . . . They didn’t 
know. The government had not given a clear . . . Didn’t know 
that the government was going to introduce it. We didn’t know 
they were going to do that, the forestry sector said to us. 
 
In fact you can imagine their surprise when we started handing 
. . . contacting them and saying the government has introduced 
this Bill, and we’d like your input on it. We see a couple of 
holes in it; we see that it could be going in the right direction. 
And so then imagine our surprise when we send them a copy of 
the Bill and they start saying, the government never even told 
us they were going to introduce the Bill. We heard that from the 
forestry sector. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And so then . . . so now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote is talking about support from the forestry 
centre. Well now the forestry centre, the forestry centre is a 
building. So the building is supporting a Bill. Well now isn’t 
that just great, Mr. Speaker — we have a building supporting a 
Bill. 
 
The fact of the matter is, the real players, the real players, Mr. 
Speaker, in the forestry sector, aren’t a building. They’re 
financial investors; they’re loggers; they build forestry 
equipment. That’s who the players are, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
who the players are. 
 
You know something, Mr. Speaker? If this government would 
have taken the time to talk to the forestry investors, those 
people that work in the forestry sector, we would have had clear 
and definitive — clear and definitive — direction for the 
province of Saskatchewan when it comes to the trade injury 
duty that’s been applied, that’s been applied against the 

province of Saskatchewan and the entire country of Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it appears as though that the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote wants to table a letter. Maybe the 
member would like to table that letter and show us, and show us 
clearly, who in the forestry sector is supporting this Bill. Who’s 
supporting this Bill? 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want to know, if you have such 
strong support for this Bill, Bill No. 43, that this is going to 
solve all the problems of the forestry sector, then maybe the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote should hand that letter in 
so that the people of Saskatchewan know that it exists, so that 
the opposition Saskatchewan Party can have a look at it. 
 
But the reality is, the reality is, he just wants to wave a piece of 
paper at us. Anybody can wave a piece . . . The people of 
Saskatchewan are demanding more than just waving a piece of 
paper. It could have been written by anybody. 
 
Now if the member wants to clearly have the people of 
Saskatchewan know who supports this Bill, then what he should 
do, he should table that, he should table that information. You 
know, not just receive it, just not receive it from the member 
from Athabasca and say, we’ve got support, we’ve got support 
— won’t say who it’s from, won’t say who it’s from. So why 
don’t you, why don’t you table? Why don’t . . . why doesn’t he 
table it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What we have heard, what we have heard very clearly, very 
clearly, from some parts of the forestry sector already, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there is not overwhelming support for this Bill. 
In fact what we’re hearing, we’d be surprised if there was any 
support in the forestry sector, in the forestry sector. In fact what 
they think, what they think, Mr. Speaker, is that this is an attack 
on the forestry sector — that this could, this could be the 
beginning of putting a nail in the coffin for the forestry sector in 
Saskatchewan. They’re outraged. Some of the players are 
outraged over this. They say, why are we staying here? We can 
do business anywhere. 
 
The fact of the matter is, forestry companies don’t need to just 
do business in Saskatchewan. It’s a global market, Mr. Speaker. 
This isn’t about Saskatchewan or Canada or North America. 
This is about doing business in the world. It’s a global market, 
Mr. Speaker. And we need to provide the forestry sector in 
Saskatchewan a significant advantage so that what this forestry 
sector will do is be able to bring investment into Saskatchewan 
at such a rate that it would astound even the NDP. 
 
Of course it doesn’t take that much, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, to 
astound the NDP government. It certainly wouldn’t be 
astounding to the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, how much 
investment’s going to flow into Saskatchewan. There will be 
companies setting up here. They will be cranking out softwood 
lumber. They will be tapping into American markets that we 
don’t even know about yet. 
 
They will be usurping, they will be usurping our competitors to 
the west of us. They will be usurping our competitors to the east 
of us right out to the Atlantic coast. Because after all, Mr. 
Speaker, once you cut that tree you can ship it anywhere when 
it reaches the finished product. And we can be competitive. We 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

 

can be competitive anywhere. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this Bill should have been talking 
about — creating such a competitive advantage for the forestry, 
for the forestry and community in Saskatchewan that we would 
be renowned. We would be renowned. Saskatchewan would be 
renowned in the global forestry community for its ability to 
create forestry sector business. That’s what, the kind of Bill we 
should have been talking about, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we 
want to see in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the 
Saskatchewan Party is going to do. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, when the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar is going to be the premier, what kind of Bills 
that we’re going to have to promote the forestry sector, Mr. 
Speaker? That’s what we’re going to be seeing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if this government is unwilling, unwilling to 
be, to be the leaders, the industry leaders in forestry, then 
maybe what they should do is just step aside. Call an election. 
Let’s get it over with. And then the people of Saskatchewan, 
and certainly up in my area of the world, up in my area of the 
world they’re going to be able to have a chance to be able to 
send back to Regina the appropriate representation they’ve been 
used to for the last almost four years and which, which, Mr. 
Speaker, they know that the forestry sector is going to have a 
voice; is going to have a voice in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if they call that election, Mr. Speaker, Bills such as Bill 
No. 43, they know will never see the light of day. That’s what, 
that’s what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker. Because this Bill, 
this Bill talks about restricting that. This Bill talks about 
restricting, restricting doing business in Saskatchewan. That’s 
what this Bill talks about. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? This Bill does not significantly, 
does not significantly have any impact — does not have any 
impact — on the forestry sector. In fact the impact will be 
negative. 
 
That’s why the forestry sector what we have heard from already 
. . . And there’s going to be more information coming to 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to definitively 
tell us that what we need to do is have a Bill, is going to have a 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, that will help the forestry industry and not, 
and not be another attack, another attack on the forestry sector. 
 
Because we know, we know, Mr. Speaker, that there are people 
who . . . investors in forest, investors that want to come here 
and do business. This side of the House has certainly heard 
about Ainsworth Lumber, has certainly heard about Ainsworth 
Lumber that want to come and do business here. And what 
happened? This government put more roadblocks in front of the 
them than anybody even knew existed. 
 
So what happened? What happened? Another forestry 
company, actually courted, courted by this government, come in 
here, do business. We’ll make sure you have a wood supply. 
What happened to that wood supply? Nobody ever saw it again. 
Nobody ever saw it again, Mr. Speaker. It was all, it was all 
promises. The NDP are big on promises. 
 
Is that what this Bill’s about, Mr. Speaker, just more promises? 

We’ll talk about, we’ll talk about making the changes but we’re 
not going to put them in legislation. We’ll talk about doing it in 
regulation. Regulations could be changed at the drop of a hat, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want good, solid legislation that clearly defines how our 
forestry sector needs to operate. It needs to clearly define, Mr. 
Speaker, that when it comes to allotting wood stands, woodlots 
in this province, in the Crown forest, Mr. Speaker, that we need 
to have an exact number put in there. 
 
What is that number, Mr. Speaker? What is it going to take? 
Does the NDP government know? Is it going to take 5 per cent 
of our logging operations on a yearly basis? Is it going to take 
10 per cent? Is it going to take 15 per cent, 20 per cent, 25 per 
cent? Is that what it’s going to take? 
 
Are we going to have to clearly define in legislation exactly 
how much of our yearly allotment for forestry is going to have 
to be put up for bid? Is it going to have to be done on a yearly 
basis? Does it have to be done on a yearly basis? The minister 
didn’t clearly indicate that in his remarks. Is it going to have to 
be done maybe on a five- or ten-year cycle? Are we going to be 
able to do it that way, Mr. Speaker, for a large section of the 
forest to be set aside for a forestry operator . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly 
amusing on this side of the House that suddenly the NDP want 
to participate in this debate. You know, eleventh hour, eleventh 
hour they bring this Bill, and all of a sudden they want to 
participate in debate also. 
 
They were kind of hoping they could sneak this through, hoping 
that the Saskatchewan Party would be quite as willing to go 
home as they were. Of course we’re kind of enjoying question 
period, Mr. Speaker, a lot more than the NDP government is. 
And I guess so maybe that’s why the NDP government’s a lot 
more anxious to go home right now than we are. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this Bill follows a whole line of things that 
this government just can’t seem to get right. This Bill needed to 
clearly establish for the forestry sector, for those who invest in 
it, for those who work in it, that we are going to become 
competitive with our largest consumer, the United States of 
America. 
 
No, this Bill unfortunately was unable to go quite that far. 
Instead they kind of had to . . . kind of had to get beside it. We 
want to leave it up to regulations; we’ll talk about, we’ll talk 
about that we need to do this, but we’ll leave it up to 
regulations. 
 
Well our consumers, our consumers are wiser than that, Mr. 
Speaker. Our consumers know — our consumers know, Mr. 
Speaker — that regulations by this NDP government can 
change pretty quickly. Actually they already know that. They 
know that when you come here to do business in Saskatchewan 
that there’s going to be regulations put in place, and a week or 
two weeks or two months later they could change. They could 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

change at the whim of this NDP government. 
 
They know that this government is more interested in being a 
business tycoon than allowing business to operate. After all, all 
we have to do is look at some of their shining examples. If they 
would have just allow the forestry sector to operate, if they 
would just allow the forestry sector to operate, Mr. Speaker, 
we’d have such a growing province. 
 
We wouldn’t have to worry that . . . they should . . . If they 
allowed the province to operate rather than get involved in 
SPUDCO and Coachman Insurance and Retx.com. We need to 
stay out of that, Mr. Speaker. We need to stop wasting 
taxpayers’ dollars investing in business. Business wants to 
invest in business. 
 
Business wants to come to Saskatchewan and work in the 
forestry sector, Mr. Speaker. They want to have the assurances 
that when they come here, they’re not going to put such an 
undue burden on them, such an undue burden that they’re not 
going to be able . . . that they’re going to be able to compete in 
a global market. 
 
After all we . . . Is our . . . who are our competitors? Is the 
competitors Weyerhaeuser in Saskatchewan competing against 
NorSask lumber in Saskatchewan? Those aren’t competitors. 
Those aren’t competitors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The competitors are Saskatchewan against the world. We need 
to go out, compete in that market. It’s not about trying to 
protect . . . It’s trying to protect our forest industry is what we 
should be doing. We should be promoting our forestry sector to 
such an extent that they want to come here and invest even 
more. 
 
Can you imagine? Can you imagine NorSask lumber wanting to 
expand their operation? Weyerhaeuser wanting to further 
expand their operation? Other companies wanting to come to 
Saskatchewan? Ainsworth so anxious to come in here they’re 
actually stampeding over us? Carrier wanting to not only have 
one mill here but maybe two or three or four mills? Alberta 
Newsprint wanted to come to Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s what this Bill should be trying to address. That’s what 
they should be trying to address. 
 
Now we know that there’s some problems in the forestry sector 
and certainly this trade injury duty has put a great deal of stress 
on the forestry sector. And I’ll use an example, Mr. Speaker, is 
Zelinsky Lumber in La Ronge. Zelinsky Lumber is having a 
hard time trying to keep the doors open, Mr. Speaker. The 
member from Athabasca knows that. That company, Zelinsky 
Lumber knows — knows — that we need to find a way to 
eliminate that trade injury duty. We need to eliminate that trade 
injury duty. 
 
And what, what, Mr. Speaker, is in this Bill to do that? Why 
would the government be so afraid of setting a vision for 
forestry in this province that they weren’t able to clearly define 
in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, the exact, the exact amount of 
allotment that would be put up for bid on an annual, biannual, 
triannual basis, whatever needs to be done. We would assume 
that the forestry sector and those people involved in 

international trade would have an idea of what we need to do 
here. They must be able to get good advice from that. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Why couldn’t that be clearly defined in here? Are the 
Americans going to buy into the concept that, well, the 
Saskatchewan government was willing to talk about it? Another 
thing, does this government think that that’s all they need to do 
that we’re willing to talk about it, we’ll have a regulation on 
this? 
 
On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we are firmly of the 
belief that it takes more than a regulation to attract people to the 
province of Saskatchewan, to attract investment in the province 
of Saskatchewan, to get rid of that trade injury duty that the 
United States has applied not only in the province of 
Saskatchewan but right across the Canadian main here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But let’s not worry about Canada; they already have provincial 
governments — Manitoba, Alberta, Ontario, British Columbia. 
Forestry is the responsibility of the provincial government, and 
it is the responsibility of the provincial government to overcome 
that trade injury duty, Mr. Speaker. It is not entirely incumbent 
upon the federal government to get rid of it. 
 
They have tried. We have got a ruling from the WTO. It looked 
. . . It’s favourable but without an enforcement, without an 
enforcement, how are we supposed to, Mr. Speaker, be able, be 
able to force our largest consumer to adhere to it? Because they 
know . . . They still believe, Mr. Speaker, that because of the 
way we do business with our forestry, the way we do business 
with our forestry sector, northern Saskatchewan and in Canada, 
they are still going to see it as an unfair advantage. 
 
What they want, what they want is a benchmark set by the 
industry. We’ll set a benchmark by the industry if we allow, if 
we allow the industry to set the benchmark, Mr. Speaker; if we 
had legislation that would allow the industry to set a benchmark 
for the forests in Saskatchewan so that we can maximize those 
benefits, maximize those benefits for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We think, we believe very clearly 
that we’d have an opportunity to get into that American market 
like you would never have believed possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker, we are firmly committed that the 
United States, our largest consumer of our softwood forest 
products, wants to do business in Saskatchewan. We believe 
that. 
 
But we also know that they might want to do business in 
Manitoba or Quebec. They don’t care. It’s a global market, Mr. 
Speaker. They want to be able to work with a jurisdiction that 
operates on a market-driven basis. That’s what they’re looking 
for, Mr. Speaker. And we believe Saskatchewan can get to that 
point. We believe that if business in Saskatchewan, the forestry 
sector was given the advantage, Mr. Speaker, what would 
happen was that we would start, we would start to usurp other 
jurisdictions for business. 
 
Now as much as we might want to worry about them, we need 
to look after ourselves first. After all we have a very large 



June 18, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

 

sector in this province that thinks we can double the population 
in 30 years. 
 
And a clearly defined Bill, Mr. Speaker, a clearly defined Bill 
43 would have clearly outlined for the forestry sector, clearly 
outlined for the people who work in logging, work in the 
sawmills, work in the paper mills, work in the pulp mills, that 
they would have had the assurances that we’d have been 
growing Saskatchewan instead of just fighting a rearguard 
action as we see in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. This Bill needs to be 
about more, needs to be about more than giving the Canadian 
government a negotiating tool. 
 
The Canadian government has shown clearly that they are 
stumped on how to solve this. They want to negotiate some 
more. They’re stumped on how to solve this problem. We know 
how the problem should be solved. This provincial government, 
the NDP government, should know how the problem should be 
solved. 
 
We know that we have a neighbour in Western Canada knows 
how this problem should be solved. The forestry sector is some 
excited about that, Mr. Speaker. They know that they’re going 
to be able to grow that forest industry in that province. You 
know what, you know what, Mr. Speaker, we could do that 
here. We could clearly do that here. 
 
If this Bill would have been strong enough, if this Bill would 
have been strong enough to outline for the forestry sector in 
legislation how this allotment would work for a bid system, if 
you would have put that in legislation, if, Mr. Minister, if that 
minister would have put that in legislation, Mr. Speaker, you 
know what? We believe that the forestry sector would have 
been very pleased about that. 
 
We know, we know that the Saskatchewan Party . . . The people 
of Saskatchewan know the Saskatchewan Party is very clearly 
onside, Mr. Speaker, with allowing the benchmark for stumpage 
to be set by the private sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Bill stops two steps short of that. It stops two steps short of 
that. It puts . . . They want to put in the legislation that the 
minister will decide what softwood lumber . . . what a softwood 
lumber treaty is when, Mr. Speaker, the industry will already, 
will do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the benchmark, that the benchmark 
for stumpage needs to be clearly outlined so that the forestry 
sector can go to the United States and say, see we’ve got a 
benchmark we’ve established, when it has not been established 
by government. That’s what needs to happen. And that 
benchmark, Mr. Speaker, needs to be established by the forestry 
sector in the forests, not at the mill. 
 
This Bill talks about, Mr. Speaker, what should happen is that if 
a forestry partner in Saskatchewan has taken out its allotment, 
its annual allotment as they’re bound to do by the forestry 
agreement that all the forestry sector must sign, they have an X 
amount of timber, of cubic metres they must take out every 
year. And if they’re unable to sell all of that and if they have 
logs, and if they have logs left over that could be turned into 
softwood lumber, they can put that up for sale. They can put 
that up for sale. 

This Bill’s talking about well that’s how we’re going to 
establish a benchmark for what our timber’s worth. Well you 
know, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to take a little more than that. To 
have one forestry company selling delivered logs to a sawmill 
and then selling it to another sawmill is not going to establish a 
base price for stumpage. That’s not going to cut it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I can see the member from Athabasca is kind of surprised 
that we’d actually read the Bill far enough to establish that this 
was actually in there — that they weren’t going to clearly 
outline bidding for timber in the forest; they wanted it done, 
they wanted it done at the lumber mill. So I think, Mr. Speaker, 
what they should have done, is if they’d had, if they’d have 
consulted with the forest industry as they are not wont to do, 
they would have found out that this comes up just a little bit 
short. 
 
Now the member said, from Athabasca, that we should’ve got 
legal counsel on this. 
 
Well I think the minister should have got legal counsel on this 
because he would have found out that, if he would have got 
legal counsel on this, that this Bill comes up a day late and a 
dollar short, as this government is usual to do. Instead he’s 
allowed himself to be swayed. He’s allowed himself to be 
swayed by a sector out there that has no vested interest in 
growing Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 years. That’s 
how this Bill reached the point of where it’s at. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, why, why didn’t the minister when he had the 
opportunity to work with the forestry sector, to work with the 
forestry sector to be able to come up with such a vision for 
forestry in this province that, Mr. Speaker, we’d have been 
creating jobs, we’d have been creating high-paid careers, career, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m saying, fairly clearly in the forestry sector? 
 
That’s what we should have had, Mr. Speaker. This Bill should 
have been leading us in a future for vision for the forestry sector 
and not, and not merely providing what this provincial 
government is hoping is a bargaining tool for the federal 
government. That’s what this Bill’s about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the minister had read this Bill and not simply the notes, if 
he’d have done . . . read this Bill instead of just the notes from 
his department, he would have found out that this Bill is 
nothing more than a . . . is a hopeful, is a hopeful bargaining 
tool for the federal government. 
 
This Bill should have been clearly outlining that the 
Saskatchewan province is not going to participate any further 
with trade injury discussions. We are simply going to overcome 
them. We’re going to do it internally. The forest resources of 
Saskatchewan belong to the people of Saskatchewan. That’s, 
that’s what this Bill should have been about. 
 
Instead, instead the minister brings an eleventh-hour Bill hoping 
to sneak it through the House in a hurry. Apparently he wants to 
go home. The minister wants to go home because he’s certainly, 
he’s certainly worried about his constituency. Greg Ross is 
causing lots of problems for the minister up in Athabasca. 
 
It’s because of Bills like this though, Mr. Minister, that’s 
creating problems in Athabasca. It’s because of Bills like this, 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, where there is no clear definition of how this is 
going to create jobs in Athabasca. That’s what’s missing in this 
Bill. This Bill is about talking about stuff. That’s what this 
Bill’s about. 
 
All they needed to do, Mr. Speaker, was say, we’re going to go 
out in the Crown lands and on a two-year basis, five-year basis, 
eight-year basis, set aside 20 per cent . . . or maybe 15 per cent. 
What about 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker? Could have set aside 15 
per cent. 
 
What’s it going to take? Has the government heard definitively 
from the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs what it’s going 
to take? What percentage the forests are going to have to be set 
aside on an annual, biannual, triennial basis for bidding? For 
bidding in order to establish a benchmark for a stumpage fee 
that will get, that will get us around that trade injury duty that 
has been applied to the forestry section in Saskatchewan that is 
so injurious to the forest industry sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
What is happening, Mr. Speaker, what is happening, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we’re losing jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
I remember very clearly, Mr. Speaker, when the former premier 
in 1999 said we need to have a forestry policy in this province 
that would create 10,000 more jobs — 10,000 new jobs in the 
forestry sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
What’s happened? What happened? What happened to that 
promise by Roy Romanow? I’ll tell you what happened to that. 
It was shortly after that, that that former Premier Roy Romanow 
decided he wanted to try a new career. 
 
And how did that help the . . . So how did this new government, 
how did this new Premier help out the forestry sector by having 
10,000 more jobs, 10,000 more jobs in the forestry sector? Well 
the forestry sector has told the Saskatchewan Party, through that 
transition period, they probably lost, they probably lost 5,000 
jobs. 
 
And so then you promise 10,000, you lose 5,000 — that’s 
15,000 jobs difference. You can imagine what that would have 
meant to government coffers to have 15,000 more jobs in the 
forestry sector today than what we would have had, Mr. 
Speaker, at the start of this new Premier’s mandate — 15,000 
new jobs. 
 
There’d been corporate taxes being paid. There’d been personal 
income taxes being paid. Those people would have been paying 
PST (provincial sales tax) on their purchases. They’re 
well-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker. Those are well-paying jobs in 
the forestry sector. 
 
So we would have benefited by creating more jobs in the 
forestry sector rather than have the member from Athabasca 
lead us down the road of losing jobs in the forestry sector. 
 
That’s all that’s been . . . that will be the legacy, that will be the 
legacy, Mr. Speaker, of that member of this House. That will be 
the legacy that member is going to have to take home to 
Athabasca that this Bill, that this Bill . . . this Bill will not solve 
the unemployment problems in La Loche. This Bill will not 
solve the unemployment issues in Buffalo Narrows. It will not 

solve the unemployment issues in Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(17:00) 
 
The Speaker: — It now being past the regular hour of 
adjournment — order, please — and . . . Order please, 
members. Order, members. It now being past the hour of 
adjournment, and pursuant to an order of this House, this House 
does now stand adjourned until Thursday, June 19 at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:01. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1769 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1769 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1769 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1769 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1769 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1769 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1769 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1770 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1770 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1770 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1770 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1780 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1780 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Athletes Bound for National Hockey League 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1772 
 2003 Saskatchewan First Nations Summer Games 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
 City of Regina Centennial 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1773 
 Team Saskatchewan Goes to Washington 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
 Royal Visit 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
 End of Session 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1774 
 Team Diabetes Canada 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Support for Beef Industry 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1777 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1777 
 Metis Addictions Council of Saskatchewan  
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1778 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1778 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 ExpressAddress Service 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1779 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1779 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1780 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1781 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1781 



 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1781 
  Lautermilch (point of order)..................................................................................................................................................1790 
  Heppner (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................1790 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................1790 
 


