















































Hansard: March 20, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 37 
 March 20, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 58 between Chaplin and 
Shamrock. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the community 
of Shamrock. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with constituents that are opposed to the grasshopper spray 
penalty assessed to farmers: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reassess the grasshopper spray penalty assessed to farmers 
in 2002; and further, that the government review the 
definition of viable farming practices as outlined in present 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance policy. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Paynton, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about adequate and reasonably priced 
telephone service. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
modify the exorbitant rates of telephone hookup to these 
cabins and provide reliable cellular telephone coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Leask, Saskatoon, Martensville, 
Langham, Dalmeny, Sonningdale. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 58; 
 

A petition concerning funding for a new regional hospital 
in Swift Current; 
 
A petition concerning that Sask Crop Insurance reassess the 
grasshopper spray penalty assessed to farmers in 2002; 
 
Another petition concerning Crown lands and existing trails 
remain open for recreational and tourism purposes; 
 
A petition concerning telephone hookup for cabins and 
cellular telephone coverage in parks; and 
 
A petition concerning the federal government’s intent to 
sign the Kyoto accord in its current form. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 8 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Agriculture minister: how many applicants were 
there for the 2002 crop forage cover program; further to 
that, how many of these applicants have now received their 
full funding from the program? 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 8 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Sask Property Management Corporation: 
does SPMC currently have plans or is it currently executing 
plans to close the major SPMC storage depot facility in 
Saskatoon; if so, how many jobs will be lost; where will 
those services be relocated? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to stand 
today and introduce to you and through you to the members of 
this Assembly some very bright and energetic grade 8 students, 
16 of them in total, from the school in Cudworth. And 
accompanying them, Mr. Speaker, are their teachers, Bob Dally 
and Carla Medernack. 
 
I’m looking forward to meeting with these students a little bit 
later on in the day and I do hope that you enjoy the proceedings 
in the Assembly today. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and to all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly a delegation here today to mark La 
Journée internationale de la Francophonie as part of the 
celebrations during Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie and 
La Semaine nationale de la Francophonie. 
 
Excuse me. I ran up the stairs to grab my introduction and I’m 
out of breath. 
 
They’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And if I could ask 
you to stand as I mention your names, representing a variety of 
Fransaskois community organizations. 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

From the Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise: Francine 
Proulx-Kenzle, directrice adjointe; Grégoire Patterson, 
coordonnateur régional de PAC (Programme d’accès 
communautaire) et agent de projets. 
 
University of Regina: Ellen Chapco, Secrétaire de l’université; 
Dominique Sarny, directeur, Institut français. 
 
From the Conseil culturel fransaskois: Michel Vézina, directeur 
général. 
 
From école Monseigneur de Laval: Marie-France Girardin, 
représentante du conseil d’école; Donna Lajeunesse, directrice 
adjointe. 
 
From the Éditions de la Nouvelle Plume: Joanne Bonneville, 
présidente. 
 
From the Fête fransaskoise: Michel Cordeau, président; 
Géraldine Petit-Gras, coordinatrice. 
 
From the Guichet unique: Ronald Labrecque, directeur. 
 
From the Réseau fransaskois de santé en français: Renée 
Demmans, coordonnatrice. 
 
From the Division scolaire francophone: Marie Patterson, 
responsable des relations publiques — not there. 
 
And from the Société . . . Oh — there. The lights are in my 
eyes. 
 
From the Société historique de la Saskatchewan: Marie-Josée 
Perron, coordonnatrice des activités. 
 
Please join me in welcoming these guests on this fine 
francophone day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the minister in welcoming our fransaskois 
friends, and possibly francophones from across the country, 
who are with us here today. And so on behalf of the official 
opposition, we would like to thank you and certainly commend 
you on your contributions to the country, especially your 
contributions in the area of language, culture, and in the 
development of this great country of ours. 
 
Thank you and we welcome you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the House, Vice-Chief Guy Lonechild, who is here. 
He is of course, as you know, a very prominent member of the 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) governance 
structure, and I’d like all members to join in welcoming him. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I’d as well like to welcome a former 
colleague in the legislature, Grant Schmidt, who has joined us 
here this afternoon. Welcome, Grant. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I seem to 
be having ample opportunity to be on my feet today, but I too 
would like to take the opportunity to welcome Vice-Chief Guy 
Lonechild to the Assembly today. 
 
As well, I’d like to say a great big welcome to a gentleman 
that’s here today as band manager for Whitecap Dakota, Tony 
Kuchapski. Tony was actually a young man who grew up in the 
same small village as I did some time ago. Anyway, Tony, it’s 
just a very wonderful surprise to see you here and I hope you 
enjoy the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my privilege today to introduce to you and to members of 
the House a volunteer group of crop reporters from across 
Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, and 
who report for Sask Ag and Food, Mr. Speaker. This group of 
crop reporters I had the privilege of having lunch with today. 
They have been involved in doing crop reporting in 
Saskatchewan for the past 25 years and I want to recognize 
them individually today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have in the Assembly, or we have in the Assembly today, 
Glen and Liz MacKenzie from the RM (rural municipality) of 
Pinto Creek, No. 75. I have with me as well today Fred and 
Barbara Headford from the RM . . . of the RM of Dufferin, No. 
190. Fred and Barbara Headford from the RM of Dufferin, No. 
190 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, thank you very much. 
David and Irene Ehman from the RM of Craik, No. 222; 
Norman Langager from the RM of Loreburn, No. 254, who is 
accompanied today by family friend Ann Follick; Cecil and 
Mary Reimer from the RM of Barrier Valley, No. 394; William 
Gryba from the RM of Invergordon, No. 430, who is 
represented here today by his son, Daniel Gryba, and daughter, 
Vicky Kuntz; and Bruce and Marilyn Meeds of the RM of 
Meadow Lake, No. 588; and Ed Shulver from the RM of 
Pleasantdale, No. 398, who was unable to be here today. 
 
I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
recognizing this special group of volunteers who do good work 
for the Department of Agriculture and Food, for our 
Saskatchewan farmers, and our Saskatchewan community. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to join in welcoming Mr. Grant Schmidt to the legislature. As 
you say, I am the member for North Battleford now. However, 
in a previous life I practised law in Melville as does Mr. 
Schmidt. We never actually practised together, but we did 
practise in the same community, and we didn’t actually agree 
on very many things. 
 
We disagreed on most subjects but we did retain, I think, a 
degree of respect for each other. And we did at least agree in 
that both of us have a passionate commitment to the ideals of 
democracy. Please join me in welcoming Mr. Schmidt today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
also want to join my colleagues in welcoming Vice-Chief Guy 
Lonechild to the Assembly today. And of course with 
Vice-Chief Guy Lonechild is Tony Kuchapski. And both 
Vice-Chief Guy Lonechild and Tony, as well Chief Bear, are in 
the Assembly today to lobby for the four winds training project 
which is an exciting opportunity for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to make sure that we all take a minute to first of all 
welcome them here, and to also point out that we had a hockey 
discussion before we came down here, Mr. Speaker, and Tony 
Kuchapski now says to me when he was young, when he played 
hockey, they called him Slapsky Kuchapski. So I want to 
welcome Slapsky here today and to point out that they’re here 
promoting, again, a wonderful project called the four winds 
training project. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition I would like to join the Minister 
of Agriculture in recognizing the great work performed by the 
crop reporters of our province. 
 
And those present today have volunteered 25 years of their 
time, which not only takes great dedication but also a love of 
our province and a true commitment to the importance of the 
agriculture industry. So we thank you. It’s an honour to have 
you with us today, and would everyone please join us again in 
welcoming these great individuals . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I introduce to you and through you to members of 
the House a representative of labour sitting in the west gallery. 
Gord Gunoff, the business manager for IBEW (International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers). I’m very pleased to see 
Gord here this afternoon and I’d like all members to welcome 
him to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Fifth Annual Saskatchewan Party Leader’s Dinner 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last night I 
had the pleasure of attending the fifth annual Saskatoon 
Saskatchewan Party leader’s dinner. Almost 700 people were in 
attendance, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these people came out at 
$200 a plate because they want to change the government. And 
they support the Saskatchewan Party vision, plan, and team. 
 
These people don’t believe the tired rhetoric of this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government. They believe their lived reality. 

Day after day they see their communities shrinking, the 
out-migration of youth, the longest surgery waiting lists in 
Canada, the wasted tax dollars on potatoes, ISC (Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan), and risky foreign 
investments. 
 
And they know that Saskatchewan is being shortchanged. They 
know that $28 million could build two high schools and hire a 
whole lot of nurses and policemen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people, and many more, support the 
Saskatchewan Party’s plan because they’ve seen the NDP’s 
track record and they know whatever plan this government 
purports to have just isn’t working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has a plan for governance 
and we have clear goals for our province. As Earl Nightingale 
once said: 
 

People with goals succeed because they know where they 
are going. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask this government to listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan and call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Thank You to the People 
of Saskatoon Fairview Constituency 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as the newly elected member 
of Saskatoon Fairview, I want to thank my constituents for their 
support on March 17 and for the showing of confidence in me 
and the New Democratic Party by electing me by a margin of 
almost 2:1 over my nearest opponent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 17 the people of Saskatoon Fairview 
judged the opposition, their empty slogans, and their 
doom-and-gloom scenarios. More importantly, they judged this 
NDP government. The choice was clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is both daunting and gratifying to think that 
people of Saskatoon Fairview have chosen me to follow in the 
footsteps of Chris Axworthy and Bob Mitchell. But I’ll do my 
utmost to represent them as effectively and ably as those two 
worthy gentlemen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate my opponents for their vigorous 
and hard-fought campaigns. I would also like to take this 
opportunity to thank my family and my campaign team, 
especially the volunteers. Mr. Speaker, volunteers are at the 
heart of any political campaign. Without them, none of this 
would be here. 
 
I am looking forward to working with all hon. members. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Thank You to the People 
of Battleford-Cut Knife Constituency 

 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

like to take this opportunity to thank the people of the 
Battleford-Cut Knife constituency in supporting me in the 
by-election. I’m looking forward to working with the people of 
the Battleford-Cut Knife constituency and representing all 
people in that riding. 
 
There is needs to be recognized, and responsibilities, in justice, 
youth, crop insurance, health, and First Nations, as these were 
some of the issues that were recognized through the campaign. 
I’m looking forward to be working on these issues and other 
concerns that will be brought from the Battleford-Cut Knife 
constituency. 
 
I and the people from the Battleford-Cut Knife constituency 
will be looking, anxiously waiting for the call for the general 
election, and also will be looking for the new hope and 
direction the Saskatchewan Party will be taking in forming the 
new government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Congratulations to the Melville Millionaires Hockey Team 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today 
to congratulate, and I would ask the members to join me in 
congratulating the Melville Millionaires hockey team for 
winning their Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League series over 
the Notre Dame Hounds. By all accounts, Mr. Speaker, it was a 
hard-fought series with the Millionaires finally prevailing in the 
sixth game with a four-to-nothing victory. 
 
Now rumour has it that shortly after the game, Bill Boyd, the 
real leader of the Saskatchewan Party, unhappy with this 
outcome, requested a secret meeting with officials in an attempt 
to have the score overturned, reversed — something, anything, 
Mr. Speaker. Fortunately reason, good judgment, and fair play 
won out. Mr. Boyd and the Saskatchewan Party caucus were 
surprised and disappointed when they were informed that in a 
hockey game, as in democracy, there are rules of which one of 
the better known, less obscure ones is, most goals wins. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Condolences to the Rob Sivell Family of Buena Vista 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today with great sadness to talk about the passing of a 
constituent of mine, and to offer sympathy for the family of 
Rob Sivell from Buena Vista. 
 
Mr. Sivell was killed while working on a oil rig in the Middle 
Eastern country of Yemen. This husband and father was a 
victim of a shooting rampage that left him and two other 
workers dead, while a second Canadian from Alberta was 
seriously wounded. 
 
Apparently the shooter was a Yemen citizen employed at the rig 
located in the oil-rich northern province of Marib, about 160 
kilometres northeast of Yemen’s capital of Sanaa. The two 
other workers that were killed were an American who was a 
superintendent at the rig, and a local Yemen worker. 

Rob Sivell, 44 years old, leaves behind his wife, twin 
one-year-old daughters, as well as a teenage son. Mr. Sivell was 
described by neighbour and good friend, Sylvia Klaptchuk, as a 
good, all around Canadian boy. I know in our hearts, we’re just 
missing him terribly. He was way too young; there’s no rhyme 
or reason to why he’s gone. 
 
On behalf of every member of this Assembly, I want to relay 
our deepest sympathies to the family of Rob Sivell. Today we 
pay tribute to this dedicated family man and proud 
Saskatchewan citizen. Our thoughts and prayers are with you 
during this time of tragedy. May the happy memories of this 
loving husband, father, be with you always. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

La Journée internationale de la Francophonie 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. Cette 
journée, 20 mars 2003, a été proclamée officiellement La 
Journée internationale de la Francophonie en Saskatchewan par 
la ministre responsable de l’Office de coordination des affaires 
francophones, la députée de Régina Centre. Nous reconnaissons 
en ce jour l’organisme international La Francophonie qui réunit 
plus de 50 pays et gouvernements qui ont le français en partage. 
 
En qualité de président de la Section de la Saskatchewan de 
l’Assemblée parlementaire de la Francophonie, je suis honoré 
de soulinger cette occasion en français dans notre assemblée 
législative provinciale. 
 
Le 20 mars marque aussi le point culminant de deux semaines 
de fêtes qui ont pour but de célébrer la langue et la culture 
françaises et de mettre en valeur les réalisations des 
Francophones et des communautés francophones de notre pays. 
 
En Saskatchewan, le thème de cette année est: Notre dualité 
linguistique à célébrer! 
 
En tant que gouvernement, nous sommes engagés à assurer le 
développement et la vitalité des deux langues officielles du 
Canada. 
 
Nous prisons beaucoup la contribution de nos concitoyens et de 
nos communautés francophones au développement social, 
culturel, et économique de notre province durant toute l’année. 
 
J’encourage tous mes collègues à soutenir les Francophones 
tout au long de l’année et à les fêter dans leurs circonscriptions. 
 
Je vous invite maintenant à vous joindre à moi pour souhaiter à 
tous les Fransaskois et à toutes les Fransaskoises: bonne 
Journée internationale de la Francophonie. 
 
(Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, March 20, 2003, 
has officially been proclaimed La Journée internationale de la 
Francophonie in Saskatchewan by the minister responsible for 
the Office of French-language Co-ordination, the member for 
Regina Centre. This day recognizes the international 
organization La Francophonie which brings together over 50 
countries and governments sharing French as a common 
language. 
 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

 

As president of the Saskatchewan section of the Assemblée 
parlementaire de la Francophonie, I am honoured to mark this 
occasion in French in our provincial legislature. 
 
March 20 is also the focal point for two weeks of festivities 
celebrating the French language and culture and recognizing the 
achievements of our country’s francophones and francophone 
communities. 
 
In Saskatchewan, the theme this year is: In Celebration Of Our 
Linguistic Duality. 
 
We value the contribution that our francophone citizens and 
communities make to the social, cultural, and economic 
development of our province throughout the year. 
 
I encourage all my colleagues to be active year-round in 
supporting and celebrating the francophones in their 
constituencies. 
 
Please join with me now in wishing all Fransaskois and 
Fransaskoises: bonne Journée internationale de la 
Francophonie.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Anna Rathje Celebrates 105th Birthday 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I would like to extend a sincere belated congratulations to Ms. 
Anna Rathje of the Allan district who celebrated her 105th 
birthday on December 29, 2002. 
 
Anna was born in Germany in 1897 and in 1923 she made the 
long journey across the Atlantic to Canada by boat. Canada 
offered Ms. Rathje a new life and she never ever regretted her 
decision. 
 
Anna and her husband Fritz built their home in 1928 on their 
farm near Allan. Both Anna and her husband focused their 
never-ending amount of energy and their ambition and dreams 
into building a life on the open prairies. 
 
In the year 2000 I had the opportunity to meet Anna and present 
her with the Three Century Certificate. As we visited she sat in 
a rocking chair which was given to her by her husband as a 
wedding gift and she shared so very many stories with me about 
her life and her adventures. I would like to take this opportunity 
to thank Anna for her contribution she’s made over the years to 
her family, to the community, and to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Happy belated birthday, Anna. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Speech 
from the Throne was certainly a disappointment for 
Saskatchewan people who were hoping for some hint of a new 

direction for the future of our province. 
 
One sector that was really looking for a sign of improvement 
was agriculture. After being ignored by NDP governments for a 
dozen years, people from across rural Saskatchewan were 
hoping to hear a commitment of renewal for the rural economy. 
Instead what they heard was a rehash of the same old, tired 
NDP rhetoric. The Throne Speech regularly referred to the 
drought that has had significant impact on our provincial 
economy, yet provided no indication of any commitment to 
addressing the impact on agriculture or the rural economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after two years of drought and stress on our 
provincial agriculture sector, why couldn’t the NDP come up 
with any new initiatives to offer farm families support and hope 
for the future in its Speech from the Throne? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter into the 
discussion and answer the question on behalf of the government 
today given that it’s been now, Mr. Speaker, better than three 
and a half years that the opposition who say, Mr. Speaker, that 
they are the ambassadors for rural Saskatchewan and 
agricultural policy, Mr. Speaker, is what I hear from those 
people. 
 
And this is the very first question I think, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member . . . Leader of the Opposition has actually got up and 
asked. But I say, Mr. Speaker, a year and a half ago, Mr. 
Speaker, I asked the departed Mr. Bill Boyd, give me some idea 
about what you have in terms of agricultural policy, Mr. 
Speaker — never heard a word from them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A couple of weeks ago before we entered into the agricultural 
policy framework of which we have now for Saskatchewan and 
Canadian people, Mr. Speaker — a good agricultural policy for 
Canadians — I asked the Leader of the Opposition to please 
send me a response. Not a word, Mr. Speaker. We have a party, 
Mr. Speaker, over there who represent rural Saskatchewan who 
are absolutely bankrupt . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the Minister 
of Agriculture that with a 20 per cent increase in our vote in the 
Battleford-Cut Knife, that 20 per cent will remove him from the 
Yorkton constituency . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And will remove the member for Meadow 
Lake from his constituency because the NDP have not paid 
attention to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne focuses on the past. 
It’s a backward look at programs already in place, policy 
already unveiled. Rather than focus on the future of the 
agriculture sector in a rural economy, the NDP just looked back 
at its failures of the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has destroyed safety net programs. Does 
anyone remember GRIP (gross revenue insurance program)? 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, they cut crop insurance coverage and they hiked 
premiums not only last year but this year as well. They have 
forced the sell-off of livestock herds. Mr. Speaker, they have 
left the ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) 
committee report collecting dust on the shelf. And now they had 
a chance to do something but they didn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Saskatchewan people see any real, 
new ideas from the NDP — anything to help our rural 
communities and the agriculture sector? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
shouldn’t be standing up in the House and worrying about my 
seat, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition should be 
standing up in the House and worrying about what’s happened 
in his Melville seat, Mr. Speaker. We’re all ready to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We’re all ready, Mr. Speaker. The 
constituents of Melville have spoken and said, we don’t want 
that member sitting in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. He should 
worry about the Melville seat, not the Yorkton seat. 
 
I say to the member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition: all 
I’ve seen from you on the agricultural policy is a slogan and a 
dream, Mr. Speaker. That’s all we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
seen nothing from the agriculture . . . on agriculture from the 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When in fact, Mr. Speaker, we rolled out the livestock retention 
program this spring, Mr. Speaker, or this fall, for producers, 
what did they say over there, Mr. Speaker? They said, well not 
enough, Mr. Speaker, not enough. But no idea, Mr. Speaker. 
When we roll out a brand new crop insurance in Saskatchewan, 
what does their ag critic say? You should have extended it to 
eight or nine years. We already have 15 years . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crop Insurance Program 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
suggest that minister should just examine what happened in the 
Battleford-Cut Knife constituency if he wants to know what’s 
happening in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Agriculture. 
The speech . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The Speech from the Throne repeatedly 
mentioned the severe drought that has gripped a large section of 
our province over the last two years. Yet despite 
acknowledgement in the Throne Speech that the crop insurance 
program has been a critical lifeline for the many farm families, 
the NDP has just announced that the crop insurance premiums 
will be hiked another 52 per cent this year. That is on top of the 

massive premium increases and the cuts in the program that 
were implemented last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How can the NDP talk about the devastation of the drought and 
how can they talk about the importance of the crop insurance 
program and yet at the same time increase the crop insurance 
premiums, making it one reliable safety net program that the 
producers of this province have, Mr. Speaker, unaffordable to 
many of the producers? 
 
To the minister, why is the NDP continuing to attack the farm 
families with a second year of massive crop insurance premium 
hikes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I can understand why the member opposite 
is asking questions of the government, because she has very 
little understanding of agriculture herself, Mr. Speaker, and so 
this is what . . . beginning of the appreciation of what the 
agriculture policy is all about, Mr. Speaker. And I say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Let me say . . . Mr. Speaker, let me say 
this. Just a couple of days ago when we rolled out the crop 
insurance program, the member from Melfort was on the radio 
waves and saying, you know what, we need to extend the crop 
insurance program over a longer period of time so that farmers 
have an opportunity to pay back that debt that we have today in 
Saskatchewan. They asked him how long. He said well, I don’t 
know how long; it should be longer. 
 
And then they asked the agricultural critic, Mr. Speaker, from 
Watrous, how long should they be extending the payback on the 
crop insurance program. She said well, you know what, I think 
it should be about eight or nine years, Mr. Speaker, they should 
do it. 
 
We already have a payback process in Canada, Mr. Speaker, for 
crop insurance which is 15 years, Mr. Speaker. And the member 
opposite wants to roll it back, Mr. Speaker. She’s talking about 
helping Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker, helping 
Saskatchewan farmers by rolling back the period from 15 years 
to 8 or 9 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that that 
minister isn’t suggesting that we’re going to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that that 
minister isn’t suggesting that we’re going to have a 52 per cent 
increase in the premiums of the crop insurance program for 15 
years. 
 
This is the second year of massive crop insurance premium 
hikes that’s going to put the program out of reach for many of 
the farm families. Faced with huge increase in prices of the 
fertilizer and fuel, the decision to purchase crop insurance will 
be weighed with all the other input costs that the farmers of this 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

 

province are facing. And in more cases this year the price of the 
program will render it unaffordable. 
 
That’s the same situation that occurred, Mr. Speaker, about 10 
years ago. When the premiums were hiked, the participation 
dropped. Mr. Speaker, how does the minister expect farm 
families to be able to pay for these huge premium hikes after 
two years of a devastating drought? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that member from 
Watrous stood up in the House last year and she said to the 
members of this Assembly and to Saskatchewan people, you 
know what? Crop insurance next year is going to drop by a 
substantive margin in this province. And you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? More people had crop insurance premium last year 
than anywhere in the province, Mr. Speaker, for last year. 
 
And the member today reads a private statement from Arm 
River and he says, Mr. Speaker, that the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, he gets up today and he reads 
a statement, a private member’s statement, that talks about the 
fact that the grass program in Saskatchewan wasn’t very helpful 
last year, and the member from Watrous said the same thing. 
We started out last year, Mr. Speaker, with 200,000 acres in 
grass. The new crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker, saw last 
year 3 million acres interred in grass this year. 
 
And we’re building a brand new crop insurance program in 
Saskatchewan to help farmers, while those people over there 
say we should have signed an agreement six months ago which 
no other province than Saskatchewan supported. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Business Telephone Rates 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskTel. Yesterday 
the NDP confirmed SaskTel is about to implement a 
multi-million dollar rate increase for rural business customers. 
It’s just the latest attack on rural Saskatchewan by this NDP 
government. 
 
Last year in the midst of a devastating drought, the NDP raised 
crop insurance premiums and reduced coverage. This year the 
NDP goes one better. They increase crop insurance rates by a 
whopping 52 per cent. And now we find out that SaskTel is 
jacking up rural business telephone rates by as much as 10 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP attacking businesses in rural 
Saskatchewan during a time when the rural economy is 
devastated by a drought? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Saltcoats 
and members from the Saskatchewan Party from time to time 

continue to say things that are absolutely not fitting to the 
reality of what’s there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Saltcoats today stands up in his chair and 
says that crop insurance premiums have gone up with a 
reduction in the yield return for farmers — is absolutely, Mr. 
Speaker, false. False, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The premiums are going up, absolutely. They are going up to 
cover . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. Where the problem is, 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers in Saskatchewan today will pay a 
higher premium for higher coverage, not lower coverage, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Saltcoats today is going to be looking in to this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, as opposed to looking out, after the constituents of 
Melville have their say with him and Mr. Schmidt has their say 
with him in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
got one thing right. Rates are absolutely increasing, last year 
and this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, since 1999 the NDP 
government has posted the second worst job creation record and 
the second worst population loss record in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the Liberals joined the NDP to form a 
coalition government, Saskatchewan has suffered net 
out-migration of more than 27,000 people. Many of those 
27,000 people are from rural Saskatchewan and most of those 
fleeing Saskatchewan are our young people that we need the 
most. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP attacking 
rural businesses that are struggling now to survive the drought? 
Why is the NDP singling out rural businesses for a punishment 
with a multi-million dollar SaskTel rate increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In my last comments, I had two things 
right, Mr. Speaker. I had two things right. The first thing I had 
right, Mr. Speaker, is that crop insurance returns to farmers on 
premiums today are going to go up over what they were last 
year, without any question about that. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I had right the fact that the new 
democracy of the Saskatchewan Party is not going to work, Mr. 
Speaker. There is nowhere, Mr. Speaker, today in Canada 
where you have a constituency, Mr. Speaker, that elects . . . that 
calls a nomination, Mr. Speaker, elects or selects an individual 
whom they want to represent them, Mr. Speaker, and at the end 
of the day, the party says we’re going to exclude this person 
from sitting on the . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. Nowhere 
else in Canada, Mr. Speaker. This is the new grassroots 
democratic party, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatchewan. 
 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to believe that the 
New Democratic Party on that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
The member for Swift Current may start over. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s hard to believe that 
this NDP government would lecture anybody about democracy. 
This Premier, Mr. Speaker, has borrowed two years from . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, members. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier has absolutely no 
mandate to sit in the chair he’s sitting in . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, furthermore this party that would 
lecture this House on democracy is currently playing games 
with the setting of an election date. We on this side of the 
House are committed to set election dates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that party was . . . that party giving anybody any 
lectures on democracy at all, that’s like . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I invite the member from Swift 
Current to put his question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — This government, this government giving . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, members. 
 
Mr. Wall: — This party, this government that stole the election 
from Saskatchewan people, lecturing anybody about 
democracy, that’s like Enron officials lecturing people about 
accounting policies, Mr. Speaker. It’s ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the minister responsible for 
SaskTel. For the last couple of sessions he’s been standing in 
this legislature saying that SaskTel is into all of these foreign 
investments so they can bring profits back home and keep rates 
low. But now we hear, Mr. Speaker, that this government will 
increase rates in rural Saskatchewan — increase telephone rates 
— by $5 million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how is it good public policy 
that SaskTel customers in the province of Saskatchewan should 
subsidize all of his adventures abroad? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I appreciate the question because it does give me an 
opportunity to talk about the great things that SaskTel actually 
does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all, the opposition has had a lot of rhetoric 

about this issue. First of all, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel provides the 
second lowest rates for residents — residents, I say — across 
Canada, and for businesses. And for businesses, Mr. Speaker, in 
the highest cost service area — I say highest cost service area in 
all of Canada — we provide the lowest rates for businesses, Mr. 
Speaker. That is a fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. The point is, how much better could it be here in 
Saskatchewan if the NDP government hadn’t squandered 
millions and millions of dollars in places like Nashville, 
Tennessee, and Atlanta, Georgia, and in Australia, Mr. 
Speaker? How much better could it be? 
 
Here’s the track record, here’s the track record of this 
government; SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) of course we know lost $28 million; 
Coachman Insurance in Ontario lost 11 million; Persona Inc., a 
stock market gamble by SaskTel, lost nine and one-half million 
dollars . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask 
members just to tone it down a bit. I want to be able to hear the 
remarks. I want to be able to hear the questions and . . . 
Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
And furthermore, members, it becomes difficult even for the 
public to be able to pick up the words of the members if there is 
too much background hollering. So kind of tone it down. I ask 
members to just pay . . . give your members who are on the 
floor a little more respect. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Retx.com is a company 
in Atlanta, Georgia. They’ve lost seven and one-half million; 
we’ve lost a couple of million more in Nashville, Tennessee in 
TappedInto.com. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is this: if the minister is so confident 
in the policy of this government, the policy to invest and lose 
money all around the world through the Crowns, if he’s so 
confident in that policy, will he whisper in the ear of this 
unelected Premier of the province and tell him that they’re 
ready for an election, they’re ready to debate the issue? And 
we’ll see where Saskatchewan people side on the issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I note in The 
Western Producer, December 5, 2002, the headline says, “Poor 
phone service irks rural Albertans,” Mr. Speaker. And from the 
party, Mr. Speaker, that supports complete deregulation, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a bit odd that they would be critical of a situation 
that now exists where CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission) dictates that you cannot . . . 
or very . . . you have limited ability to subsidize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Having said that, I want to quote from this. It says, Mr. Speaker, 
that: 
 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

 

Claims of poor service and price gouging in rural Alberta 
put Telus (deregulated and privatized phone company in 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker) under an uncomfortable spotlight at 
last week’s Alberta Association of Municipal Districts and 
Counties convention. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say that: 
 

Association delegates voted unanimously to push both 
Ottawa and the Alberta government to enforce service to 
rural areas after three municipalities brought forward 
complaints about . . . (that private phone company’s 
service). 
 

Mr. Speaker, SaskTel provides great service in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Treaty Land Entitlement Claims 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
colleague from Cypress Hills raised this issue yesterday and I 
feel it’s important to follow up because there was no answer 
from the minister on the issue yesterday. According to the treaty 
land entitlement agreement negotiated between First Nations, 
the federal government, and the province of Saskatchewan, the 
province has 90 days from the time they are notified of a land 
claim to state their intentions with regard to the claim 
settlement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 90-day period for the remaining Poundmaker 
First Nation’s claims has now expired and the province should 
have responded to both claims by now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the province of Saskatchewan responded to 
the Poundmaker First Nation’s last two claims? If so, what was 
their response? And if not, why is the province violating the 
Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement which they supposedly 
negotiated in good faith? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in my response to 
the member from Cypress I did answer the question, Mr. 
Speaker. And I said this, Mr. Speaker — and I’ll answer it again 
for the member from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker — and I said this: 
that this, Mr. Speaker, is a very, very sensitive issue. I have 
asked that this matter be delayed for a year in terms of making a 
definitive decision about what we do with treaty land in 
Saskatchewan. And I’ve said that, Mr. Speaker, to First Nations 
people, Mr. Speaker; and I’ve said it to ranchers in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; and those people from across 
Saskatchewan who think we should sell off the Crown lands, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve said that now publicly and openly for the better part of six 
months. So I say to the member opposite that we shouldn’t be 
trying to pick winners and losers in this exercise. We should be 
trying to find a negotiated settlement, Mr. Speaker, with First 
Nations people and ranchers. Because that’s the way on this 
side of the House that we do business with Saskatchewan’s 
people, Mr. Speaker. That’s how we do business — in a 
negotiated fashion as opposed to picking winners and losers, 

which the member from Humboldt is alluding to today and that 
the Leader of the Opposition does on a regular basis when he’s 
on his feet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister knows full well that by not honouring the 90-day 
response deadline — a deadline the province agreed to when 
they signed the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement — that that 
government is not respecting the rights of the other parties to 
the agreement, especially the rights of the First Nations 
involved and of the third party stakeholders who are 
landowners, Crown land lessees, and the rural municipalities, 
all of them affected by this land issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a letter from the Department of 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs that states: 
 

The government is conducting a review of the policy 
respecting leaseholders and treaty land entitlement. Until 
that review is complete, decisions respecting the 
availability of Crown land will be held in abeyance. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP conducting this lease policy 
review now? How is this fair to all the stakeholders in the 
process? And, Mr. Speaker, under what authority does your 
government assume the right to short-circuit the agreed-upon 
process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture 
and Rural Revitalization has clearly outlined the position of this 
government in the matter of treaty land entitlements. This 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, is not going to get away with this any 
more. Let that member or let that leader or let someone over 
there stand in this House and let’s hear the position of the 
Saskatchewan Party. Let’s hear the position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
tell you this. She talks about . . . that member talks about 
respecting people, from this group respecting . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This group wants to talk about 
respecting people and they want to talk about democracy. Let 
me tell you about their view of democracy. When they sat on 
the government benches, we waited five years and one day for 
an election . . . five years and one day. 
 
They were so in disgrace after that election, that what did they 
do? They had to form themselves a new political party. Did 
they consult with their grassroots? No. They got together in a 
restaurant in downtown Regina and cooked up a political party. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, after they form a political party, they have 
conventions here in the capital city — conventions here right in 
the capital city this year. They won’t allow their members to 
debate resolutions. That’s democracy. 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

And then the icing on the cake — 1,200 of their members come 
together in Melville, try to elect a member, and they’re turned 
down by that most undemocratic group in the nation of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan Environment 
Drinking Water Compliance Report 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is my pleasure to rise today to provide members of the 
Assembly with some important information. 
 
This morning Saskatchewan Environment released its 
2001-2002 Drinking Water Compliance Report. This report 
reviews the overall compliance of the municipal water systems 
and reports on elements including sample submission 
compliance and how well waterworks are performing in 
meeting drinking water objectives in effect during the reporting 
period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased with this report as it showed that 
most Saskatchewan communities are submitting the required 
samples and most of those samples show that the communities 
are providing good, clean drinking water to their citizens. It also 
shows improvement by other communities who were falling 
behind in their sampling and in their water quality results. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the report also points out the area that 
need more work. A small number of municipalities did not 
continuously disinfect their water supplies during the year 
covered by this report. Mr. Speaker, let me assure you that my 
department is working hard with these communities to help 
them improve their water. 
 
The contamination incidents in Walkerton, Ontario, and here at 
home in North Battleford were clear reminders to us all that 
water is too precious for us to take for granted and make 
assumptions. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, 
because of these incidents, all government departments and 
agencies involved in the provision of drinking water took a 
good, long, hard look at their policies and their programs. They 
then proposed changes that helped to form the government’s 
safe drinking water strategy that was released last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to outline just a few of those changes. 
The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority was created last 
October to better coordinate efforts for managing and protecting 
surface water and groundwater resources. A new Environmental 
Management and Protection Act was created to give 
Saskatchewan Environment more strength when it comes to the 
regulation of drinking water. Work continues to ensure that 
every water and waste water system regulated by Saskatchewan 
Environment is under the direction of a certified operator by 
2005. 
 
In co-operation with the Department of Health and the health 
regions, Saskatchewan Environment has updated the 
bacteriological follow-up protocol to ensure prompt, thorough 

response to bacteriological problems in waterworks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, these are just a few of the 
changes that this government has made over the past year. 
There have been many more and we’ll continue to initiate 
changes aimed at ensuring safe, clean drinking water for the 
people of Saskatchewan. In fact the release of this compliance 
report today is one step in the government’s commitment to 
openness and accountability in the provision of safe drinking 
water and part of our overall safe drinking water strategy. 
 
Later this summer we’ll be releasing the first annual state of the 
drinking water in Saskatchewan report. That report will further 
detail the province’s actions in terms of drinking water, but it’ll 
also contain updated compliance information similar to the 
information released today. As well, in just two weeks it’ll be 
the first anniversary of the North Battleford Water Inquiry and 
the government will provide a fuller progress report then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rest assured: this government is committed to 
providing clean, safe drinking water to the citizens of this 
province. It is committed to working with other agencies, 
communities, and the people of Saskatchewan to achieve that 
goal. After all, safe drinking water is not the responsibility of 
any single government agency, group, or person, Mr. Speaker; 
safe drinking water is the responsibility of us all. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to reply 
to the minister’s statement. I’d like to thank the minister for the 
advance copy of his statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister speaks about overall compliance of 
the municipal water system and how the sample submissions 
and compliance has been working and that’s a very good 
objective to work towards. He makes mention that most 
communities are submitting the required samples. And just 
from my personal experience in my constituency, the 
communities are working very hard to . . . meeting these 
requirements, but there’s a number of roadblocks in their way. 
Possibly more training and information is needed to give to 
these local officials so that they give proper samples and the 
proper samples are taken at all times. Mr. Speaker, the 
communities are doing the best they can under the 
circumstances. 
 
The minister speaks about the contamination and the incidents 
in Walkerton and North Battleford and we all agree, all the 
people of Saskatchewan agree, that water is a very precious 
asset and we must be very careful with how we protect the 
water supply because it’s very important to the communities, to 
the health of Saskatchewan residents, also to the future 
economic development of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister speaks about the Watershed Authority 
that was created in a new Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, and there’s a number of regulations and Acts 
that he speaks about. I believe that there’s a real risk of really 
laying more regulation upon regulation onto the local 
communities, and I think we have to take a very close look at 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

 

what the government is doing as far as just regulations being 
added to the bureaucracy and more bureaucracy being added to 
the local governments without actually improving the whole 
water system in the long term. 
 
It’s very clear to me that the provincial government is shifting 
responsibility to the local municipalities and that’s all fine and 
dandy. But there is not the resources, the financial resources, for 
the local communities to continue this responsibility that has 
been given to them. 
 
As I mentioned before with . . . the local officials I believe, 
need more training and more support from the local 
government. And the added responsibility that the government 
has shifted onto the local municipalities also means more 
money must be spent. 
 
The minister speaks about the anniversary of the North 
Battleford Water Inquiry. Well there’s another anniversary 
that’s just taken place. The community of Purdue has been just 
turned down for the third time concerning their application to 
the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. And this is 
three years in a row they’ve applied, three years in a row 
they’ve been turned down, and is a very serious problem in 
Purdue like there is in many communities across this province. 
And it really speaks to one large concern with this government. 
 
Either the government helps with the infrastructure program by 
putting more funding in or — which what should happen is — 
this government should bring in economic policies that will lead 
to growth and growing of the Saskatchewan economy so the 
local municipalities do have the resources to update their water 
and sewage plants and either building new plants or upgrading 
the old ones. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to just say the local 
communities are doing the best they can under the 
circumstances, but they certainly need more help from the 
provincial government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s indeed a 
pleasure to rise to participate in the Throne Speech debate for 
this new session of the legislature. We expect this will be the 
last session prior to an election which, in the viewpoint of the 
people of Saskatchewan that I’ve been talking to, just cannot 
come soon enough. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, before I get onto the issues that the Throne 
Speech raised, I would like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate the two new members who were installed into their 
seats yesterday in this legislature. 
 
First of all, I would like to congratulate the MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) that represented the Saskatchewan 
Party in Battleford-Cut Knife who won an outstanding victory 
on March 17. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, St. Patrick’s Day will go 
down in the annals of Saskatchewan Party history as one of the 
largest victories ever seen in a by-election in this province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party candidate provided 
an excellent campaign, talked to the people of his riding, earned 
their support, and won a very impressive victory. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal candidate was not too pleased 
with the Saskatchewan Party. The Liberal candidate was 
interviewed by The Wilkie Press and I’m sure the member for 
North Battleford will be interested in this article. 
 
Now the Liberal candidate’s name was Larry Ingram. And 
unfortunately Mr. Ingram trailed badly in the by-election 
campaign. Certainly didn’t get 15 per cent. I believe he was 
under 10 per cent support. In fact, Mr. Speaker, he barely even 
showed up on the radar screen in that constituency. But Mr. 
Ingram knew why he wasn’t doing very well, and I quote The 
Wilkie Press which says: 
 

Larry Ingram of the Saskatchewan Liberals is accusing the 
Sask Party of running a popular candidate such as Lorenz 
to hide voter discontent in the province. 
 
“I still believe the Sask Party has done Saskatchewan a 
disservice by getting such a candidate as Wally, because a 
lot of people in areas that know him will be supporting 
him.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is guilty of a great big sin 
— we recruited and nominated a good candidate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, that’s not fair because the 
Liberals and the NDP couldn’t find good candidates to 
represent them, but the Saskatchewan Party did. 
 
Now I’m really concerned, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve made 
the same mistake a few more times. Mr. Speaker, we had a 
dinner in Saskatoon last night and we showcased our 
Saskatchewan Party candidates in the Saskatoon city, Mr. 
Speaker — community leaders, business leaders, health care 
professionals. Mr. Speaker, it was impressive. You’d have been 
amazed if you had been there of the quality of the 
Saskatchewan Party candidates. 
 
We’ve done the same thing in Saskatoon; we’re doing the same 
thing in Regina as we did in the Battleford-Cut Knife. We 
found the very best candidate that we could — a cut above all 
the rest, Mr. Speaker. So I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, when the 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

election is called, when the Premier gathers up enough courage 
to call an election, we just may win those ridings as well 
because we’re not playing fair, Mr. Speaker — we’re picking 
better candidates than the other parties. Can you imagine that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it reminds me of the lead up to the 1999 election, 
when Premier Romanow, the premier of the day, was predicting 
gloom and doom for the Saskatchewan Party candidates who 
were going to be seeking their first election win under the 
Saskatchewan Party banner. Oh, he said, it’s going to be 
terrible; these people are going to get wiped off the electoral 
map. There were eight MLAs that sat in this area of the 
legislature and Mr. Romanow would get up in this House and 
he would say, you know, every one of you are going to lose 
your seats; because you’re Saskatchewan Party candidates, 
you’re going to be wiped off the map in this province. He called 
my colleagues a lot of names that weren’t very nice. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all eight of my colleagues won resounding 
victories on September 16, ’99 . . . 1999. Mr. Speaker, they 
were elected with massive majorities in their constituencies. 
Most of them got over 50 per cent of the vote in their ridings. 
The member for Cannington got 75 per cent of the vote. Mr. 
Speaker, I think he’s going for 90 per cent this next time, so you 
. . . 
 
But unfortunately it’s because we have good MLAs and 
because we nominate good candidates. And so we apologize to 
the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan; we apologize to the member 
from North Battleford for choosing such outstanding citizens in 
our province to represent us. We apologize too because we’ve 
already done it again, and of course we’re not going to undo 
these nominations because these are such outstanding 
representatives for our party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate the other member 
who won the by-election in Saskatoon Fairview. Mr. Speaker, 
we know that he ran a very aggressive and impressive 
campaign. While he didn’t do quite as well as the successful 
candidate in the Battleford-Cut Knife under the Saskatchewan 
Party banner, yet he garnered nearly 50 per cent of the vote. 
And we wish him well in his political career. We trust that he, 
as well as the other new member, will be able to serve their 
constituents in Saskatchewan very well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we had a speech two days ago called the 
Throne Speech which is supposed to outline the vision of the 
government; tell the people of Saskatchewan what direction the 
government will be going. 
 
Well the speech focused on the past and when you . . . if you 
use that to be a symbol of the direction the government is going, 
it means they’re going backwards, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
quite a contrast to the position the Saskatchewan Party has 
taken where we talk about looking forward into the future, in 
fact 10 years into the future when our province’s population 
under a Saskatchewan Party government will be 100,000 more 
precious souls than it is today. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier on many occasions, and some 
of his colleagues, have said, well the Saskatchewan Party has 
nothing more than a slogan. Mr. Speaker, they’ve confused a 
few things and they get confused fairly often. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

the NDP that just has a slogan — The Future is Wide Open — 
with nothing to back it up. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our slogan, our theme, our vision, our goal is 
to grow the province of Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 
years, and we have some specific plans that we’re talking to the 
people of Saskatchewan about so that we can achieve that goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP haven’t been listening very well — it’s 
not unusual; they haven’t been listening well to the people of 
Saskatchewan — but if they are listening today . . . And I hope 
that there are some of them in their offices watching on their 
television with bated breath wondering what the Saskatchewan 
Party is going to say because they’ve missed it all the other 
times we’ve said it. So I’m hoping they don’t miss it this time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in our plan to grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 
years, we are going to change the tax regime of this province. 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has one of the lowest basic personal 
income tax exemptions in all of Canada. What that means is 
that the NDP government likes taxing the poor; they like taxing 
low-income people; they like taxing people on fixed incomes. 
Mr. Speaker, they like to tax students who are at summer jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party will change that by 
raising the basic personal exemption. I wonder if the NDP were 
listening, Mr. Speaker. If they get up in the House tomorrow or 
the next day and say, what are the details of your plan, we’ll 
know that just like in months past, they haven’t been listening. 
They’re still not listening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have talked about making Saskatchewan a 
small business tax-free zone. Are they listening, Mr. Speaker? 
Is any of the NDP members on the other side listening? Is the 
Deputy Premier, sitting in his chair, listening? I hope he is 
because then he won’t be able to, in sincerity, make the 
comments that he’s made in the past. 
 
Right now Saskatchewan has a 6 per cent small business 
income tax rate. After four years of Saskatchewan Party 
government, that 6 per cent will be reduced to zero, making 
Saskatchewan the only small business income-tax-free zone in 
all of Canada, a remarkable achievement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Furthermore the Saskatchewan Party will reduce the corporate 
capital tax. The federal government in its recent budget 
announced that they’re going to eliminate the corporate capital 
tax and we applaud them for that. Saskatchewan, again, has one 
of the highest corporate capital taxes in all of Canada — it’s 
point six per cent. It has no relationship whatsoever to 
profitability and the Saskatchewan Party . . . a Saskatchewan 
Party government makes a commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan who have been listening to us, even though the 
NDP haven’t, that we will reduce that tax in half in our first 
term of government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why would we select those two taxes? 
Because those two taxes, if they’re high like they are in 
Saskatchewan, prevent people from getting jobs. Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP promised to create 30,000 jobs. They do not have a 
hope of creating 30,000 jobs. Mr. Speaker, the chances of the 
NDP creating 30,000 jobs in this province before the next 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

 

election are just about as slim as the NDP winning the next 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, so there’s three specific 
measures, three specific tax measures that we have committed 
to in the first term of a Saskatchewan Party government. 
Furthermore we have said that a Saskatchewan Party 
government will reduce the burden on property taxpayers to 
cover the cost of education. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, wherever we go we hear concerns about the 
cost of property taxes and my critics, as they participate in the 
Throne Speech debate, will talk about a lot of these issues. But 
it is the commitment of the Saskatchewan Party to increase the 
provincial government’s share of the funding of education to 50 
per cent of the total, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I know what the NDP 
members are going to say. I can tell; I’ve heard it before. I 
know as sure as I’m standing here they’re going to say, well, 
how are you going to pay for that; how are you going to lower 
these taxes and pay for these, and pay for these measures that 
will make Saskatchewan competitive? 
 
Well I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to stop 
investing in things like SPUDCO. Mr. Speaker, we’re not going 
to run up $107 million to automate the land titles system. Mr. 
Speaker, I tell you, we’re not going to invest in cable television 
in Australia, lose $2 million, could have lost $80 million. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re not going to invest in Newfoundland, in Nova 
Scotia. Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to invest in Georgia or 
Nashville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to invest in Saskatchewan where 
governments are supposed to invest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — So, Mr. Speaker, I hope the NDP were 
listening. They said, they said, Mr. Speaker, we want to hear 
your plan. And, Mr. Speaker, I hope they stay in their seats. I 
hope they don’t leave this Assembly because we are outlining 
our plan. They will have no excuse in the future saying that they 
don’t know what the Saskatchewan Party plan is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is perceived, and I think rightly 
perceived throughout Canada and beyond our nation’s borders, 
as not having fair and balanced and modern labour legislation 
— a good labour environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why don’t we have jobs in Saskatchewan? Why 
isn’t our workforce growing? Why can’t young people get jobs 
in Saskatchewan? Why must they go to Alberta or some other 
place to find a job? Well, Mr. Speaker, because the labour 
environment and the labour laws in this province are not 
balanced. They’re archaic; they’re out of step with the global 
economy. Investors are not investing in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why this government is investing through 

the Crowns because they can’t get private investment. They 
can’t get the multi millions of dollars we need in this province 
to attract industry, to create jobs, to expand value-added 
processing in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a Saskatchewan Party government, not only in its 
first term but early in that term, will correct the unfair and 
unbalanced labour laws in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to growing the workforce of this 
province. We’re committed to seeing not only non-unionized 
but unionized labour increase their numbers in this province to 
make Saskatchewan a stronger economy where our young men 
and women can actually find real jobs; they don’t have to look 
to the government for a job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, if the Saskatchewan Party 
had been writing this Throne Speech, we would talk about the 
proper role for the Crown corporations in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some Crown corporations that have core 
functions and we believe that they should be focusing on those 
core functions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the function of SaskPower is to provide electricity 
to every home, every business, every industry in this province 
at the lowest possible cost that can be . . . that service can be 
provided. What is SaskPower doing? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
SaskPower is investing outside of our province. 
 
What is SaskTel doing? Same thing. They should be committed 
to providing the most affordable telecommunications, telephone 
service to the province of Saskatchewan. What are they doing? 
They’re hiking phone rates by 10 per cent in rural 
Saskatchewan because they wasted money in Australia and all 
over the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party will restore the Crowns to 
their core responsibilities, their core duties of providing utilities 
to the people of Saskatchewan at the lowest possible cost. And 
that goes for SaskEnergy and SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) as well. 
 
It’s about time the Crowns did the job they were supposed to, 
not be the tool for economic development — the tool that has 
failed because there’s a right-hand thread in the economy and 
they keep wrenching the left-hand thread and stripping it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 
committed to better health care in this province. We have the 
longest waiting lists in the country, the longest waiting lists in 
the country in Saskatchewan. That’s shameful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past Saskatchewan has been known as a 
pioneer in innovative health care provision. But under the NDP 
government and under this particular administration, we have 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

seen health care deteriorate in Saskatchewan at an alarming 
rate. Mr. Speaker, we are short about 1,200 nurses. My 
colleague, the MLA for Melfort-Tisdale, is going to outline in 
more detail our health care policy, but we have a plan to recruit 
and retrain . . . retain health care professionals. We have a plan 
to strengthen the College of Medicine at the U of S (University 
of Saskatchewan). Mr. Speaker, we care about the people of this 
province; we care about their health. 
 
The NDP have showed no sympathy, no concern, for the 
well-being of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
doesn’t care if somebody has to wait for three years in this 
province to get a hip replacement. We have a plan for health 
care. 
 
We also have a plan and a focus on education. The 
Saskatchewan Party recognizes the importance of K to 12 
(kindergarten to grade 12) education and post-secondary 
education in this province. If we don’t equip our young people 
and our citizens to face the job opportunities and challenges of 
the 21st century, we as a province have failed. 
 
Certainly the NDP are beginning to fail in the area of education. 
They are not keeping up with the times. And my colleague, the 
MLA for Kelvington-Wadena, will be talking about the 
Saskatchewan Party’s plan for education and the priority that 
education plays and our plan to grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 
people in 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your home or in your business or in your 
volunteer association or in your profession, in your . . . in our 
involvements, we often reflect, we review, we analyze what 
we’ve been doing, particularly if things aren’t going too well, 
you know, if the personal cheque book isn’t being balanced any 
more. And we start to have a look — are we spending in the 
right place; are we working in the right areas. 
 
If our business isn’t doing well, if we can’t keep employees in 
our business, we begin to analyze the workplace conditions, we 
begin to analyze the salaries we pay our workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s nobody attending our service club 
organization any more, we start to wonder if we’re fulfilling a 
useful purpose. That’s a natural and responsible response to a 
situation when things aren’t going as well as they should. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why shouldn’t governments do the same? Why 
shouldn’t governments analyze what they’re doing, particularly 
if things aren’t going so well? You would think that after 16 
consecutive quarters of population loss, the NDP would start to 
think, maybe we’ve been doing something wrong; we need to 
review how our government operates. 
 
Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker . . . And I hope that that full set of 
MLAs over on those NDP benches are listening so that they 
won’t come back tomorrow and say, we don’t have a plan. Mr. 
Speaker, we have a plan to review the function and purpose of 
every government agency, department, board, commission to 
make sure they’re doing the job they’re supposed to do for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — I hope they’re taking notes, Mr. Speaker. I 
hope all of those MLAs on the other side are taking notes so 
that they know the Saskatchewan Party has a plan. They might 
even want to steal some of our plans. Won’t be a bad idea, Mr. 
Speaker. It would certainly be good for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, perhaps if they’d have done a little 
analyzing, a little soul searching, they wouldn’t have got 
involved in the SPUDCO affair and they wouldn’t have tried to 
hide it for six years. Mr. Speaker, they would have done due 
diligence. 
 
And you have to wonder, Mr. Speaker, if they were able to hide 
SPUDCO for six years, what else has the NDP been hiding 
from the people of this province? You know they’re not really 
being very careful about their actions. They’re not really too 
concerned about being forthright and honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s certainly causing concern amongst the 
citizens of this province that I speak with. 
 
That’s why the Saskatchewan Party wants to have a government 
that’s open and accountable, and will review its practices to 
make sure that Saskatchewan taxpayers and citizens are getting 
the very best from their government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, this province has so many 
advantages, so many opportunities. Somebody told me the other 
day, a businessman here in Regina said, you know the one thing 
about the NDP is they never miss an opportunity to miss an 
opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Isn’t that one of the best descriptions of 
the NDP that you’ve ever heard? They can’t . . . They will never 
miss an opportunity to miss an opportunity. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have too many opportunities in 
Saskatchewan to miss. We have 40 per cent . . . 47 per cent of 
the arable land, in this province. Mr. Speaker, we have the 
world’s largest deposits of potash and uranium. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re finding out we have even more oil and gas reserves than 
we thought. Mr. Speaker, we have some successful 
manufacturing. We have some successful food processing. If 
we could just remove the barriers to growth in this province, 
think of how many more opportunities we would be able to 
exploit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party understands that we can 
do much more in the area of value-added in agriculture and 
food processing. We know that we can do much more in the 
area of intensive agriculture. We know that we can do much 
more in the technology sector — information technology, 
biotechnology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve just scratched the surface, but there are too 
many barriers placed in the way of those industries by the NDP. 
The Saskatchewan Party will fix that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need a private-sector-driven ethanol and 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

 

bio-diesel industry, and we need a stronger tourism sector in 
this province. And, for instance, by making Saskatchewan a 
small-business tax-free zone, we will see tourism expand in this 
province; we will see a stronger hospitality industry. We will 
see more jobs for people, particularly young people, in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a government that places a proper 
emphasis on rural Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan. 
Every time I go to the North, people in those communities tell 
me that the NDP has abandoned them — abandoned the North. 
You know, there’s only NDP representatives from the North 
and yet northern people feel like they’ve lost touch with their 
MLAs. They never see them; they don’t care. And as a result, 
poverty continues in northern Saskatchewan; unemployment is 
at horrendously unacceptable levels; the quality of life, the level 
of health care is absolutely unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has a plan to grow 
Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 years. Mr. Speaker, that 
means bringing our kids home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in Toronto. I would . . . The member hasn’t 
been listening. You know, I thought, I thought I’d stated long 
enough that this was more than a slogan because we have 
details, and I thought that the member for Regina Dewdney was 
sitting in his seat the entire time and listening, and he still hasn’t 
got it. How slow is this member, Mr. Speaker? We’re talking 
about the details of our plan and he’s still saying it’s just a 
slogan. I’m beginning to think, Mr. Speaker, that those people 
are absolutely hopeless. They just cannot grasp success; they 
can’t grasp that the official opposition has a plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thousands and thousands of young people have 
left Saskatchewan, but many of them want to come home. They 
want to come back to their home communities. They want to 
practise their skills and abilities in Saskatchewan. And they’re 
saying, you know, if the government changes and get the NDP 
out, we just might come back. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’re working so hard to defeat 
the NDP — because we want these young people to come back 
home. We have a plan that will make Saskatchewan a land of 
opportunity once again, a place where our young people will be 
proud to come back to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, one point that I will add. I 
wasn’t planning on adding this, but in question period the 
Premier challenged me. He said, what’s your policy on TLEs 
(treaty land entitlement)? I heard him say that in the . . . What’s 
your policy on TLEs? He doesn’t have one, or if he does he 
won’t tell us. 
 
We asked questions yesterday. We asked questions today. And 
the Minister of Agriculture both times got up and refused to 
answer our questions, even though there are thousands of 
leaseholders and Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan wondering 
what the NDP government’s plan is in this regard. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party maintains that the 
position of having a willing buyer and a willing seller be 

maintained. That’s the Saskatchewan Party’s position. 
 
Furthermore we believe that leases that are currently legitimate 
should not be cancelled. That’s pretty clear, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the agreement. That’s what First Nations and leaseholders and 
the Government of Saskatchewan agreed to. We support that. 
That’s our position. 
 
And furthermore we say that when leases come due for renewal, 
when leases come due for renewal, that the current leaseholder 
— if they have maintained their end of the lease agreement — 
should have first right of refusal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, so I’ve outlined about three 
or four points of Saskatchewan Party policy when it comes to 
the TLE lands. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the way it stands now. 
That’s the way the NDP signed the agreement. That’s the way 
the First Nations signed the agreement. That’s the way the 
leaseholders understand it is. If their word doesn’t mean 
anything, that’s not my fault. We make a commitment, Mr. 
Speaker, and we intend to keep it. 
 
I want to close today, Mr. Speaker, on this Speech from the 
Throne, in talking about the principle of democracy because the 
NDP raise it all the time. Mr. Speaker, we believe, we believe 
that if a person becomes the premier of Saskatchewan, they 
should at an early occasion go to the people for a mandate. Our 
Premier refuses to do that. That’s not very democratic. Our 
Premier doesn’t have the courage to go to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Where is his commitment to the democracy? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see sitting in the seat, the representative for 
Saskatoon . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. There’s been a couple of times when 
the member has referred to the presence or absence, not quite as 
directly as this time, but I would ask the member not to refer to 
the presence or absence of members in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon Meewasin, I’ve heard 
her make some comments about democracy. Well the reason 
she’s sitting in her seat is because the candidate that was 
nominated by the members of her constituency, the members 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, she protest . . . She 
doth . . . Mr. Speaker, she doth protest too much. She doth 
protest too much. I wish the member would listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a member, an NDP member, nominated 
in the Saskatoon Meewasin constituency to run in the 1999 
election. The NDP’s executive council said, no way, we do not 
accept, we do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow to take her seat and I 
would ask the member to withdraw the statement that she just 
made and apologize to the House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with regret that I made 
the comments. I withdraw the comments and I apologize. 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the NDP 
executive council said, we do not want this person who was 
elected by the members at an open nomination meeting to be 
our candidate. The people, the members of that — if I 
remember correctly and if I’m wrong I will correct it — but I 
understand that there were some allegations about this member, 
the person, that the members knew about prior to the vote. And 
yet they still chose to democratically select a different candidate 
to run for them in the Saskatoon Meewasin constituency. That 
was overruled by the party. 
 
The only difference in the case between this and the current 
case that the Saskatchewan Party is facing, is that the member 
who was duly and democratically nominated was persuaded to 
step down. And thus another nomination meeting was held and 
the subsequent winner is the current member of Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand those to be the facts. Now we have 
another, we have another problem about democracy. We have a 
Finance minister sitting in this House who ran on a public 
platform in the last election in opposition to the NDP. In 
opposition to the NDP. That member said, vote for me and I 
will hold the NDP accountable. And so people voted in the last 
election for the member for Saskatoon Northwest, based on his 
commitment to oppose the NDP. And just days after the 1999 
election that member — not only personally but with his party 
— crossed the floor to the other side and said, we will form a 
coalition with the government, the very government that we 
criticized in a 28-day campaign. We will be part and parcel with 
that government. 
 
Now you tell me, Mr. Speaker, is that democracy? Is that 
treating the people of Saskatchewan with respect? Not one whit. 
And neither was the member for Melville who was part of that, 
nor the member from North Battleford who was part of that 
coalition for quite some time until the Liberal Party exerted so 
much pressure on him that he moved back from that side to this 
side, all the while doing it undemocratically, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am not going to be lectured by those folks about the principle 
of a democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, their whole . . . all of their 
arguments, all of their actions, the record of this government is 
dismal, is disappointing, and sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it is 
disgusting. It’s for that reason that we can’t support the Throne 
Speech. 
 
And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I would make the following 
amendment. I would move, seconded by the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers, the following . . . that the following 
words be added after the word “session”: 
 

however this Assembly is disappointed with the lack of 
vision and initiative presented by the current Premier and 
cabinet in the Speech from the Throne and therefore urges 
that a general provincial election be called immediately. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
certainly a pleasure this afternoon to rise and speak in support 
of the amendment to the original motion, the amendment 
brought forward by the member from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of interest that those of us on 
this side of the House sat here on Tuesday and listened to the 
Throne Speech brought forward by the present government, this 
government led by Lorne Calvert, who has yet, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member is out of order when he 
uses the names of any member in the Legislative Assembly. 
Order. So I bring that to the member’s attention. The member 
will continue. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker, for my enthusiasm 
and I will endeavour to be a little more diligent in the future. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, of course we 
try to practise diligence a lot more than the members on the 
other side of the House. And of course, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
referring to SPUDCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the debate was opened by the member 
from Cumberland, and it was nice to hear him open the debate 
alluding to the fact, Mr. Speaker, that it in all likelihood will be 
his last opportunity to participate in a Speech from the Throne 
debate. And so from this side of the House, of course, we want 
to congratulate him for his many years of representing the 
Cumberland constituency. Mr. Speaker, it’s also . . . of course, a 
great deal of work has gone into over the years . . . As the 
member mentioned 17 years he’s been a member of this 
legislature and that takes quite a bit of time away from family 
and friends to represent your constituency. And we certainly on 
this side of the House want to recognize that on behalf of his 
constituents also. 
 
Also, yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains seconded the original motion. And of course on 
this side of the House, we also recognize that it may be that 
member’s swan song also. Because the Saskatchewan Party, 
Mr. Speaker, is quite . . . with due diligence, Mr. Speaker, and 
in a democratic way nominated a man who is going to be an 
excellent representative for Regina Wascana Plains after the 
next election. And we’re certainly looking forward to that. And 
Mr. Dan Thibault is going to be an excellent member of the 
government team for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I went through the list of the Throne Speech 
and took an opportunity to read through it yesterday, I was quite 
amazed that a government that has been here since 1991 is still 
grasping, is still grasping for straws at ways in order to try and 
govern this province. 
 
In 1991 the NDP government was able to run a campaign on 
what they alluded to at that time was the ineptitude of the 
Progressive Conservative government and were able to gain a 
significant majority. Well, Mr. Speaker, over the years, as 
successive elections have come along, there have been 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

 

significant reductions in the majority of the NDP government 
leading up to, Mr. Speaker, the 1999 election when they were 
not able to achieve a majority and had to form — in the dead of 
night behind closed doors — a coalition government with some 
independent members, members who were sitting as 
independents at this time. 
 
Although we understand, Mr. Speaker, and maybe the members 
at some time in the future may be able to correct this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the two independent members may in fact 
be looking to run for the NDP party in the upcoming election as 
members of the NDP party. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, of course there are several issues that were 
raised in the Throne Speech or alluded to. Several of them, of 
course, were the government’s self-congratulatory posing so 
that people will remember that they have been, actually been 
government for the past few years. 
 
I have listened to many throne speeches. They’ve been almost 
identical from year to year, congratulating themselves for 
what’s happened. In the early ’90s, the balancing of budgets 
that had to be worked towards . . . Which was one of the things 
on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that we were able to 
willingly accept, that balancing a budget is crucial, is crucial to 
being government in this province of Saskatchewan. Unlike, 
unlike the present Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who seems to 
have no interest in balancing the books in this province, and we 
are very concerned about that. And the people of Saskatchewan 
are very concerned about that, and have raised the issue on a 
multitude of times with members on this side of the House that 
deficit budgeting is unacceptable and will do everything they 
can to help us remove this NDP government from power. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that of course — and we 
talk about this present government — that I just want to allude 
to very shortly. And I spoke about the big issue with deficit 
budgeting that this government is carrying out and their fairy 
tale, fairy tale Fiscal Stabilization Fund that they . . . the 
so-called rainy day fund that no one, Mr. Speaker, seems to be 
able to find, including the Provincial Auditor. The Provincial 
Auditor can’t even find the fund and so then how is the 
government able to prove, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it even 
exists? 
 
But another big issue that is out there is that we are now 
running into a period of our history of this province where we 
have a Premier — a Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker — who has 
never gone to the polls in a general election to be recognized by 
the people of Saskatchewan as the Premier. 
 
This is starting to create a great deal of concern, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan. How can someone 
continue with a mandate that they have never earned at the polls 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
And now we understand that, of course in the mid-1960s there 
was a short period of time where the predecessor to the NDP, 
the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) Party, also 
elected a leader prior to a general election. The gentleman at 
that time remained as premier for a very short period of time 
and then went to the polls. 
 

That is due diligence and that is how you gain respect. That is 
how you gain respect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this House by 
going to the people to seek a mandate, to seek a mandate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, from the people of Saskatchewan. And not 
trying to hide behind their desk in this legislature and make the 
people of Saskatchewan wait while they try to pad their 
pensions in this province at the expense of the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, now the Leader of the Opposition has 
talked briefly about several issues. He talked about agriculture 
and the complete lack of vision by this government. And 
certainly today in question period it was reiterated again by the 
Deputy Premier, the member from Yorkton, who is also the 
minister for Agriculture and Rural Revitalization. 
 
Rural revitalization is a bit of an oxymoron, of course, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because we know very well that rural 
revitalization is certainly not taking place at this time. With the 
significant drought that hit this province, this government’s 
complete lack of commitment to the agricultural industry, that 
rural revitalization is actually an oxymoron. 
 
Now what we also know, that in the agricultural sector, is that 
this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, could be one of the huge advantages 
that this province could have with over 45 per cent of the arable 
land mass in Canada. We should be a leading industrial 
agricultural producer in Canada. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we’re not. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan, our 
return per acre ranges right around the $88 an acre mark — $88 
an acre. 
 
Now let’s make a comparison. Now it may be a little bit unfair 
to the province of Newfoundland to be compared to 
Saskatchewan for arable land but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
return per acre in Newfoundland for agriculture is over $700. 
Now if the province of Newfoundland can get those kind of 
returns per acre, why in the world not can Saskatchewan 
improve its ability to generate wealth through agriculture? 
 
But this province’s plan under this NDP government, this 
do-nothing NDP government, is simply to sit back and wait and 
see if it rains. Now that was what the . . . that’s what the Deputy 
Premier said last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker — if it rains, 
everything will be better. 
 
Well it didn’t rain and it didn’t get better. In fact he started the 
loopy lotto with the rain stations in this province that backfired. 
They increased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the insurance premiums 
for crop insurance. They cut, in crop insurance, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the crops that could be insured. 
 
So we’re trying to understand, the farmers in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are trying to understand how it is that this 
government can get up and say, we’re here for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, when day after day and week after week and 
month after month, they’re able to physically demonstrate they 
have absolutely no knowledge of what goes on in rural 
Saskatchewan and do not feel any obligation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to try to understand the devastation that is going on in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday there was quite a lengthy 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

speech, I believe about an hour and 15 minutes, from the 
member from Cumberland. And there was a couple of . . . there 
was a couple of real interesting points that the member brought 
forward. And I’ll speak about more than two certainly, but there 
were a couple of real interesting points that the member from 
Cumberland House brought forward that I think are very 
important — that need to be continued to be debated about in 
this House. 
 
Is one, on this side of the House we’ve got a . . . we’ve got a bit 
of a vision, looking through the NDP fog, of what their election 
platform is going to look like. The NDP, through the member 
from Cumberland and the member from Regina Wascana 
Plains, have parted the fog, gently you know, just so we can see 
through it a little bit what their election platform is going to be. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP’s election platform in the 
upcoming provincial election is going to be Sask Party bad. 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
are going to be looking for a little more than that. 
 
But it falls into line, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with what we’re 
hearing from this government on a day-to-day basis when every 
day in question period, whether it’s the Premier, or the Deputy 
Premier, or the former Economic Development minister, or the 
minister responsible for the Crowns, get up and say to this 
legislature, repeat in the media, that what is the Saskatchewan 
Party’s . . . what is the Saskatchewan Party’s position on these, 
on different issues. 
 
Well it’s question period. The opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is supposed to ask questions, and the government is supposed to 
respond to them. But they don’t. Because the government 
doesn’t have a position on anything, doesn’t have a vision for 
this province, doesn’t have an election platform other than Sask 
Party bad, the people of Saskatchewan are going to be able to 
very quickly make up their mind in the upcoming provincial 
election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who actually has a vision for this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the party that has a vision for this province is 
the Saskatchewan Party, led by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of the Opposition. That’s the 
party that the people of Saskatchewan are going to be 
supporting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s the man who’s 
going to lead this province through and into the new 
millennium. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Cumberland also talked 
of it yesterday, about economic development in northern 
Saskatchewan. Now we all found that — we found that, on this 
side of the House — amusing. As the Leader of the Opposition 
alluded to in his speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no 
economic development in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:15) 
 
In the town of La Loche, the northern town of La Loche, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, unemployment is 90 per cent — 90 per cent. 
Those members on the other side of the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are proud that the number one industry in La Loche is 
welfare. And they are proud of that and they’re proud to stand 
up and brag about it. 

But the people of La Loche, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are tired of it. 
They want jobs; they want real jobs. They know very well that 
in northwest Saskatchewan there can be real jobs for everyone 
in northern Saskatchewan, specifically in northwestern 
Saskatchewan — whether you start at Beauval and work right 
up the highway to La Loche and further north — that there can 
be jobs for everyone. In fact, there should be more jobs than 
there is even people there to fill those jobs. The people will 
actually have to move there to improve, actually improve, their 
quality of life in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So what has the government, what has this government done to 
help the situation in northern Saskatchewan when it comes to 
economic development and quality employment? Well we 
looked at the Throne Speech as the Lieutenant Governor 
presented it to us on Tuesday and the government said, well 
we’re going to hold a meeting and we’re going to talk about 
stuff. And then we’ll see what happens from that. And then 
we’ll hold a couple of more meetings and we’ll strike a 
committee. 
 
So how, how is it that the people of northern Saskatchewan are 
going to gain confidence in their future for their children and 
their grandchildren when all this government wants to do is to 
invite the people of northern Saskatchewan to come to a 
meeting? What kind of economic development plan is that? 
 
I have talked to hundreds upon hundreds of people in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and not once did I run into 
someone that says, we go to a meeting with the government and 
we go a meeting with the government and nothing good ever 
comes out of it — all they’ve done is go to a meeting. They’ve 
been paid for their mileage, paid for their meals, and sent home. 
And the government pats them on their back and say, what a 
great job. For what? The government doesn’t listen to them. 
 
There have been proposals, there has been proposals, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, brought to this government for economic 
development in northern Saskatchewan, and what has the 
government done about it? Well they hold some more meetings, 
and then they do a study, and then the study ends up on a shelf 
and it gathers dust, and then they hold another meeting to talk 
about the study, and then they have a study to study the study. 
This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is how this NDP government creates 
economic development in northern Saskatchewan — by holding 
a study in the city of Regina. 
 
Let’s take a look at some of the things that could be happening 
in northern Saskatchewan. Now the member from Regina 
South, he’s really looking forward to this. So I want to tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that not only is the member from Regina 
South excited about what I’m going to tell him, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but what I’m about to tell the NDP government are not 
my own ideas. These are the ideas of the people from northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These are the ideas of the 
people who live and want to work in northern Saskatchewan, 
the opportunities that abound in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We can look at a multitude of areas. We can look at agriculture. 
We can look in forestry. We can look in tourism. We can look 
in the mining sector. We can look at energy. What is this 
government doing in any one of those areas? 
 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

 

Now there’s members on the other side of the House say they 
have . . . they could tell what’s going on in northern 
Saskatchewan. Well of course they could. You can drive into 
any community and find nothing. That’s what this government 
is doing for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
In the town of La Ronge at one time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 
was 20 exploration companies doing exploratory work in 
northern Saskatchewan. There was 20, up until the early ’90s. 
As of today there’s about six. Now I want to hear sometime 
through this debate someone on that NDP side of the House, the 
government side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, explain to 
me how going from 20 exploration companies in La Ronge 
down to six is an improvement. How is that providing quality 
employment opportunities in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Now we can look at mining. Let’s take a quick look at mining. 
What does this province have, what does this province have, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as an advantage that cannot be matched 
anywhere in the world? We have opportunities in mining, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that cannot be matched anywhere in the world. 
We have a clean energy source in northern Saskatchewan that 
the world is clamouring for. And I mean clean. It’s 
environmentally friendly. And what is this government doing 
about it? Absolutely nothing. They’re sitting there wringing 
their hands and gnashing their teeth saying, oh, we need to 
study them. We need another study. Studies are done. 
 
In fact what I heard yesterday in the speech from the member 
from Cumberland and the member from Wascana Plains, 
Regina Wascana Plains, talk about that we have problems in the 
world of energy, that the people of Saskatchewan need to 
recognize that SaskPower has done a great job. There are 
problems all around us, all around, but not here, not here, 
because we have SaskPower. 
 
In fact one of those members said, one of those members said 
Saskatchewan has never had a blackout, has never had a 
brownout. Well if they actually believe that, they must not read 
one single newspaper in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because if they had, they would have known 
very well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the town of La Ronge has 
been living with brownouts for decades because of that NDP 
government not allowing economic development in the energy 
sector in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
There are . . . Opportunities abound in that region around La 
Ronge, where you can get private investment, where we would 
not have to put taxpayer dollars at risk to create cogeneration 
for energy in the La Ronge area. And do you know what, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? There are members on that side of the House 
said we can’t have that, we can’t have people investing in 
energy in Saskatchewan other than the government. But we 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker — we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— that the record of this government when it comes to 
investment is dismal and almost zero at best, almost zero. 
 
But there is one investment, there is one investment they’re 
always willing to take credit for. The member from Cumberland 
brought this up yesterday. There is one investment that took 
place that they are willing to take credit for except when you 
remind them about it, except when we remind them about it, 
how the investment took place. And that’s when SaskTel 

invested in Chunnel, in building the Chunnel underneath the 
English Channel. SaskTel was there and made a lot of money 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And who was the government that took on that risk? It was not 
that NDP government. Made a ton of money on that for the 
people of Saskatchewan. And so, what did they do? They took 
credit and said we did that. You didn’t do that at all. It was the 
previous government that actually took on that risk, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But I see it raised the hackles, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
members opposite. They surely don’t like to hear that the one 
golden, one golden Crown that we have in the Crowns where 
outside opportunity actually went well was not actually initiated 
by this government. 
 
We can certainly look at a lot of other areas that were initiated 
by this government that went very badly, and the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar has gone through that extensively. 
 
And I know in the response to the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the member from Swift Current, he’s certainly going 
to be reminding the government about all their mismanagement. 
And I would suspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he will also have a 
few words to say about some investment called SPUDCO. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I stay on the subject of the 
opportunities in northern Saskatchewan, and I was talking about 
energy that could be created through the mining sector, there 
are other mining opportunities in northern Saskatchewan that 
are being lost because of the waste and the confusion in the 
NDP caucus as to what to do next. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the North American auto industry, 
there’s a group of metals that are extremely important, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the manufacturing of today’s automobiles. 
That group of metals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, exists in 
Saskatchewan. It exists in abundance. You know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, those group of metals do not exist to the degree, 
anywhere else — only one place else in the world — like they 
do in Saskatchewan. The auto industry has actually found they 
would rather go to this other jurisdiction to gather those metals 
that they need for the automobile industry than to try to do 
business here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the group of metals that I’m speaking 
about is the platinum group of metals. We have abundant 
opportunities to create significant wealth in northern 
Saskatchewan; jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the people of 
northern Saskatchewan; investment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 
the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So what is the NDP government doing to make sure that 
investment by the people of northern Saskatchewan, that 
economic wealth can be created by the people of northern 
Saskatchewan, in just this single industry? Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they’re doing nothing. In fact, they’ve turned virtually a blind 
eye to the opportunity. When you talk to officials from the 
departments about the opportunity that exists, oh well, it’s too 
far north and the government or the automobile makers aren’t 
going to be wanting to go that far to collect, to collect these 
minerals. 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

So where are they going, Mr. Deputy Speaker? In North 
America we are second to no-one in having the abundance of 
this group of metals, the platinum metal group, that the 
automobile industry requires in today’s automobiles. They can’t 
get it in Manitoba. They can’t get it in Alberta. They can’t get it 
virtually nowhere else in any of the other provinces. They can’t 
get enough of it in continental North America. It’s not here. The 
abundance that they need does not exist except outside of 
Saskatchewan in the North American continent. 
 
So where are they going? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are 
going to a jurisdiction that they find it easier to do business 
with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, than it is in Saskatchewan. It’s hard 
to believe, it’s hard to believe that this jurisdiction is a better 
place to do business with than Saskatchewan, but that’s where 
the automobile industry is going. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
must be a better place to do business. 
 
So where are they going, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They are going 
to mainland China to get platinum group metals for the 
automobile industry in North America when the platinum group 
metals already exist to supply all their needs for decades right 
here in Saskatchewan. And we are not mining one ounce, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the platinum group of metals . . . A 
proposal was brought to this government for two projects, for 
two projects, in northeastern Saskatchewan. One was for a 
large-scale forestry operation and one was to open up a mine to 
mine in the platinum group of metals. 
 
So what happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well, the minister of 
Economic Development at that time told the House, told the 
newspapers, that these companies that wanted to come here 
didn’t have deep enough pockets. Well we’ll never know if they 
had deep enough pockets because certainly the former minister 
of Economic Development admitted to this House that he has 
not always been truthful. So we don’t know; we’ll never know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether these companies had deep enough 
pockets to actually come to Saskatchewan to do business. 
 
We do know something though that is definitive, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that when one of these companies was interviewed 
as to why they’re leaving Saskatchewan, they were emphatic in 
their response. They refused to come to Saskatchewan because 
they didn’t know what the rules were. Every time they went 
over one hurdle and the government would say to them, it’s all 
clear sailing now, they’d go around a corner. There’d be a 
bigger hurdle. Get over that one, go around a corner, there’d be 
another big one. And every time they went over the hurdle the 
government said, you’re clear sailing now; all you’ve got to do 
is get around that corner, but there’d be another hurdle. It 
wasn’t deep pockets that were their problem; it was this NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker, that is the problem. 
 
Those two initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, cost northern 
Saskatchewan residents — northern Saskatchewan residents 
represented by the member from Cumberland — an opportunity 
for investment and it cost them an opportunity for quality jobs. 
Investment and quality jobs is what it cost them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
(15:30) 

And that’s another example of how this NDP government talks 
about we’re the ones that want to represent northern 
Saskatchewan; we’re the ones. And as the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar talked about, they have members from 
northern Saskatchewan in that government, and still nothing is 
happening in northern Saskatchewan. And that is simply 
another example. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the advantages I’ve had, growing 
up north of Prince Albert, is having an opportunity to have met 
many people that . . . they were very experienced and took an 
active role, an active role, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in helping open 
up northern Saskatchewan for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan and the people of southern Saskatchewan on a 
two-way street that should have — and under a Saskatchewan 
Party government I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will benefit 
both parties — but should have opened up great opportunity for 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Before there was a highway to Lac la Ronge, before there was 
even a good road, I can remember going to La Ronge many 
years ago when I was young on a small dirt road. And certainly 
the member from Cumberland House will remember that small, 
windy, dirt road that we used to take from north of Prince 
Albert to La Ronge. And prior to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
freight to La Ronge was done with Caterpillars in the 
wintertime. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the interesting events 
that always took place on those trips north, hauling freight into 
northern Saskatchewan, was that on the night before these 
freight trains would cross the south shore of Lac la Ronge and 
they crossed the lake into the town of La Ronge, they’d stop 
overnight at a . . . along a river. And, of course, they had their 
own bunkhouses with them. These bunkhouses needed heat. 
They needed to be heated. So the men on the freight crew 
would take their shovels out, when they parked at night, go into 
the riverbank, and shovel coal out of the riverbank and use that 
coal to heat their bunkhouse for the night. 
 
So I was asked a question several years ago: you know, why 
don’t . . . now that you’re an MLA, now that you’re a new 
MLA, why don’t you ask the government, go to someone in the 
government and ask them how much, how large is that coal 
deposit on the south shore of Lac la Ronge? 
 
So I did that. I did that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I went to a 
representative from the Department of Energy and Mines, and 
we were carrying on a very good conversation about 
opportunities in this province. And I talked to him about this 
coal deposit. And it caught the civil servant off guard 
momentarily that he would even be asked such a question. But 
he quickly, quickly gathered himself, remembered the NDP 
party line: there is no coal in northern Saskatchewan. That’s the 
NDP party line: there is no coal in northern Saskatchewan. You 
can go into a riverbank and take it out with a shovel, but there’s 
no coal there. 
 
The people of northern Saskatchewan are asking, why wasn’t 
this developed? We’re developing power through coal 
generation in southern Saskatchewan; shouldn’t we have been 
doing this in northern Saskatchewan? 
 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

 

Well we never did get an answer, just that it doesn’t exist. The 
coal doesn’t exist so therefore it can’t happen. Now this is how 
this NDP government, on a consistent and long-term basis, 
continues to bury their head in the sand or in the case of the 
south shore of Lac La Ronge, bury their head in the coal, that 
we can’t have anything good in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve moved into that area of 
transition of mining and energy, and of course in mining in 
Saskatchewan a great deal of energy can be created through 
either coal or uranium. And certainly we’re one of the leading 
producers of uranium in the world and could be a lot bigger 
producer of uranium in the world if we had a little more 
friendlier government towards business in this province. And 
under a Sask Party government, led by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, we’re certainly going to have that right after 
the next provincial election. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve heard also for years — you know, 
growing up, as I mentioned earlier, north of Prince Albert in the 
forest fringe and having spent considerable time in my youth in 
northern Saskatchewan — that the tar sands, according to this 
NDP government, end at the Saskatchewan border. There’s a 
huge tar sands area in northern Alberta and it stops cold at the 
Saskatchewan border. 
 
So in my multitude of forays into northern Saskatchewan and 
up the west side, up Highway 355 — or 155, pardon me, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — I got to make a lot of friends up there. A lot 
of friends in northwestern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that are very influential; community leaders in northern 
Saskatchewan. Community leaders, business leaders, who are 
very concerned, Mr. Speaker, about how economic 
development and how job creation is being developed in 
northern Saskatchewan, and specifically the northwest. 
 
So we’re sitting around at a meeting and the meeting, it’s kind 
of winding down, and we’re having a second cup of coffee, Mr. 
Speaker, and I got to asking about the oil and gas deposits in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Well the meeting extended significantly when I asked that 
question, Mr. Speaker, because the people of northwest 
Saskatchewan simply opened up and told me about a massive 
opportunity that’s being lost by this NDP government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They know definitively that in northern Saskatchewan that the 
Athabasca tar sands do not end at the Saskatchewan border and 
that they extend for miles — nay, Mr. Speaker — leagues into 
Saskatchewan is how far those tar sands extend into 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I asked these gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, how deep is that oil? Is 
there going to be a problem? Is that oil positioned as such that 
it’s uneconomical to go after? Is it just at a layer where you 
can’t strip the topsoil to get at it, yet it’s too shallow to want to 
drill into it? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no they didn’t think it was too 
shallow to strip topsoil. In fact there are a multitude of areas, 
Mr. Speaker, where that if you’re digging a basement in 
northwestern Saskatchewan, you hit oil. All you have to do is 

dig a basement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Eight feet in places, 
they’ve struck oil in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now here’s an opportunity where we have neighbours all 
around us that are crying for energy. And Saskatchewan has 
decided, well we’re going to wait; we’re going to save it for a 
rainy day. 
 
Well of course if you’re talking about rural Saskatchewan, 
waiting for a rainy day might take a while because we’re 
suffering in the middle of a drought. But for economic 
development, we are in the middle of a downpour, a monsoon, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it is time that this government who is devoid of ideas, was 
not able to bring forth one good, solid, long-range vision for 
this province in this Throne Speech, it is time for this Premier 
who has not been given a mandate by the people of 
Saskatchewan to call an election, and that the Saskatchewan 
Party can then form the next government. And we can create the 
jobs and we can create the economic wealth that the people of 
northwestern Saskatchewan are demanding. 
 
One of the other interesting conversations that took place at this 
very same meeting, this very same meeting, Mr. Speaker, was 
that not only were they wanting — these communities’ northern 
leaders who represent the northern community — wanting to 
have jobs in the energy sector, they were looking for more 
energy for themselves. 
 
They could see that if they had more energy for themselves they 
could expand their economic opportunities, Mr. Speaker, to a 
point where they would be such a massive contributor to 
Saskatchewan’s economic growth that they could virtually lead 
Saskatchewan by themselves into economic recovery. They can 
actually see that in northwestern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So one of the requests that one of the communities actually put 
forward to the Government of Saskatchewan was access to 
natural gas. We would like natural gas in our community. Well 
SaskEnergy told this community, oh that’s too far; we can’t 
bring natural gas into this community; it’s way too far to bring 
natural gas. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you know how far we have to 
move that natural gas into that community? Eleven hundred 
feet, Mr. Deputy . . . 1,100 feet. That natural gas is right 
underneath the village. It’s right underneath the village. There’s 
a large pool of natural gas there to create all the energy for their 
needs and everyone around them. It would create economic 
wealth for all the communities around them and specifically for 
that community. It would create tremendous economic wealth 
in job creation and jobs for northern Saskatchewan. And that’s 
just one community, what they could do. 
 
Now this government of course has talked many times about, 
you know, assisting the people of northern Saskatchewan. And 
certainly since 1944 the people of northern Saskatchewan are 
still waiting for the NDP government to actually — and their 
predecessors, the CCF — to actually do something for them. 
Well they’re tired of waiting; they’re tired of waiting, Mr. 
Speaker, and they are making the conscious decision that they 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

are going to lead the charge for economic development in 
northern Saskatchewan without this NDP government. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are still barriers. 
There are still barriers in northern Saskatchewan that they can’t 
overcome. Now certainly we heard yesterday from the member 
from Cumberland who clearly outlined that the people of 
northern Saskatchewan have been held back and that the NDP 
government is going to lead the charge for them to help them 
become an integral part and equals in Saskatchewan society. 
Well we’ve been waiting since 1944, Mr. Speaker. So when, we 
need to ask this government. And maybe someone in future 
debates on this Throne Speech, and maybe the member from 
Athabasca will be able to help out in this debate. When’s that 
day coming? Because the people of northern Saskatchewan 
can’t see it coming. 
 
We take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of how this government 
continues, continues to put the people of northern Saskatchewan 
under their thumbs so that they can’t create the economic 
wealth and the economic development that could take people 
from northern Saskatchewan off the welfare rolls that are so 
excitedly promoted by this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the early 1950s the town of La Loche didn’t 
exist — did not exist. Thousands of people lived in that area, 
but not in the town of La Loche. There were small communities 
around there that some people lived in, but those people lived 
off the land. But in the 1950s that land was taken away from 
them. 
 
The CCF government under Tommy Douglas went into 
northern Saskatchewan and took the land away from the people 
of northern Saskatchewan, created Crown land . . . they created 
Crown land, moved everyone into the town of La Loche, and 
put them on welfare and say, now you’re going to be better off. 
 
That was the plan of the 1950s and that’s the plan that is still 
being promoted today by this NDP government. The people of 
northern Saskatchewan are tired of that plan, Mr. Speaker, and 
they want a change. 
 
They want a change so badly that that’s why we have people in 
northern Saskatchewan — community leaders, business leaders 
— who are coming to the Saskatchewan Party and saying, how 
do we go about electing someone in northern Saskatchewan 
who will actually represent us and represent northern 
Saskatchewan rather than the policies of the NDP party? And 
they clearly understand now, Mr. Speaker, that that can only 
happen if you elect a Saskatchewan Party member of the 
Legislative Assembly in Saskatchewan, will they ever have 
economic development in northern Saskatchewan. They know 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But do you know what something they also know? That as 
important as that member is going to be in this House on the 
Saskatchewan . . . sitting with the Saskatchewan Party in 
government and maybe even in cabinet . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I can’t make promises on behalf of our 
leader; he will make that determination himself. But the people 
that are coming forward actually have the ability to be good 
cabinet ministers, Mr. Speaker. These people know that the 
Saskatchewan Party are not going to abandon them like this 

NDP Party has. That’s the promise. 
 
That’s the promise that they are hearing from the Saskatchewan 
Party and they know, Mr. Speaker, that that is more than a 
promise. It is a commitment. Because they have heard since 
1944 hollow promises from this NDP government and its 
predecessor, the CCF, that they know very well that they don’t 
want to be trusting those promises any more because after all, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you can’t trust the government, who can 
you trust? 
 
Well they’ve decided to trust themselves. That’s what they’ve 
decided, Mr. Speaker. After all we had the former minister of 
Economic Development and the newly named Minister of 
Industry and Resources, that former minister, admit in this 
House — admit in this House, Mr. Speaker — that he had not 
been totally truthful to this House. 
 
People in northern Saskatchewan heard that message, Mr. 
Speaker. People in northern Saskatchewan heard that message 
that not only was that minister less than truthful, they know that 
this government has been less than truthful when it comes to 
dealing with economic development, job creation, and integrity 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to integrity, the people of northern 
Saskatchewan are a proud people. I have taken many members 
from my party up to . . . and from this side of the House up to 
northern Saskatchewan. I’ve taken the member from Wood 
River. Talk about a culture shock. I’ve taken the member from 
Thunder Creek. Again, a culture shock. 
 
But you know something, Mr. Speaker? They come out of that, 
those trips up there, absolutely astounded at the opportunity that 
abounds in northern Saskatchewan. They went up there with the 
preconceived notion fed to them by this NDP government that 
northern Saskatchewan is a desolate wasteland devoid of any 
value to Saskatchewan. 
 
And it is that kind of NDP thinking that is allowing the Member 
of Parliament for Churchill River to promote the theory that 
northern Saskatchewan needs to separate from Saskatchewan 
and become a territory, and they would be better off as a 
territory than as a part of the province of Saskatchewan. It is 
that kind of thinking by this NDP government that is driving 
that debate in the North. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, the people of northern 
Saskatchewan have hope. They have hope now that because of 
the work of the Saskatchewan Party, that what we’re doing, that 
what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, that what we are promoting, 
that northern Saskatchewan is not a desolate wasteland; that the 
reality is they can become an integral part of the economic 
recovery that is going to take place in Saskatchewan under a 
Sask Party government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was meeting with some of the community 
leaders up north and we were talking about some of the changes 
that have taken place in municipal governance in Saskatchewan 
and specifically the whole area of governance for cities and the 
broadening of power that’s going to happen for the cities in this 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

 

province. And they were explaining to me their frustration with 
the northern municipal Act . They are wanting to keep the title 
of the northern municipal Act because they think that they need 
to be recognized as being a separate entity; that life in northern 
Saskatchewan is different than southern Saskatchewan. And we 
certainly can’t disagree with that point and you can’t argue that 
point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is certainly quite true that things are different in northern 
Saskatchewan. Communities are much broader in northern 
Saskatchewan than they are in the South. We can have 
communities such as Pense; we can have communities such as 
Morse. They are separate and distinct communities. And you 
know what, Mr. Speaker? They remain that way. They work 
hard to protect their identity and they work hard to promote 
their communities and maintain the strength of those 
communities. 
 
But in northern Saskatchewan it’s actually broader than that. 
You take communities such as Beauval, Green Lake, 
Ile-a-La-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, Dillon, Michel Village — 
they’re a community as one. 
 
There was one area . . . There’s one aspect of the report on 
municipal amalgamations that was brought forward — 
municipal restructuring — brought forward by Joe Cartiere, 
talked about regional government. People in northern 
Saskatchewan love that idea. They’ve already been working on 
those lines to begin with. They’d already been carrying out that 
mandate under their own auspices to begin with, Mr. Speaker. 
And so they . . . That was one idea that they really loved in that. 
 
But you know what? But what they found is that it was hard to 
carry out that mandate under a regional governance, Mr. 
Speaker, because under the northern municipal Act in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you can have a dog bylaw but until 
it’s approved by the Department of Government Relations and 
by the Department of Northern Affairs, it has no teeth, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
That’s what this NDP government has done to the people of 
northern Saskatchewan. Yes, you can have a mayor and yes, 
you can have a town council and yes, you can have bylaws, but 
we’re going to approve every one of them. We’re not going to 
let you make a decision in northern Saskatchewan unless we 
approve it. That’s what this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, has 
done to the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So what the people of northern Saskatchewan are telling us, Mr. 
Speaker, is that if we truly recognize right across the main in 
Saskatchewan that we are one and the same, that we are all here 
because we love this province, that if we are all here because 
we want to see Saskatchewan to be a better place — not only 
for ourselves but for our children and our grandchildren and our 
children’s grandchildren — that we need all to pull together as 
one and we need to break down the segregationist policies of 
this NDP government. 
 
That’s the commitment, that’s the commitment of this 
Saskatchewan Party to the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
Our leader, the member from Rosetown-Biggar, has sat with 
community leaders and said, this will happen. You will be the 
determinant, you will be the determinant of your destiny. You 

will not, you will not have to go to La Ronge and Regina and 
beg, and beg, Mr. Speaker; you will not have to beg for 
anything any more. You will decide. You will decide whether 
you are in Creighton . You’ll decide whether you’re in La 
Ronge. You’ll decide whether you’re in Uranium City . You’ll 
decide whether you’re in Camsell Portage. You will make those 
decisions on what’s best for your community, and not, and not 
have to go cap in hand to Regina to an NDP government and 
ask for self-determination . 
 
A Saskatchewan Party government, led by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, Mr. Speaker, has already committed to the 
people of northern Saskatchewan that they will make their own 
determination. They are excited about that, Mr. Speaker. They 
are very excited that for the first time since 1944 they are going 
to have the ability and the right to make their own decisions in 
northern Saskatchewan. They will create economic opportunity, 
they will create jobs in northern Saskatchewan; not, not this 
NDP government. They are excited about that, Mr. Speaker, 
they are excited about that more than we could have imagined 
on this side of the House. 
 
When I took the member from Wood River up there, he 
couldn’t believe the excitement that exists in northern 
Saskatchewan when we talk about the support that we’re going 
to give them for economic development. That’s what they’re 
looking for, Mr. Speaker. They were looking for support. They 
were looking for encouragement. They weren’t looking for us 
to own it for them. They didn’t want us to give it to them. They 
want us to get out of their way. 
 
And that’s what the member from Wood River was astounded 
by, that the people of northern Saskatchewan, the entrepreneurs 
in northern Saskatchewan — and northern Saskatchewan is full 
of entrepreneurs that are being held back by this NDP 
government — the entrepreneurs in northern Saskatchewan are 
going to have the opportunity after the next provincial election 
to actually determine their own directions in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If they want to build a sawmill, they’ll take that risk. If it fails, 
then at least they’ve tried. That’s what they’ve been promised. 
If they build an outfitting camp and if it doesn’t work, if it fails, 
at least they tried. 
 
But you know what? In southern Saskatchewan multitude of 
businesses are started every year. This NDP government has 
even told us about the thousands of businesses that started in 
Saskatchewan in the last year. But you know what? What they 
left out, was the thousands of businesses that failed in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what they didn’t 
admit was that there was not one single tax dollar, not one 
single tax dollar, put at risk when a business is created. That’s 
what the Saskatchewan Party is talking about in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan communities are looking for 
opportunity. They are looking for partnerships. They are not 
looking for partnerships, Mr. Speaker, from this NDP 
government. In fact they are looking for it in the private sector. 
They’re looking for it in the private sector. They’re not going to 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. They’re not going to the 
Crown Investments Corporation. They’re going to the private 
sector. 
 
I heard of a multitude of opportunities where a community had 
found a partner in the private sector to start a business 
opportunity. But because of the regulations that this government 
puts in their way, because they have to get in the way rather 
than promote, but get in the way of business opportunities, 
those businesses never got started. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those businesses, those opportunities, 
they’re still sitting there. They’re sitting on the back burner. 
Those communities in northern Saskatchewan are simply 
waiting for the government to change. They know when they 
had their conversations with the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, Leader of the Saskatchewan Party or Leader 
of the Official Opposition, they know that when the 
Saskatchewan Party becomes the government, they are going to 
be able to develop those opportunities and not put one dime of 
taxpayers’ dollars at risk. They know that, Mr. Speaker, and 
they know that they have the opportunity, they have the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to be able to create wealth and jobs 
— and jobs — in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to just wind up with one little 
illustration. In November one of the northern communities was 
putting ice in their curling rink and putting ice in their skating 
rink. After the ice was going to be put in, the community was 
going to need two caretakers in each one of those facilities, two 
caretakers in the skating rink and two caretakers in the curling 
rink to look after the ice, look after the facility. So they 
advertised. The community advertised for four jobs. Four jobs 
in this community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It doesn’t sound like much. These are not big paying jobs, you 
know, but not minimum wage either — decent jobs. 
Twenty-two applications for four jobs in this community. You 
know what this illustrates, Mr. Speaker? That the people of 
northern Saskatchewan are clamouring for jobs, are clamouring 
for jobs. And if their jobs were available, they would be there to 
fill those positions. And the Saskatchewan Party, a 
Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker, led by the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar, is going to make sure that 
those jobs are going to be allowed to be created — allowed to 
be created, Mr. Speaker — for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that the House has some very 
important business that also needs to be taken care of this 
afternoon. It also needs to be taken care of, Mr. Speaker, 
because of some very dramatic events that have taken place in 
the lives of members of the Legislative Assembly. And so I 
think it would be appropriate at this time, Mr. Speaker, that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from . . . why is the 
Opposition House Leader on his feet? 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave to 
move a motion of substitution of committee members. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Member 
on Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That the name of Randy Weekes be substituted for that of 
Carl Kwiatkowski on the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly 
to move a motion of condolence. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
would move, the member for Yorkton, seconded by the member 
for Rosetown-Biggar, by leave of this Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and express 
its grateful appreciation for the contributions he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to the province. 
 
John Penner, who passed away on March 5, 2003, was a 
member of the Legislative Assembly from 1991 to 1995, 
representing the constituency of Swift Current for the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Penner was born on December 12, 1931 in Swift 
Current and was raised on the family farm. He received his 
early schooling at Iris School. He furthered his education at 
the University of Saskatchewan from where he received his 
Bachelor of Arts degree and Education degree. And he 
married his wife, Josephine, on July 11, 1953, and together 
they had two children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Penner was a teacher by profession and 
he taught in schools around Saskatchewan for over 30 
years. He undertook teaching assignments in Africa over 
two summers. Mr. Penner’s contributions to education 
extended beyond the classroom. He served as the 
vice-principal and principal of Swift Current 
Comprehensive High School. He also served as a 
councillor with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and 
on the local provincial curriculum committee. He retired 
from his teaching profession. Mr. Penner then turned his 
interests to the business sector. He became owner and 
director of the Parkside Mennonite Funeral Home in Swift 
Current. 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

 

In his private life Mr. Penner was an active participant in 
his community. He was a member of the Rotary Club and 
active on the Western Credit Union Board for many years, 
including 12 years as president. The Swift Current 
Hospital, his church, and other community organizations 
also benefited from his participation and leadership. Upon 
leaving elected office, Mr. Penner carried on his public 
duties as a board member of the Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation and as Saskatchewan’s 
representative on the Board of Management of the 
Canadian Customs and Revenue Canada. 
 
Mr. Penner first sought elected office as an alderman in the 
city of Swift Current. He later was elected to the Assembly 
in the 1991 general election. And he immediately entered 
cabinet as the minister of Energy and Mines. Later, in 
1993, he was appointed associate minister of Finance, 
minister responsible for Crown Investment Corporation. 
Mr. Penner resigned from cabinet in 1995 and continued to 
sit as a government member until the . . . following 
election. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to the 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, upon other . . . a couple of other comments I’d 
like to make about Mr. Penner. I will then conclude by 
forwarding the motion, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, 
seconded by the member from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
I had the opportunity to serve with Mr. Penner personally in this 
Legislative Assembly, was elected at the same time as he was in 
1991. And of course, Mr. Penner immediately made his way 
into cabinet and we entered this Assembly with a large number 
of members on this side of the House. And as a new member 
entering the Assembly, as we recognized members who 
recognized the Assembly today as new members, it was really 
wonderful to have somebody who had the broad life experience 
and who knew what it meant to make a difference in 
community and as being a leader and as a political figure. 
 
I attended the funeral that was held in Swift Current for Mr. 
Penner, and I have over the years as one would appreciate 
attended a number of funerals, and I had not ever attended a 
ceremony or service that was so largely attended by 
Saskatchewan people. The church was simply full of men and 
women from all parts of Saskatchewan — people who knew 
John as a Rotarian, people who knew John as a teacher, people 
who knew John as a community leader, people who knew John 
as a family man, and those who knew him as a politician both at 
the local level and certainly at the provincial level. 
 
And I was touched on many occasions by many of the people 
who came forward and spoke in respect of John’s life. The 
people from the Rotary who talked about the motto of Rotary 
which is “service before self”, and how we had in the man of 
John Penner, who always took some extra time to put the 
welfare of others and his community and often his family in 
advance of himself, and gave selflessly and tirelessly on many 
projects for the Rotary. 
 
One of the projects that the Rotary undertakes is to provide safe 

drinking water for some of our Third World countries, and it 
requires a great deal of fundraising. It requires to initiate from 
within the community often a support for people who are less 
advantaged than we are in our own province or within our own 
country, and John was instrumental in raising large sums of 
money, not only from his own community but when he served 
at the national Table of Rotary for Third World countries. 
 
It was touching to also hear from his colleagues from whom he 
taught with who talked about the respect of which he garnered 
within the school system and how, for many of the teachers that 
taught with him, how he provided the kinds of strength and 
direction that’s often necessary working in the education of 
young people. 
 
And then to hear people step forward and talk about the 
gratitude of which is hard for one to imagine that you could 
express in having taken an algebra or a math class. Being 
someone who had difficulty in both of those fronts, I can’t 
imagine that anybody would step forward and talk about how 
wonderful it was to have an experience in a math class. But on 
many occasions there were a number of people who talked 
about how John was an outstanding teacher. 
 
His community leadership — today in the Swift Current area 
we hear lots about the importance of the health care facility, the 
need for a new hospital in that area, and how John Penner and 
the . . . has been leading a group of community leaders in trying 
to find the resources required to build a new health care centre 
in Swift Current, and has always worked diligently and hard in 
that front to improve the health care services in that community. 
 
I was most touched though, Mr. Speaker, by the message and 
the words that were given by his son-in-law who talked about 
John as a friend, talked about John as a colleague, and how in 
fact the two of them would participate in events within the 
home and within the family that would be described in the 
fashion of collegiality and warmth that is often hard to describe 
even when you have your own children and the development of 
those kinds of relationships amongst them. And to have his 
son-in-law speak about the exceptionally warm and passionate 
friendship and relationship that they had was most touching. 
 
Within this legislature on many occasions John provided . . . 
And those who spoke about his strength talked about the early 
parts of 1991, the early days when in fact the government was 
struggling with balancing its affairs, balancing its finances, and 
how John brought stability to the decision-making process. 
How in fact he was able to provide a perspective, a strength that 
often was hard to find through long hours of debate and 
discussion, and then be able to articulate that message back to 
those of us who served in caucus with him. And then to build 
the kinds of financial stability in the province of which we 
today enjoy, during some extremely difficult times of which 
John Penner was a pillar in our view, and was recognized from 
that perspective by both Premier Romanow and certainly by 
Mr. Mitchell, who served right beside him during those days, at 
the funeral. 
 
John was someone who was prepared to take some risks. Today 
we reflect back on the investment of the Husky Upgrader in our 
province, of which we once were involved in the purchase of 
and then the disposing of that asset. And there were long hours 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

of which . . . long hours, Mr. Speaker, of which our caucus said 
to Mr. Penner that we couldn’t believe that we would ever be 
heading down that path and how it is that we would take 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money and invest it in a venture of 
that type and how high risk that was. And at the end of the day 
this turned out to be a very successful project for Saskatchewan, 
of which Mr. Penner was a leading ambassador for our 
province, and at the end of the day has paid significant 
dividends for us in our province. 
 
So today, Mr. Speaker, I want to, on behalf of the government, 
recognize the life of Mr. Penner, thank him for the contributions 
that he made not only to our community of Saskatchewan but 
certainly to the community of Swift Current and to all of those 
people who were touched by him, by his presence. And as was 
said during the service, that Saskatchewan and this legislature 
and the people of Swift Current are better for the fact that we’ve 
had the benefit of having Mr. Penner a part of our 
Saskatchewan community. 
 
And with that, by leave of this Assembly, that it be recorded 
that the sorrows and regrets of the passing of the former 
member of this Assembly, and that we express our grateful 
appreciation to the contributions he made to his community, his 
constituency, and to his province. 
 
Moved by the member from Yorkton, seconded by the member 
from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to be able 
to participate in this discussion and to say a few words about 
Mr. Penner, and also through this Assembly and through your 
Chair to wish his family all the best. 
 
You know I don’t think we have to necessarily agree with 
everything an individual might believe or work for to consider 
them a role model. And you know I think for me and others, 
Mr. Penner would arguably fall into that category. 
 
I knew Mr. Penner reasonably well, I guess, on a personal level. 
Swift Current is a small place and so there are lots of points of 
contact, frankly, and in fact my brother, my only brother, 
married John Penner’s niece and so that’s one contact. 
 
Also my mom worked as a secretary at the Comprehensive 
High School for a number of years and worked while . . . 
worked under Mr. Penner while he was the principal at the 
Comprehensive High School. 
 
And certainly it’s easy to see the contribution that he made to 
the community of Swift Current. There’s intangible ways that 
we can see that and there are tangible ways. 
 
You know, the quick melt in the southwest Saskatchewan, in 
southwest Saskatchewan has caused our Swift Current Creek to 
rise fairly high so it was, you know a moment of excitement, I 
guess. We were all down by the creek-side on Sunday — after 
whatever we might have been doing that morning — to check 
out how high it was getting. And people were driving around 
the community having a look. 
 
And I had . . . we had the chance, as a family, to go for a walk 
and we walked down a long pathway by the creek. And it’s a 

beautiful pathway called the Chinook Pathway in Swift Current. 
It really runs almost the entire width of the city, I guess you 
could say north and south, and it goes along the creek among 
other places. And we walked by a large boulder that had been 
placed there — decorative boulder with a plaque on it — just on 
Sunday that honoured the city council of the day that had 
helped make a significant improvement to the pathway and 
make that possible, and there was the name of Alderman John 
Penner on that plaque. 
 
(16:15) 
 
We heard, as the Deputy Premier said at the funeral, from his 
. . . from teachers who talked about his impact in terms of 
education and we heard indirectly about his impact on the 
students themselves. And so we know that the impact was made 
in our community as a teacher and as a principal and as a city 
councillor, and we know as well of the impact that he made 
serving his province and serving this Assembly and serving the 
cabinet of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
What many wouldn’t know here perhaps is the contribution he 
continued to make after he was forced to resign or to step away 
from politics for health reasons. I think many would take that 
opportunity to slow down and to take it easy, but he returned 
home and was as dedicated and worked as hard as ever he had 
for the community. 
 
We have a very, very successful health care foundation now in 
Swift Current called the Dr. Noble Irwin Healthcare 
Foundation, and it has done a great job of raising money for 
health care, not just in Swift Current but across the southwest. 
And to the extent that we are able to raise money for health care 
in southwest Saskatchewan and one day even for a hospital, we 
can owe that in large measure to this foundation. 
 
Mr. Penner was instrumental not in just its operation but in its 
formation. I think he was an original board member of that 
foundation and, more than that, someone who really was key to 
getting it going in the first place. And he continued to work 
hard on the foundation because it’s something that he believed 
in very strongly. 
 
And he was also a very, very active Rotarian, as the Deputy 
Premier has alluded to. Now those of us in the Kiwanis Club in 
Swift Current would say that as good as the Rotarian Club is, 
they could have done even more, but it wasn’t for the lack of 
effort by people like Mr. Penner. He served as the club 
president, I think, for two or three years in these years after 
resigning from this place here. 
 
He served the club as president, was instrumental in things like 
starting a lobster boil, the first lobster . . . annual lobster feed 
fundraiser that we’ve ever known in Swift Current and still 
going on today. I think he played a key role in that, along with 
his fellow Rotarians, and he was always raising money however 
he could for the foundation and raising awareness. You know, if 
you happened to be in the Carmel Mall where our constituency 
office is in Swift Current — where I believe his was too; we’re 
in the same area — you know, he always made sure he’d drop 
by to ensure that I had the latest ticket or raffle offering from 
the foundation and you just couldn’t say no. 
 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

 

So, you know, it’s just amazing. I’m not sure exactly of the 
percentage but I think a good part of his heart had been 
damaged in those . . . in that heart attack, a very . . . I’d say a 
majority. And to think he was again able to step back from this, 
but go home and work as hard as he did in the community to 
make it a better place, and also to spend time with his family 
and his grandkids is really quite a . . . it’s really quite a 
testament to Mr. Penner, to his character, and the reason why 
we can disagree on things but have these people as our role 
models. 
 
The funeral was very well attended, as the Deputy Premier 
alluded to. I think there was about, I think there was 900 people 
there. The church was full and then they had the basement . . . 
or the gym I should say, it’s not in the basement . . . the gym 
full of chairs and it was very well attended and certainly his 
former colleagues were there in a very, in a very great number, 
which I’m sure was wonderful for his family to see. 
 
There were three premiers there, three . . . the current Premier 
and two former premiers there: Mr. Romanow, Mr. Blakeney, 
and Mr. Calvert was delayed a bit by his activities but came a 
little bit later, I believe. And, you know, that’s quite a thing. I 
think any of us who sit here today when we look ahead to that 
fateful day that we’ll all meet would think, well that would be 
quite a thing to have that many members of a cabinet and a 
government of the province of Saskatchewan and no less than 
three premiers there to pay respects and to support the family. 
 
But arguably even more important than that was all of the 
words that we heard from the various groups and walks that he 
touched — whether it was education or at city council or in 
Rotary, and most importantly of course the tribute from his 
family and his son-in-law as the Deputy Premier alluded to, 
Randy Hildebrandt. And maybe that’s the goal that we strive for 
— or should strive for, frankly, for that fateful day, even more 
than to have the dignitaries, which is obviously quite an honour 
— is to just leave a legacy and leave the legacy that Mr. Penner 
left in Swift Current and have that kind of a gathering to 
provide support to his family. 
 
So with those brief remarks, I guess I would just want to pass 
on, on behalf of the opposition, our best wishes and 
condolences and our sympathies to his wife, Jo, and his 
daughter, Sheila, and her husband, Randy, as well as to Maxine. 
 
And I would just . . . I would add this. I remember as a . . . I 
think I was in grade 11 or 12 and it’s hard to believe maybe, 
Mr. Speaker, but I was, you know, marginally interested in 
politics at the time when I think, when Mr. Penner was first . . . 
or I guess I just finished high school when Mr. Penner was first 
considering a career in politics. And I think he ran in 1986 is 
the first time he ran in the Swift Current constituency. And I 
remember feeling particularly smart one day and I drafted a 
letter to the editor about the fact that Mr. Penner was a retired 
teacher, or a retired principal, and now he wanted to be an 
MLA. And was that right because he’s already getting one 
public cheque and should he be getting another cheque? Boy it 
seemed pretty smart at the time to send that letter to the editor. 
And of course it was silly. And it’s something . . . I’m sure I 
told him I regretted it. But he joked about it because that was, 
you know, that was his nature. 
 

The other thing about the funeral I would just add is that there 
was a great deal of support there and fond remembrances. But 
there was also a hope at that funeral. And I don’t think we can 
underestimate the importance of that to the family in the days 
and weeks to come, that they’re going to see him again. 
 
So with those few words on behalf of the opposition, I would 
extend our condolences and sympathies to the Penner family. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very glad to 
rise to say a few words in memory of John Penner. I was quite 
honoured, along with the member from Saskatoon Nutana, to 
serve as a pallbearer at the funeral which has been said by the 
Deputy Premier and the member from Swift Current was very, 
very well attended by many people in the Alliance Church, 
which was very packed. And there was a real outpouring of 
love and respect for John Penner and support for the family. 
 
But I think first and foremost that funeral was a celebration. It 
was intended to be a celebration. It was a celebration because it 
was a celebration, Mr. Speaker, of a life that was very well 
lived and very fully lived. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that first and foremost, and we heard 
from various speakers as has been mentioned — various 
speakers at the funeral — John Penner was a family man first 
and foremost. His family was the centre of his universe in all 
his community activities. And that was very important to him 
and very clear at the funeral, and especially hearing from the 
family members as has been said. 
 
And secondly, he was a man of faith. That is something that he 
didn’t wear on his sleeve. I don’t think John Penner ever 
discussed with his colleagues his deeply held religious views, 
but I think he lived his faith through his life and his conduct, 
Mr. Speaker. But that’s what he was — as well as a family man, 
he was a man of faith. 
 
And of course he was a teacher. And we heard from people who 
spoke at the funeral that he was one of the best teachers that had 
ever been encountered there. 
 
And after he left teaching he was a business person and he 
owned one of the funeral homes in Swift Current, which I think 
he was active at least as a shareholder until relatively recently 
and then sold it sometime within the last year or so. 
 
And of course he was a community leader, involved in all kinds 
of activities — heavily involved in the credit union, involved in 
the Rotary and city politics and so on. He was a very, very 
well-rounded, accomplished person. 
 
And as has been said, Mr. Speaker, he was held in very high 
esteem by the people in Swift Current but also by many across 
this province, including of course the people in this Legislative 
Assembly and many others. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that John Penner was not a very 
flashy person. He wasn’t flashy or slick in any way. He was a 
person that had a sort of a quiet resolve. John was a very big 
man and he had a quiet resolve. He was somebody who 
believed deeply in the common good and in the public interest. 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

I think, you know, those of us in politics . . . Sometimes I’m 
asked why I would go into politics, Mr. Speaker. And I say, 
well the only answer to why anybody should go into politics is 
to serve the public interest. That’s the only answer there is. And 
I don’t think there’s any question in anyone’s mind that John 
Penner’s activities in politics and otherwise were centred 
around one goal, and that was to serve the public interest. 
 
And I’d like to give as an example of John’s commitment to the 
people of the province — his courage, his wisdom — one 
example that was alluded to by the Deputy Premier which was 
the situation involving the Lloydminster Upgrader — the 
Bi-Provincial Upgrader, now the Husky Upgrader. 
 
And it’s a very good example of John’s skill and dedication and 
courage because what had happened there was that the 
governments of Canada, Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Husky Oil, 
had each invested about a quarter of a billion dollars in the 
Bi-Provincial Upgrader, but it was losing money. And so 
Alberta and Canada and Saskatchewan were having to put 
money into the upgrader. Far from getting money out of it, they 
were putting money into it every year. 
 
And eventually Canada and Alberta said, well we’ve had 
enough of this. We’re going to sell our interest in this upgrader. 
And they had put in each about a quarter of a billion dollars. So 
had we. And what they did is they went to Husky Oil and they 
sold their interest in the upgrader at about 7 cents on the dollar, 
so that Alberta and Canada had put in about 250 million and 
they got some 20 million out of it in return. 
 
Now imagine, Mr. Speaker, here we had John Penner who was 
the minister in charge and he came along and he said, I don’t 
think we should sell our interest in the upgrader; in fact, I think 
we should put more money in. And he convinced the 
government of the day to invest I think it was another $40 
million to start purchasing the interest of Alberta and Canada in 
the upgrader. And that’s what we did. So while other people 
were selling their interests, John Penner said, no, we should put 
more money in because that upgrader is going to pay off; that 
upgrader is a good investment. 
 
And John Penner of course was right. But that’s not the point of 
my story, or that example, Mr. Speaker. The point I’m trying to 
make is this: that here was a man who had a lot of courage as 
well as wisdom. Because he said to people, and stood up in the 
face of some ridicule, I might add, and said, yes, others are 
bailing out and it may be the popular thing to do today. But we 
need to make a courageous decision and actually invest more 
because it will be in the public interest and a good investment to 
put more money in in the face of opposition and ultimately it 
will pay off. And of course he was right. 
 
And what happened was a few years later, because of that 
decision on his part . . . and there are others I could talk about, 
other decisions he contributed to as a minister of the Crown that 
saved the people of the province hundreds of millions of 
dollars. But that one example when we sold our interest in the 
Husky Upgrader a few years later for about $300 million, that 
one decision of John Penner brought the people of this province 
about a quarter of a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. And we used 
that money to pay down some of the public debt. 
 

(16:30) 
 
And I think it’s safe to say that it’s not very often that one MLA 
in the province can have so much impact on the province with 
just one wise decision, very wisely and courageously made. But 
I think it illustrates the impact that dedication to the public 
interest can have, and it illustrates the importance of principles 
and of integrity. 
 
Now sometimes, Mr. Speaker, we get very cynical about 
politics, but I think when we think about John Penner and his 
actions and his life and his integrity and his dignity, that he 
stood out as an example of just how good we can be as elected 
representatives. 
 
I think it’s unfortunate of course that his career was cut short in 
1995 by ill health but he was never a man to sit still. The 
member from Swift Current wondered what his heart capacity 
was. I was told that during the last several years of John’s life 
he was operating at a heart capacity of 25 per cent, that 
three-quarters of his heart had been destroyed over the last 16 
years or so through some heart attacks that he had had. But you 
would never know it, to watch him or to listen to him. You 
would never know it. 
 
I think he was a big man, he probably had such a big heart that 
operating on 25 per cent of his heart maybe wasn’t so bad, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think he had a pretty big heart. 
 
Well his many careers in education, business, and the credit 
union movement, not to mention politics, are all proof of that, I 
think. And we’re happy that John had a full life for several 
years after his retirement and continued to be able to serve the 
public as he wanted to do. And we who served with him in this 
legislature are very grateful to have had the chance to work with 
him and call him our friend. 
 
And so, our thoughts and condolences go out to his family: his 
wife, Jo; and daughters, Maxine and Sheila; also his son-in-law, 
Randy; two grandchildren. And condolences also to his very 
many friends, Mr. Speaker, all over this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I too would like to join my colleagues in paying a 
short tribute, a brief tribute to John Penner. As was indicated, 
John came to this legislature in 1991, and that’s really when I 
came to know him. I can’t say that I knew him before. 
 
But I can say in the few short years that we served together 
from 1991 to 1995, it became very clear to me that the respect 
that John has garnered and that was spoken of today was 
because he was very much a gentleman. But not only a 
gentleman, Mr. Speaker, he was a gentle man. 
 
He would bring reason and calm presence to discussions that 
would sometimes around the cabinet table, around the caucus 
table, would be difficult because we were in those years dealing 
with some very difficult issues. But you could always count on 
John to bring a calm presence to the discussion; always a good 
and a profound understanding of the issues. He always did his 
homework. And I think part of that profoundness and part of 
that understanding came from the life experience that he 
brought to this legislature as a teacher and as a co-operator, as a 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

 

business person, and it has been said, as a family man. 
 
As I worked with John, it was very clear that he had gained the 
respect of his community, and his role as a cabinet minister 
allowed him exposure to people all over the province. And it 
became very clear why John gained the respect of the people of 
Saskatchewan through the different positions he had as a 
cabinet minister, as I knew him. 
 
And I suppose we all have a small anecdote. I have one memory 
of John in a difficult time, and the premier had charged him to 
spearhead discussions as his role as minister of Energy and 
Mines to deal with some negotiations that were taking place as 
it related to the Co-op upgrader. And the reason that was was 
because of John’s life experience as a co-operator working with 
the co-operative movement through the credit unions to explain 
the government’s position related to these issues. And there 
were some pretty heated discussions and some very strong 
feelings. 
 
I saw John take control of the meeting. It could have been more 
difficult than it was. The only reason he was able to do that is 
because of the respect that his fellow co-operators had for him, 
and knowing that John’s presence brought for not only a good 
understanding of the issue but a probably a wise approach to 
dealing with it. 
 
Further on down the road I had the opportunity to chair the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, which John sat as a 
board member. And it was so clear, it was so easy to see the 
impact that John could have on his colleagues on that board and 
on the staff that served and worked for that board. 
 
I spent some time as Energy and Mines minister following John 
who was our first Energy and Mines minister post-1991. And I 
can tell you that in 2002 and in 2003, John’s work is still having 
an impact on the relationship that we have, as a government, 
with the oil and gas sector and the success of the development 
and the growth of that industry here in the province. And he’s 
still spoken of. 
 
And so I want to say that, as well, John cared very deeply about 
his family, as I know they did about him. And so I would just 
say in closing that I want to thank Jo and the members of John’s 
family for allowing him to be part of my life and a part of our 
life as legislature, part of the history of this province and part of 
as well the future of this province. Because he had an impact, 
both on the past and he will have an impact on the future, based 
on the work that he did. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that Jo and the family should be very 
proud of someone who was a gentleman and as importantly a 
gentle man with lots of conviction. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s such an honour to 
be able to stand and remember Gentleman John, as he’s been 
referred by some of my colleagues. And that truly is John 
Penner, Gentleman John. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Swift Current was my first city, Beechy being my 
hometown; Swift Current being the city that John Penner so 
ably represented in this legislature long after I’d moved away 
from my hometown. 

But I learned something at the funeral. John Penner’s first 
school was in Hallonquist. Hallonquist is where my mother 
originated along with many other famous Nelsons, and I’m sure 
that John Penner had something to do with the life of 
Hallonquist in the year that he spent . . . he and Jo actually spent 
there. 
 
John Penner turned out, as has been shared, to be an inspired 
choice for then Premier Roy Romanow’s first cabinet. Others 
have shared the story of the upgrader. 
 
I’m going to sort of fast-forward over that and get right to sort 
of my last memories of John in cabinet. I shared the day, that 
fateful day, in Yorkton when John had his heart attack. I was 
with him and I was . . . I remember vividly us going from a 
series of meetings with the city council and with the credit 
union board and the co-op people and just a whole host of 
meetings through Yorkton that day, and it was interesting 
because many of the people that came wanted money for some 
very worthwhile cause in Yorkton. 
 
I remember one of the issues was policing and, interestingly 
enough, they used the example of Yorkton being the same size 
basically of Swift Current in population and some differences in 
policing there — I remember it vividly — and John Penner was 
the one that we always looked to to provide the reasoned and 
the reasonable answer, and he never failed us at all. That entire 
day I was just so proud of the job that he was able to do on our 
behalf and it was obvious that the good people of Yorkton 
respected and just knew this was a man giving them the straight 
goods on how things were. 
 
He quietly didn’t show up to one of the final meetings of that 
day, and it wasn’t until later that I found out that the reason he 
didn’t show up at that particular meeting was he was in an 
ambulance and on his way to the hospital having a heart attack, 
but never ever trying to distress us or the people of the 
province. It really, really spoke to Gentleman John and his sort 
of sense of values. 
 
Of course it wasn’t that much longer after that he had his 
surgery and then came to the conclusion that he was not going 
to be able to continue in his duties here. And I want to share 
that that was one of the saddest days of this MLA’s career, was 
the day that I realized that John Penner would not be able to 
continue. 
 
By way of highlighting that, I’m sure that the current Premier, 
who I’ve shared this with before he became the current Premier, 
would appreciate this. I’ve actually shared with John Penner in 
his life that he was the only one I would consider, outside of the 
current Premier, to become our premier. And it just wasn’t 
meant to be for a whole host of reasons, not the least of which 
was John’s health and his age. 
 
But I cite that simply to share with John’s family and his many 
friends and with colleagues here the huge esteem that I, and I 
know many others, held John Penner. He earned it. We miss 
him. I’m grateful for his contribution. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join all of 
my colleagues today in paying tribute to John Penner, a former 
member of the Saskatchewan legislature, representing the 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

constituency of Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, like a number of my colleagues, have many 
remembrances of John Penner. And some of the most poignant 
remembrances have been mentioned here today, particularly his 
leadership in our government when we were renegotiating the 
Co-op upgrader, a heavy upgrader deal, as well as our further 
involvement in Husky Oil. And I, like many of my colleagues, 
remember the many, many cabinet meetings that we undertook 
in order to arrive at a consensus around the cabinet table and 
then a consensus amongst all government colleagues. And I can 
say categorically John Penner provided outstanding leadership 
to our government as we made our way through those many 
difficult decisions. 
 
And one of the difficult decisions, Mr. Speaker, was adding to 
the provincial debt when we made the decision to purchase 
more shares in the Husky Upgrader in Lloydminster. And I 
recall the criticisms that were undertaken in the public and also 
in this legislature with that decision. But as my colleague from 
Mount Royal said, it allowed us to eventually sell our shares at 
a much greater price and to reduce our overall provincial debt. 
And I can say that John Penner provided us outstanding 
leadership as we made our way to that decision. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think one of the greatest tributes that can be 
made to a member of this legislature is when the new member 
representing the constituency of Swift Current says, on the day 
of the funeral, John Penner was respected by this community. 
And there’s no question when, if you were in attendance at the 
funeral, there were people from all political persuasions, all 
religious points of view, attending that funeral to pay respects 
and to celebrate John Penner’s life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I can say about John was that he cut an 
eloquent swath. He was a dashing dresser, he and Jo. 
 
He was a gentle man and a gentleman, but you always knew 
where you stood with John Penner. He never left any doubt in 
the cabinet room where he stood. He never stuck his finger in 
the air to see which way the wind was flowing to determine 
what his position would be. He was a man of principle and a 
man of integrity, and I think all of my cabinet colleagues — in 
particular in those days between 1992 and 1995 — can say that 
we knew where John Penner stood on the issues of the day. And 
there were moments when John and I would be walking down 
the hallway and he’d say, well I don’t think anybody has any 
doubt where you and I stand, Pat. And I appreciated that. And 
we often stood on opposite side of the issues but you knew 
where he stood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the people of Swift Current, they had a good 
MLA who represented them well in this constituency . . . in this 
legislature. He advanced the interests, the public interests of his 
constituents, and for that we are grateful. 
 
To his family, Jo and to Maxine and to Sheila and Randy and 
the grandkids, I say I’m sorry John has passed on, but he left his 
mark in our province and for that our province is a better place. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and by leave of 
the Assembly, I would move, seconded by the member for 
Yorkton: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Carl Edward Kwiatkowski who passed away on February 
2, 2003, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1999 until 2003, representing the constituency of Carrot 
River Valley for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski was born on November 20, 1959 in the 
town of Porcupine Plain. He was raised on the family farm 
and attended elementary and secondary schools in 
Porcupine Plain. In 1982, Mr. Kwiatkowski married Leona 
Kistnerand they had three children. 
 
After finishing high school, Mr. Kwiatkowski was 
employed for several years in road construction and on oil 
rigs. He then shifted his attention to improving the lives 
and opportunities of those who lived in his community. His 
primary focus was on individuals with mental and physical 
disabilities. He served for over 17 years as the general 
manager of the Porcupine Opportunities Program Inc. Mr. 
Kwiatkowski also served as the president of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres and on 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Administrators. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski has a lengthy record of public service. 
Mr. Kwiatkowski’s first foray into elected office was at the 
municipal level. He served as mayor of Porcupine Plain for 
three terms. Later he was elected to this Assembly in the 
1999 general election. He served as a Justice of the Peace 
and on numerous boards and committees across the 
province. The Porcupine Plain Chamber of Commerce and 
the NewSask Community Futures Development 
Corporation were two organizations that benefited from his 
participation. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with the 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I might, I’d like to add a few personal 
comments beyond the scope of the motion. 
 
Those of us, and all who knew Carl Kwiatkowski, loved the 
man. Losing Carl was a personal loss for everyone on this side 
of the House, and from my understanding members across the 
way also felt a loss with Carl’s passing. He was the kind of a 
guy you couldn’t help but love and appreciate. He was 
outstanding and very professional in his service as an MLA. He 
was respected for that. He loved politics. He made no apologies 
for his love of politics. 
 
And I recall campaigning with Carl in the 1999 election and I 
can’t remember whether it was in the community of Hudson 
Bay or the community of Nipawin, one of those two 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

 

communities, and we were going door to door and having a 
good time and chatting. And we came to one door and we could 
hear a noise in the backyard. And so Carl and I went round to 
the back and we discovered a young mother who was trying to 
light the barbecue and she was having difficulty — the starter 
just wouldn’t work. 
 
Those of you who know Carl know that he had a smoking habit 
and of course he had a match. And between the two of us I 
think I was one that had the courage to light the match, and the 
happy ending to the story is we got the barbecue lit. The 
unhappy part of it is it made quite a bang when it did light. And 
Carl and I had many chuckles over that. I was very pleased that 
I still had my eyebrows and Carl was very pleased that his hair 
was still in place. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, and members present, Carl loved politics; he 
loved meeting people and doing things. And we have no idea 
whether the young mother ever voted Saskatchewan Party or 
not but that didn’t matter, we had just had a lot of fun and that 
is very representative of the way Carl approached life. 
 
Carl is respected province-wide for his work on the behalf of 
people with disabilities. As Leader of the Opposition I have 
been fortunate to travel to all parts of Saskatchewan and I 
would never cease to be amazed at the people throughout the 
province who knew Carl because of his work with people with 
disabilities. 
 
He was respected, he was appreciated, and he was loved 
because he had such an impact in that area of working with 
people with needs. As I mentioned earlier he was instrumental 
in starting the Porcupine Opportunities Program. He later 
became involved with SARC (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres) and SARCAN and even served in 
official capacity in both of those organizations. So Carl was 
respected for his work with people with disabilities. 
 
Carl was also respected for his support of municipalities. Carl 
was the mayor of a community and he understood the 
importance of the municipal level of government, and again 
was known throughout the province for his work at the 
municipal level. He performed admirably as the mayor of 
Porcupine Plain, and knew the challenges and knew the 
responsibilities of serving people at the local level. So Carl was 
respected for his impact on municipal government. 
 
Carl was respected by his constituents. He had a servant 
attitude. I never heard any complaints from the people of Carrot 
River Valley about the work that their MLA did, and that is a 
real tribute to an MLA. 
 
I remember one of my earliest involvements with Carl, even 
before either of us were elected to this Assembly. It was 
working on behalf of the people of the community of Carrot 
River, trying to maintain health care services in their 
community. Carl divided his time evenly amongst all of his 
constituents. Even though he himself resided in Porcupine 
Plain, he quickly came to earn the respect of constituents in 
every community of the Carrot River Valley constituency. So 
Carl was respected by his constituents. 
 
Hundreds of people showed their respect for Carl at the funeral 

which was held in Porcupine Plain. The hall, the community 
hall, was filled to capacity. Every chair was taken and hundreds 
of people were standing and stood for a long time out of respect 
and reverence for the life of Carl. Many MLAs, a very large 
turnout of MLAs from both sides of the House, were present at 
Carl’s funeral. And the Deputy Premier, as well as the member 
for Saltcoats, and myself, were able to give tribute to Carl at his 
funeral. 
 
And the MLAs were also allowed to form an honour guard for 
Carl as he was removed from the hall. You could sense just by 
the intense look on people’s faces, the attitude of the service, 
that Carl was respected by the people of his community and 
people throughout the province who came to the funeral 
service. And I would like to publicly thank every MLA who 
took part in that service and showed their respect for Carl and 
expressed their sympathy and condolences to the family by 
being present at the funeral. 
 
Today we express our heartfelt condolences to the family once 
again in an official way here in the Legislative Assembly. We 
want to express our concern and our love and our sympathy to 
Carl’s wife, Leona; to his daughters, Carla and Krystal; to his 
son, Tyrrell; his parents, Frank and Myrtle; to a brother, Steve; 
and a sister, Teresa. 
 
Today in this Assembly we remember and we pay tribute to an 
outstanding citizen of Saskatchewan, Mr. Carl Kwiatkowski. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join the member for Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of 
the Opposition, and on behalf of the government express our 
sincere condolences to the family of Carl Kwiatkowski, and to 
all of the individuals of whom his life has touched. 
 
My experience and association with Carl is on three fronts, Mr. 
Speaker. I first met Carl when I was working for a private social 
service agency in Yorkton called SIGN (Society for the 
Involvement of Good Neighbours). And at that time of my life, 
in the early ’80s, I was busy trying to put together a 
transportation program and a housing program for people with 
disabilities. And I called through, through the Saskatchewan 
Abilities Council at that time, as to whom I might be able to sit 
down and have a conversation with about what it is that we 
might do in our community in order to make it better for people 
with disabilities. And they gave me the name of Carl 
Kwiatkowski, the member from Carrot River. 
 
And with a great deal of interest and enthusiasm, in the way in 
which Carl always met and greeted and worked with people, he 
chose to travel to Yorkton as opposed to me bringing my issues 
to Carrot River, to where he was working, and to share with me 
his experiences about how we might be able to provide a better 
housing program and transportation program for people with 
disabilities. 
 
And of course when you talk to someone on the phone you 
form your own impressions about who it is that you might be 
seeing on the other end of the line. And I had my own little 
vision of this man because I had not had a chance to meet him 
before. And of course when you’re as tall as I am, everybody 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

else is shorter. And so I was expecting that when he arrived in 
my office in Yorkton a much different kind of a personality and 
individual. And as he came through the door, as we know, sort 
of tall and imposing, and — it would be fair I think for me to 
say because it’s been said on many occasions — a very 
attractive, good-looking man and elegant man. 
 
And I welcomed him into my office and then we proceeded to 
talk about how we could make a difference in my constituency 
of the province in providing a better lifestyle for people with 
disabilities. And of course Carl was most instrumental in 
helping our organization in putting together a transportation 
program for disabled people in Yorkton and today we have 
evidence of housing programs in our city of which Carl was 
instrumental in helping us design. 
 
(17:00) 
 
My second experience with Carl was when he in fact became 
the mayor of Porcupine Plain. I served as the city alderman for 
the community of Yorkton and we both had the opportunity to 
meet at a SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) convention in Saskatoon. 
 
And for those of us who knew Carl in a social fashion, he 
enjoyed having a good time. And he lived in a fast lane; the 
pace was quick for him. And there were . . . and SUMA 
conventions were about learning, but SUMA conventions were 
also about having experiences that we can’t always share in 
assemblies of this nature, Mr. Speaker, or publicly, but I can tell 
you that we soared to some heights which were most 
appreciative in the learning experience of how to govern 
municipal governments. And clearly, we passed a lot more 
public policy outside of the convention on a couple of those 
evenings than we did when we were doing sessions. 
 
And my third experience of course was in this Assembly here, 
Mr. Speaker, where as many have already said — the Leader of 
the Opposition has said — Carl came here with a passion to 
serve people and it was exemplified in the work that he did in 
his constituency; it was exemplified in the work that he did with 
the organization of which he represented prior to coming here, 
the disabled; and it was representative . . . it was also 
represented in the passion that he had for the files that he was 
responsible to do work on. 
 
From time to time in this Assembly, the energy level gets a bit 
higher and the intensity gets a bit higher and we find 
opportunities to point out the differences in our appreciation of 
this Assembly, but rarely would you ever see or hear Carl 
participate in that. And I look at the words that the Premier had 
provided when he had heard of Carl’s passing and he said this: 
 

Carl was not one who catcalled ever from his seat. This is 
not to say that when he was on his feet, he didn’t speak 
with a great deal of pointedness if he had a criticism to 
level at (the) government. But I always felt that the 
criticism was fair. 

 
And that statement in quote, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely true. 
 
When I looked at Carl’s nomination papers — in when he was 
being courted for the nomination — you will find on that 

nomination paper, Mr. Speaker, individuals who are from all 
party stripes. 
 
And when Carl came to this Assembly and then returned back 
to his constituency after his election, you will find when you 
travel his constituency and talk to people about the work that he 
did in his constituency that the affairs of his work weren’t tied 
to a party affiliation but were tied to responsibility of serving as 
a Member of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I can tell you that he was a hard-working MLA because I 
have more correspondence from him, as a minister, than anyone 
else that I’ve ever received in this Assembly, both from our side 
of the House and from yours. Collectively this man has done a 
tremendous amount of work and has done a tremendous amount 
of work for his constituents. 
 
I want to today also join with the members opposite because 
often when we rise in this Assembly, on this day, we’re 
speaking about people who from time to time we have a sense 
of knowing either because we served with them for short 
periods of time or in many cases we talk about people who have 
preceded us for some time. 
 
It has been a rare occasion I believe, Mr. Speaker, in this 
Assembly where we would rise and speak about members who 
have been very much a part of our day-to-day life in this 
Assembly as we did earlier with Mr. Penner and certainly today 
with Mr. Kwiatkowski presently. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition is absolutely true . . . is 
correct when he says that when we lose a colleague from the 
Assembly it touches us deeply and fully, irrespective of which 
side of the Assembly you serve on. 
 
Because to get here, to this Assembly, irrespective of our 
political associations and affiliations, there are huge, huge 
sacrifices that we make as individuals — tremendous 
commitments that we make to our constituencies and huge 
sacrifices that are made by our families. 
 
And so we have a tremendous understanding and a warm 
understanding about what it is about having to work and live 
and provide service for people of Saskatchewan when we’re 
here in this Assembly. 
 
And I can’t hardly imagine, Mr. Speaker, about some of the 
difficulties that my colleagues across the way are experiencing, 
because I know the kinds of associations that we form as a team 
on this side of the House because we, from day to day, have to 
make some very difficult decisions. We need to support each 
other from a variety of different perspectives, and we become 
very close family members in this Assembly, and as a team. 
And often as much as we might not appear that we always agree 
on everything — there are days that we don’t, which is not 
unlike what happens within families — but when one of your 
colleagues or one of those family members leaves you 
suddenly, it becomes a very difficult place and a very difficult 
task to manage your way through. 
 
And so today I want to as much as join in extending my 
condolences to the family, to Carla and Krystal and Tyrrell, I 
also want to express my sincere condolences to the members of 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

 

the opposition who are, I know, experiencing some difficult 
times as they work through this period of time, and say that our 
thoughts are with them as well. And that we appreciate having 
had, in this Assembly, the strength and wisdom of a colleague 
who served our province exceptionally well at the time he did. 
And that his family, and we, are stronger for the opportunity to 
personally, to have been touched by the work and life of Carl 
Kwiatkowski. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — There are days in the Assembly that members 
find extremely difficult to get through, and for me this day of 
condolences is one of those days. It’s made even more difficult, 
like the Deputy Premier mentioned, when we recall that the 
member whose work and memory we are honouring was 
standing in this Assembly just three short months ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe I speak for all members of this 
legislature when I say that Carl Kwiatkowski was a friend, not 
just to those of us here in the Assembly, but also to those 
outside the House who had the opportunity and the privilege to 
work with him. 
 
Aside from the two new members who were just sworn in a 
couple of days ago, I know I’d be hard pressed to find one 
person here that Carl hadn’t taken the time to talk to, sit down 
with, and converse with. 
 
By the same time, Mr. Speaker, I know that if Carl were with us 
today, the newly elected members from Battleford-Cut Knife 
and Saskatoon Fairview would have experienced first-hand, or 
within a very short time, his warm and winning personality. Mr. 
Speaker, Carl wouldn’t have had it any other way. 
 
Professionally Carl had a tremendous amount of respect for the 
Legislative Assembly and for the political process. Part of that 
respect came from Carl’s in-depth knowledge of the history and 
the people involved in the process. It held a never-ending 
fascination for him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first time I met Carl I was at a trade show in 
Porcupine Plain. My first impression of him was of a tall, 
polite, wonderfully candid man with a boyish grin and a big 
laugh. And I was absolutely amazed and impressed at how in 
touch he was with the day-to-day issues in politics. Not 
surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, Carl confided to me that politics had 
always been his passion. 
 
As the mayor of Porcupine Plain, Carl had developed a great 
understanding of inner workings and the many diverse needs of 
municipal government. It seemed only fitting and very logical 
that he would take the next step from local governance to that 
of the provincial forum. If ever there was a natural candidate, 
Mr. Speaker, it was Carl. He was a force to be reckoned with 
when he was campaigning, and his solid victory in the 1999 
general election proved how much the constituents of Carrot 
River Valley personally believed in him and what he stood for. 
 
Not surprising then that the constituents of Carrot River Valley 
became an extended family to Carl. I was always amazed at 
how many people he knew on a first name basis. The same 
passion and respect that got him elected, Mr. Speaker, followed 

him right here to the legislature. And as all members are aware, 
one of the tasks that befall us in this building is often to loudly 
and pointedly remind the members opposite of their 
shortcomings. From the very beginning Carl said he’d not be 
part of that, and he had made a bet to that effect. He did in fact 
lose that bet. I think it cost him $50. But to the best of my 
knowledge and to the knowledge of my colleagues that was the 
one and only time that he ever did do any calling. 
 
Even after learning that he had been awarded a nickname like 
Coyote Carl or something of that sort, Carl still refused to give 
in. Instead he would simply acknowledge the comments with a 
grin and a shake of his head, and a little smile. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Carl believed wholeheartedly in the dignity of all 
human beings no matter what their physical, mental, or 
emotional handicaps may be. And he worked tirelessly on their 
behalf whenever and wherever possible. This was another one 
of Carl’s great passions and it earned him the admiration and 
respect of people from all walks of life and from all corners of 
this province. 
 
The SARC and SARCAN organizations benefited from his 
dedication and his commitment to their cause, and his belief 
that everyone has value and deserves to be treated with dignity 
and respect. There are so very many people, too numerous to 
count, whose lives Carl touched and ultimately made better 
because of his belief in the unlimited potential of the human 
spirit. 
 
Since his election to the legislature in 1999, Carl came to fully 
understand and appreciate the many issues and concerns that 
were found in the critical portfolios of Environment and Natural 
Resources. And we learned that there were countless people, 
both inside and outside of this Assembly, who respected his 
work and the many suggestions for improvements or 
innovations that he brought forward. 
 
To say that we’ll miss Carl, Mr. Speaker, is an understatement. 
We’ll miss teasing him about his perfect hair and his 
immaculate grooming. We’re going to miss teasing him about 
trying to talk to him while he’s talking on the phone to 
somebody else. We’ll miss hearing him talk about his children 
— Carla, Krystal, and Tyrrell — his three beautiful children 
whom he adored and he was so very proud of. But most of all, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to miss his friendship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we are elected and we enter the political 
arena, the only thing that we all have in common that day is our 
political ideology. But in no time at all we come to understand 
that we can also count on each other as we work towards 
making our province a better place to live in. While it is our 
political beliefs that draw us together, Mr. Speaker, it is through 
the process that we become actual friends. And as friends we 
help each other through the difficult times and we celebrate the 
good times. Some days our friends have to remind us what 
we’re doing is important, and that no matter what happens 
inside or outside this Assembly we can be secure in the 
knowledge that they’re going to be there for us. Their influence 
on us will last a lifetime, and this is the way we feel about Carl. 
 
We are fortunate to have been part of Carl’s circle of friends. 
Carl’s circle of friends knew no barriers of race, creed, age, 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

gender, or nationality; friends that are connected in hearts and 
in spirits that have no walls. It’s truly a gift that he gave us and 
we’ll treasure his gift of friendship forever; treasure it and pass 
it on to others in this give-and-take world that we live in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know there are things that we have to accept 
even if we don’t understand them. Losing our friend is one of 
them. Carl and I went skydiving together and he was very 
excited that day. I remember he talked about the feeling of 
freedom he had when he was floating towards earth when the 
parachute had opened. And I was reading a poem lately that 
made me think of the way Carl talked that day. It was called 
Child of the Earth and I’d like to read it to you: 
 

When you are told that I am dead . . . 
. . . do not believe it. 
Walk among the trees . . . 
I will speak to you in the soft mystery of the winds. 
Touch a leaf sprinkled with sunshine . . . 
. . . and you will be touching me. 
Pick up a smooth worn stone and throw it . . . 
. . . far into the sea. 
That will help you to understand that I am not dead. 
Whether I am in your hands or in the sea 
I’m a child of the changing earth . . . changed and free. 

 
Carl, we are so proud to have known you and to have worked 
with you, and we miss him very much. Your passion, your 
work, and your memory will not be forgotten. Our condolences 
to all those who love you. 
 
(17:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join my colleagues in celebrating the life of Carl 
Kwiatkowski. Certainly as we all know in the Assembly, Carl 
was the critic that I faced off with on many occasions in this 
Assembly. And it’s always important for us to express to the 
family our sincerest sympathy. 
 
There’s no question that change that is provided to us in life, 
sometimes a tragic change, is always very difficult to adapt to 
and certainly most difficult to accept. Change is always around 
us, some of it positive, some of it a great loss to family and 
friends and to regions and to the province. 
 
And I can certainly say that one of the things that I think is very 
important is that although we squared off in the Assembly on 
numerous occasions, Carl was always a gentleman, was always 
a scholar, and was very, very approachable to talk about things 
that were of significant interest not only to himself and his 
constituents and his family and this province but certainly to the 
number of issues facing Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
Carl never yelled from his seat. And if my memory serves me 
correct, he told me one day that he made a promise to an older 
lady somewhere in his constituency that he wouldn’t do that, 
and she always watched the Assembly to make sure he wasn’t 
doing that. And of course what you don’t see is the heckling 
and the yelling and the challenge we issue to each other when 
somebody’s on his feet. So I can explain to the old lady, who I 
don’t know who she is — he never did give me her name — 
that Carl never once did heckle. 

And I think the important thing here is that in this particular 
challenge that we face as elected individuals, that it’s always 
important that we have a relationship that is cordial and 
respectful and one that is certainly one that we recognize each 
other’s challenge that we have to meet to be able to do this job. 
 
Many years ago when I was a young lad, I often hear politicians 
say that it is a commitment, it is a commitment for me to be at 
this job. Or you’d hear him in his speech, I’m seeking 
re-election because I’m prepared to make that commitment. 
And instinctively people would say, well it’s a commitment but 
you’re being paid for that job; you know, it’s something that 
you’re seeking, it’s a job that you want, so what are you talking 
about, a commitment? And being you know similar to . . . 
facing similar circumstances that Carl faced being away from 
his family, being away from his constituency, being on the road 
that’s steady, that is the commitment that people have to know 
that people like Carl certainly afforded their particular job. 
 
I think in the whole notion of his role as an MLA, that he was 
very well connected as a minister responsible for a number of 
areas that Carl was a critic, which includes SARCAN. It is not 
without any imagination that I say that when we met with Carl 
on a joint effort with the folks in SARCAN, that they admired 
him tremendously. And he took the effort — made the effort — 
and took the extra step to attend a number of functions that I as 
a minister travelled to to celebrate what SARCAN has done and 
a number of other organizations that he was intimately involved 
with. 
 
And that dedication and that commitment that politicians often 
speak about, certainly Carl had expressed . . . had shown that, 
displayed that, and certainly delivered that to this Assembly on 
behalf of his constituents and certainly on behalf of the 
organizations that he helped and represented over the years. 
 
To his wife and his son and his daughters and his mom and dad 
and brothers and sisters, it is a tremendous loss for yourself 
personally and to point out that we are here to celebrate Carl’s 
life and to also thank you for sharing Carl with us because often 
when we meet in this particular arena of politics, we get new 
doors of information and new sights that other people point out 
to us and certainly, from his perspective, he afforded me many 
of those opportunities to see what he’d see and certainly to 
understand what he understood better, and often he would give 
us many, many words of advice. 
 
About the only criticism I have of Carl was I mentioned to him 
one day that because I’m stuck in the Assembly answering 
some of his questions on a wide variety of issues, that my 
hockey career was suffering. And Carl often picked on my 
hockey career, Mr. Speaker, and his words was . . . were well, I 
understood that you were just suffering when you first put on 
your skates. So he done it in a joking fashion, but as always, it 
was business. 
 
When we met behind the bar we spoke business and he had his 
issues to deal with, but he was going to keep everything 
above-board. Everything was going to be handled in a 
gentlemanly fashion, and we would get the issues and the 
questions out in front of the public of Saskatchewan so they 
know exactly what is going on. But we will not be frivolous and 
we will not be political and we will not play games with each 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

 

other, was the offer that Carl often made to me. And he 
certainly lived up to his words. 
 
In recognition of some of the travels that Carl undertook, we 
knew that there was many hours and many miles that he 
travelled, but we also know that in this job that the lack of rest, 
sometimes health problems, whether it’s high blood pressure or 
not eating properly, or whether it’s family pressures, or whether 
it’s the support systems that sometimes aren’t there all the time, 
or whether you lose contact with friends or constituents — 
those are all the challenges that I know Carl faced. And it is 
with his gritty determination that he continued coming here 
looking for a fight, and deserving a fight, and wanting to fight 
for what he believed in. 
 
And I think if you compile all those challenges that MLAs face, 
that at the end of the day it is really how you begin to treat each 
other which really begins to measure a person’s compassion and 
certainly a person’s humanity. And Carl, Mr. Speaker, showed 
his kindness, his compassion, and showed that he was a human 
being despite the differences and the sacrifices that he made. He 
was cordial, respectful, business-like and a great person. 
 
I offer to the family, to the constituents, and to the many people 
touched by Carl, our sincere sympathy. We share your loss. But 
let the memories that we have of Carl allow us to celebrate his 
life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to join with other members in passing on our condolences 
to the Kwiatkowski family. And I just thought, and I know 
some of the members have heard this story before, but I just 
wanted to tell you my experience of the first night that I met 
Carl. I believe it was Porcupine Plain or in some community out 
there, and at the time he was president for the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
And just before the meeting started, or the function that we 
were attending started, I had gone to the washroom and when I 
left the washroom, not knowing that anyone was in there, I 
flipped the light off — being, you know, very concerned about 
saving energy and stuff like that. And there was this beller out 
of one of the cubicles in the washroom, and unbeknown to me 
there was Carl Kwiatkowski who I had never met in my life. 
And it was a sight to behold, Mr. Speaker, because I flipped the 
light back on and this guy comes out of the cubicle, pants down 
around his knees, in sheer shock because he was scared of the 
dark. 
 
And that was a lasting impression that I will never forget in all 
my days. And that, Mr. Speaker, was the start of a great 
friendship. He never forgot me from that point on and I never 
forgot him, all of him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last week before Carl’s death we had the good 
fortune of having Carl stay with us for a couple of days. And in 
hindsight, you know, you look back and try and find in your 
mind something that you should have picked up on, and there 
was nothing there. And hindsight’s 20/20, but we could find 
nothing. 
 
Carl touched, everywhere he went, he touched someone. I think 
in the building here is a prime example. You talk to people all 

over the legislature, people that we don’t see that often, and 
they’ll say, oh Carl stopped in and talked to me on numerous 
occasions. Carl was the kind of person that cared for everyone 
everywhere he went and had to talk to everyone everywhere he 
went. 
 
Carl and I spent an awful lot of time together, and many of you 
in this building will know because at many times during the day 
when session was on, just for something to do, we would go out 
and stand on the step and get some fresh air. 
 
Carl’s future was very bright and it’s so sad that he . . . it was 
cut short. Carl had told many of us that his dream since he was 
a little boy was to be an elected representative in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and who knows where that could have led him 
to in the future. He was an excellent representative for the 
people of Carrot River Valley. I’ve got to know many of them 
up there — Carol Stewart is president now and her husband and 
many others up there thought the world of Carl. And I know 
they’re going to be . . . just a tremendous loss with Carl not 
there as a representative. 
 
The member for Athabasca, I thought, touched on some 
important points too, Mr. Speaker. I think the public, a good 
part of the time, thinks that being an MLA is very colourful and 
rewarding — and for the most part, it is. 
 
But there’s another side to being an elected official. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a lot of stress as you know and everyone in this 
fine legislature knows. The stresses that can add up after a long 
day and after long sessions and even when we’re not in session, 
when the people sometimes call you at 6:30 in the morning and 
say, I thought I might not be able to get a hold of you so I 
thought I’d call you early. And quite often that can be 7 o’clock 
on Sunday morning, and these calls can go on any hours of the 
day. And I know it’s our job, and I know we’re paid well for 
our job, but it’s things that add to those stresses, Mr. Speaker, 
as you’re well aware. 
 
There’s also a loneliness that goes with this job. And I know 
especially with the rural people, but even the ones that live in 
Saskatoon and that and places away from Regina, we spend 
hours and hours on the road. In Carl’s case, a one-way trip to 
Regina was about three-and-a-half hours — round trip, seven 
hours. That’s time that you spend all by yourself many days of 
the week. How many times did . . . In Carl’s case and all of our 
cases that we would have to drive out to our constituency to a 
meeting and back in at night, and it was very lonely because 
usually you’re all by yourself. 
 
Many of the days of the year when other people finish their job 
at 5 or even if they’re on shift work, get to go home after work. 
Mr. Speaker, we’re away for many of those days and days in a 
row, especially when session’s on right now. And it can be 
tremendously hard on family life and hard on our families. And 
I think in many of our past experiences it’s shown, whether it 
ends up in divorce or whatever. But it is definitely hard on our 
families. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what caught . . . cut Carl’s life 
short and I don’t think any of us ever will. But one thing I do 
know is his passing has made a big hole in my life and I’ve lost 
a very good friend. So I want to join with every one of you in 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

passing on my thoughts and best wishes to Leona and Carla and 
Krystal and Tyrrell, and tell them that we share with them that 
we will very dearly miss Carl Kwiatkowski. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I count it as a 
privilege to be able to participate in this tribute this afternoon. 
 
I will remember a man who was outgoing and friendly; who 
treated everyone with respect and warmth, whether they were 
prominent or average, whether they were political friend or foe. 
I knew Carl prior to our entering politics and I liked him, as did 
almost everyone who knew him. His interest in people was 
genuine and shone through. And of course, as members have 
alluded, he and I shared a dislike of heckling and catcalls in this 
Assembly. 
 
His death was a shock to me as it was to all members of this 
House. His death reminds us that politics is a difficult 
profession — difficult not only for those of us who have chosen 
it, but also for our families who in most cases did not choose to 
have a family member in public life. 
 
His death reminds us that while we practise a profession that 
requires an ever-ready smile, the appearance of never letting 
things get to us, and a hiding of any hint of weakness or 
self-doubt, the truth is that we are as vulnerable as members of 
any other occupation group. His death reminds us that we are 
always wrong to presume to know what is in another person’s 
mind. The truth is, we do not. 
 
(17:30) 
 
In 18th century England, it was, I understand, the custom to 
ring the church bell when there was a death. And as the member 
for Swift Current pointed out this afternoon, the death of any 
person reminds all of us of our own mortality. But this one 
particularly so to me. 
 
And it was the poet John Dunn who wrote a poem on our 
connectedness to all life and on our loss when any life is 
snuffed out. And he wrote the immortal words which ended 
with the line: 
 

(Send not to know) . . . for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for 
thee. 

 
And those lines came to me particularly when I learned of 
Carl’s death because this, more than most deaths, reminded me 
of our shared vulnerability and our shared mortality. 
 
I will miss him as I know will all members of this House. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I first met Carl, like many of my 
colleagues, when he first came to this legislature after the 1999 
election. And Carl quite frankly quickly stood out in this House 
as a very capable member and obviously a member who cared 
very much about representing his constituents in the best way 
possible. 
 
And it was during that first sitting of the legislature that I have 
my most, clearest memories of Carl. And it was in one of the 
early question periods when he got up and I believe he was 
questioning the government on their policy in regards to coyote 

hunting. And I think it was myself or perhaps one of my 
colleagues let out a little bit of a coyote howl. And I must 
admit, Mr. Speaker, I took the opportunity to howl at Carl every 
opportunity I got the rest of that session. And he later came 
about by the nickname of Coyote Carl and I may have had some 
small part to do with that. 
 
But I think that was the beginning of my appreciation for Carl 
because he took that howling, and the heckling, and the catcalls 
in the way that . . . in the fashion that they were meant, with 
good humour. 
 
And it was during that same, short, December session that Carl 
and I discovered that we both shared in the need to step outside 
this legislature two or three times a day to do a quality check of 
the fresh air out there. And it was during one of these fresh air 
checks that we also discovered that we shared something else 
very much in common which is not maybe plentiful in 
Saskatchewan. There’s probably not that many of us that share 
a common commitment as a lifelong fan of the National 
Hockey League Montreal Canadiens. 
 
And I remember when we first discovered this and we were 
discussing the fortunes of the team — quite frankly we 
preferred to discuss their past fortunes much more than their 
present ones — but it was during that discussion that Carl 
disappeared and quickly went off to his office and retrieved a 
pair of handmade leather gloves that had the Canadien team’s 
insignia beaded on them. And he was very, very — and 
rightfully so — very, very proud of those gloves, and I was 
envious. 
 
But it was probably in September of 2001 on a trip to Halifax to 
attend the annual conference of the Canadian Council of Public 
Accounts Committees that I got to know Carl the best, because 
during that time we spent much of our free time together, and 
we had many long, frank, and earnest discussions. And 
although we didn’t always agree on things, I did gain the 
deepest respect for Carl. 
 
And after that Carl and I would often meet when he was here in 
Regina on legislative business and doing his MLA work. We 
would often meet for breakfast and we would carry out some 
very good discussions, and very friendly chit-chat and chatter. 
And we did stay in touch on a regular basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was happy to have had the chance to get to 
know Carl, although for a short time. Carl was an honest, 
hardworking, principled, and a very caring person. In other 
words, Mr. Speaker, simply put, he was an all-around nice guy. 
And I am proud to say that Carl was a friend of mine, and I, like 
many others, do miss him. 
 
I want to offer my condolences to his friends and his family. 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my distinct pleasure and honour to stand with fellow colleagues 
as well and remember our good friend, Carl Kwiatkowski. 
 
Carl and I first met back in the late 1980s when I was working 
as an economic development consultant in those days, and I was 
working on an economic development project up in Porcupine 
Plain and Carl was mayor at that time. And it was a pleasure to 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

 

have met him then and it was a real pleasure to renew 
acquaintances when I . . . during my first period that I was 
elected when Carl was with SARC and used to come as part of 
that body when they came here to the legislature. And I was 
certainly very, very happy to be reacquainted with him in 1999 
after he was elected to this legislature. 
 
As many of you know, I share a great passion for history and 
genealogy, and certainly of members of this legislature and of 
people of Saskatchewan. And it didn’t take me long to remind 
Carl that there were three of us of Polish background at that 
time in this new legislature that was elected in 1999. The 
member from Melville who was . . . shortly became Speaker 
and myself were the eighth and ninth members of Polish 
background elected to this legislature. And then Carl who was 
the 10th MLA of Polish background elected to the legislature. 
 
And so we had a lot of chance to talk a little bit about that and 
Carl certainly shared my interest and passion to the extent that 
about a year later he brought me this file here which I’ve been 
working on. It’s the copies of all their family documents for 
Carl’s grandfather and family when they emigrated to Poland 
. . . from Poland to Canada. 
 
And we found out at that time, or I found out, that we had a lot 
in common. Carl’s ancestral village is a village called 
Liszkowice which is about 35 kilometres from our ancestral 
village of Buczacz. 
 
And when you’re doing Polish and Ukrainian genealogy you 
have to be very careful. You know in this area that we talked 
about, Galicia, there’s many villages that have the same name. 
For instance our village was Trybuchowce. Well there’s three 
Trybuchowces so you’ve got to make sure you’ve got the right 
one. Well Liszkowice, there was four or five Liszkowices. 
 
And Carl had tracked down one, but it was the wrong one, and I 
had had a chance to talk to him not long ago and I pointed out 
that I had managed to track down the right one for him. And we 
were looking forward to getting together here sometime this 
session to go over this information. So it is with a great deal of 
sadness that I must say that I won’t be able to do it with him. 
But it’s certainly information that I will be passing on to his 
members of his family. 
 
As I said, colleagues, Carl was of Polish background. The word 
or the name Kwiatkowski, kwiat in Polish is flower, kwiaty is 
flowers plural. And although Carl would be a little young to be 
considered a flower child —like I could have been back in the 
’60s — certainly we would all have to agree that he was very 
flowery in his speeches, in his talks. 
 
As an hon. member from Regina Northeast has pointed out, 
who could ever forget the talk on the coyotes? I recall — to 
show what a good sport Carl was — the member for Regina 
Victoria every second year has a constituency fundraiser called 
Prime Time Politics and where a lot of people and a lot of 
things and a lot of politics get lampooned. 
 
Well Carl came to this event two years ago, I think it was, and 
did his coyote question at this what was an NDP constituency 
event. And I must say everybody, everybody there just really 
enjoyed that. And it just showed what a great sport Carl was. 

More seriously though, I do recall, I think it was Carl’s first 
term here, who can ever forget his . . . the member’s statement 
that he made which affected me very, very much. Carl made a 
very, very powerful member’s statement on the evils of racism 
as I recall in his first session here. And that moved me very, 
very much and it was something that I will never forget. 
 
And I actually . . . I was trying to do it today and I didn’t have a 
chance — I was going to go pull it out of Hansard — but it’s 
just something . . . I will pull it out one day and pass it around 
to people. But Carl could be a very, very, very serious and 
motivated person and that member speech he gave on the evils 
of racism that day was very, very powerful. 
 
So with that I just want to join with all of my other colleagues 
here to honour Carl and, if you don’t mind, I think it might not 
be totally inappropriate to maybe say a couple sentences in the 
language of my grandfather and Carl’s grandfather and the 
member from Melville’s father, and I’d just like to say in 
Polish, Carl Kwiatkowski . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Polish.) 
 
The last part there just said that I plan to finish off this work 
that I’ve been doing, the research on the members of Polish 
background, and I’ll dedicate this study in the memory of our 
good colleague, Carl Kwiatkowski. 
 
And I would like to add to Carl’s family again my personal 
condolences. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Other members have 
referred today to just how difficult this day of condolences is 
for members of the Legislative Assembly and have referred to 
how doubly difficult it is when someone that we have served 
with in this current session passes away in an untimely and 
almost incomprehensible fashion. 
 
I want to start out my condolences by first of all extending my 
condolences to the members of the opposition and also to the 
members on the government side. I have noticed as various 
members have been speaking, that many of us in this Assembly 
have had difficulty controlling our tears, and I think that it’s 
because we move a bit beyond being family in this Assembly. 
 
We often use the metaphor family, but really what we are is a 
very tight-knit community. Indeed the 58 members who are 
elected at the beginning of a session really in many ways almost 
are the whole population of many small towns in Saskatchewan. 
And we get to know each other in a very peculiar, very intense, 
very passionate fashion as we debate, as we have our 
differences of ideology, as we discover our similarities, our 
shared pasts, our shared futures and dreams. 
 
So I do want to pass on condolences very directly to all 
members in this Legislative Assembly and most particularly to 
the members of the opposition who of course knew Carl more 
than we in the government side did simply by virtue of your 
many caucus meetings and all the travelling that you would do 
together. But all of us I think shared a common bond of 
friendship and of respect for Carl. 
 
When he was first elected and walked in that door, you know 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

big, tall, cool-looking dude with his funny moustache and this 
very, very carefully coiffed hair, he had an impact on all of us 
almost immediately. He was full of hope, full of dignity, full of 
integrity, and extremely stubborn. And when he said he wasn’t 
going to heckle, he followed through on it. And I know that the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena, being fair and strictly honest, 
said he lost his bet, but I don’t believe he did because he just 
slipped just ever so slightly and we all of us have to cut some 
slack for ourselves in this Assembly. So I think he won his bet 
that he was not going to heckle during the session. 
 
I also found that Carl was extremely courteous. During my time 
as minister of Environment, Carl, as the Environment critic, 
could have done the easy thing and could have sprung on me 
the issue of the day while we were sitting here in the Assembly. 
Instead Carl always went out of his way to give me a heads-up, 
to make sure I wasn’t blindsided and I did know the issue that 
he was going to raise. 
 
(17:45) 
 
Carl always asked genuine questions and he was genuinely 
interested in the answer. And I think in that respect he was an 
incredible role model for all of us for what question period 
could and should be, and often is but unfortunately sometimes 
is not. Sometimes, like any community, we get into petty 
bickering; we forget that we are here to serve for the long-term 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan and we decide that 
we’re going to go for the quick, easy point. 
 
Carl didn’t do that. Carl always kept his eye on the future and in 
that respect I think he was a mentor to all of us — those of us 
who had served three terms, four or five terms, and those of us 
who have only served one or two terms. 
 
I was very fortunate to attend an institute in Madison, 
Wisconsin with Carl. The Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association had decided to have a much more direct bilateral 
relationship with the midwest conference of legislators in the 
United States and we were able to send two legislators to the 
Bowhay Institute for Leadership Development in Madison, 
Wisconsin. And so I spent a full week with Carl. 
 
That was probably one of the more interesting weeks in my life, 
because Carl was always on task but he was also very much 
focused on certain things that were extremely important to him. 
 
In Madison we had marvellous meals in this brand new facility 
that had just been opened. We were the first conference to be 
there. And I said to Carl one day, you never come down for 
breakfast and they have such a wide assortment of food and 
everything, and it’s just a marvellous thing — you should come 
down for breakfast. He said, well Pat, I can’t. And I said, why, 
are you dieting or do you not eat breakfast? What is it? He said 
well, don’t laugh, but I get up at 6 o’clock every morning. And 
I said well, good, that should give you lots of time to get down 
to the 8 o’clock breakfast. He said well no, it doesn’t because it 
takes me that long to get ready. And I said, Carl, for heaven 
sakes, why would it take you so long? You’re not a woman; you 
don’t have to put on makeup or anything. What takes you so 
long? And he said, well actually it takes me that long because I 
have to make sure that my moustache is combed just properly 
and that every hair is in place. And that was Carl — totally 

focused on details and always making sure that everything was 
perfect. He was a perfectionist. 
 
At the end of that conference — which was a lot of work I must 
say — we had approximately three hours to go shopping. And I 
thought well, good; this is my chance to kind of have a little bit 
of time to myself and see Madison. Carl insisted that I had to 
come shopping with him. 
 
Now this is very unusual. I don’t know how many men in this 
Assembly would want to go shopping but — and would ask that 
one of their colleagues come along shopping with them — but 
Carl insisted he had to go shopping. And not only did he have 
to go shopping just anywhere, but he had to go into every store 
and he looked at everything that there was, and he was getting 
more and more frustrated. 
 
And I thought well, maybe it’s me because some men don’t like 
shopping with women. And I said, well am I doing something 
wrong, Carl? He said, no, no, no; I am looking for the perfect 
gifts. And I said well, who are you looking for gifts for? Maybe 
I can help you. He said, I have to get gifts for Leona and Carla 
and Krystal and Tyrrell. 
 
Because you see for Carl I think there probably was nothing 
more important to him in his life than his family. Sure, politics 
was incredibly important to Carl, but really his family was the 
total fulcrum of his existence. 
 
And so he insisted that we had to go to all the stores so he could 
find just the most perfect gift. Finally in frustration he settled on 
T-shirts, sweatshirts, for all the family because he wanted to 
have something that had the souvenir of Madison, Wisconsin. 
And I’m not a sports fan so I’m sorry, I can’t remember the 
name of the football team that’s there. Oh it’s the . . . Is it the 
Green Bay Packers or something like that? Anyway he had to 
have souvenirs of the Madison people . . . the Madison football 
players. 
 
So we finally ended up buying all these T-shirts. And he’s 
holding them out and trying to decide if they’re the right size 
and picking out people, shoppers, to say well, Leona’s about 
that size and, you know, Tyrrell, well he’s young yet and he’s 
sort of like that young lad over there, and so forth. We bought 
these T-shirts or sweatshirts rather, walked out, and Carl was 
carrying a huge shopping bag of course by this time because he 
had his presents for his family. 
 
And we walked out and the first thing we saw was an ice cream 
shop and the ice cream shop name was Chocolate Coyote. The 
member for Regina northwest has already referred to the coyote 
catcalls that Carl suffered with such good nature in this 
Assembly. Carl very kindly agreed to let me take a photograph 
of him in front of the Chocolate Coyote ice cream shop. And 
Carl was carrying in that picture the shopping bag with gifts for 
his family. 
 
I would like to table this photo with you, Mr. Speaker, and hope 
that when the Hansard proceedings of today’s motion is 
transmitted to his family that you would include this photo that 
very definitely speaks to happier times for Carl and his family 
— times before he, like all of us in this Assembly, succumbed 
to the long hours, the lonely life, the times that we do not ask 



March 20, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

 

for sympathy because we don’t . . . we asked for this job. But 
we always do have the sacrifices we make. We suffer in silence 
mostly and we give to our families and to our community of 
legislators here in this building and, more importantly, to the 
bigger, broader, beautiful community of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would like to express my condolences to all of the MLAs 
here in the Assembly and most particularly to Carl’s family. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too would rise to pay 
honour and respect to Carl Kwiatkowski, MLA. I’d like to start 
by giving the condolences to the family, the friends, all the 
people in the House, and everyone who knew Carl 
Kwiatkowski. 
 
Many members have stated that he was a very skilled person. 
As I watched him come into the House, I have watched many 
MLAs over the past, you know, over 16 years, you know, come 
into this House. And I was indeed very impressed with this 
person. As I come into the House I knew not only his 
meticulous nature and his skills, not only in regards to the 
serious nature of the debate, but also in the light humour that is 
demanded of us as we deal, you know, with the issues of this 
province and our constituencies. 
 
But there was a special something about indeed Carl. Many 
people have talked about many aspects of Carl. One of the 
things that struck me about Carl was his sensitivity, what you 
would call the humanitarian side of people. It was sensitivity 
not only to people within the realms of the legislature, but you 
saw that in the many walks of life from the different 
backgrounds of people. You saw that in his work with people 
on disabilities and the tremendous compassion that he had in 
that regard. 
 
But I also wanted to say this, you know, as an Aboriginal 
person, that when you look at the issue of racism and the fact 
that this person was a strong fighter against racism, he proved it 
to me time and again in this House. I remember the time when 
he came into this House and he did that member’s statement 
and there was racism against, you know, the aspect of 
somebody with a eastern European origin. And he made his 
commentary and he made his statement in the House. 
 
I was listening and I looked up to him and, you know, I gave 
him a nod, you know, of approval on his comment. And after he 
was finished, I stood up in the House and I looked at him and I 
walked right across. And I went over and I shook his hand. And 
I said that was well done. You know, I said I really appreciate 
what you did. 
 
After that he was new in the legislature and we had many 
discussions, you know, about my own experiences. You know, I 
had talked to him about, you know, the many debates including 
the Meech Lake debate in the House when there was three of us 
MLAs that voted against Meech Lake and everybody voted for 
Meech Lake, and I had become one of the members to vote 
against Meech Lake in the House. And it was not long after that 
when we were having one of those debates in the House and it 
came to be on the issue of The Métis Act. 
 

On the issue of The Métis Act, in the question of The Métis 
Act, most of the members of course voted for The Métis Act 
and in that particular regard . . . And I remember when I was in 
Meech Lake, you know, all of our members voted for Meech 
Lake, except for three of us. And there was Carl standing up 
voting for The Métis Act along with another of his colleagues. 
And I thought, now there is a guy who lives up exactly to what 
he says. 
 
You know, after I talked . . . we had talked but it was not on the 
basis of some generality on the humanitarian side. He had 
looked at that Métis Act and had turned it upside down and he 
had come to talk to me about the different clauses of it. He had 
done it through knowledge; he had done it through the 
compassionate route that he had. And I learned to respect, you 
know, this MLA who had made this first speech that I heard of 
before, you know, in dealing with the issue of racism. 
 
And I knew the genuine nature, you know, that he felt in 
regards to the issue of inequality here of all peoples. So I stand 
in this legislature, you know, with all my colleagues and many 
other people who have learned to respect such a man and to say 
that this indeed was not only a skilled man, he was not only a 
good man, he was a compassionate man — somebody that we 
can say we were proud to know in this House. 
 
(18:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand and join with colleagues on both sides of the 
House this afternoon in expressing our thoughts and feelings 
about the loss of a colleague that we all obviously thought a 
great deal about. 
 
It seems very strange entering this session of the House, and not 
being able to look over to the Speaker’s left and see Carl 
Kwiatkowski there, passionately attentive to what is going on, 
when his opportunity came to raise issues and questions or put 
his position and principles on the order paper to do that. 
 
It’s hard to think of this House without Carl as part of it. It will 
be adjustment for all of us from wherever we sit in this 
Assembly to not feel something’s missing because Carl isn’t 
there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all shared today some of our glimpses in 
Carl’s past, his great accomplishments. When I first came in 
contact with Carl in the Northeast of the province was through 
joint participation on a community committee. And over the 
years cross paths with Carl in the Northeast and could see his 
compassion and passion for people of disabilities, his 
commitment to the environment and recycling, his commitment 
to his community and to his family, were all things that were 
easy for any of us and all of us to see even if we met him, 
initially, quite casually. 
 
And I wasn’t aware of his interest and passion for politics really 
until 1997 when after eight of us decided to embark on a new 
adventure in politics and form the Saskatchewan Party, I 
received a phone call that night when I got home to Melfort, 
and it was Carl Kwiatkowski expressing his enthusiasm for the 
decision and his interest to be involved. Before that I had no 
idea that he had a political interest. 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2003 

 

And since that time through ’99 and afterwards, you got to 
know Carl much better, his passions, and all the strong points 
that you his colleagues have outlined, and some of his little 
quirks. I plead guilty to passing by his meticulous, spotless 
office with the door open and finding it irresistible not to walk 
over to the picture and just give it a little nudge out of square. 
And the next time you walked by it, it’d be right back where it 
was supposed to be. So I was one of the gremlins that made 
sure that Carl was always vertically, and horizontally, and 
organizationally challenged. 
 
He was the kind of fellow that it not only seems impossible not 
to see him in this House, but to not see him on the steps of the 
legislature or in the rotunda, or in the corridors of this building, 
visiting with people. And it didn’t matter at all to Carl, I mean, 
if it was his colleagues or people on our side of the House. He 
just loved people and he saw them for what they were — people 
who had jobs to do and were committed as equally as he to this 
province. 
 
And it makes me sort of wonder that when you listen to what 
. . . the tributes that have been given today to Carl, if we don’t 
have to think about what does it mean going forward. If all is 
we’re going to do is remember Carl for what he was, then I 
think we somehow sell Carl’s memory short. Carl should be an 
example and an inspiration for us. On both sides of the House 
people talked about that he was a mentor and a role model, 
somebody we all looked up to in our own way even though we 
took pleasure in laughing with him and teasing him and he, we 
in return. 
 
And I know people of this profession are very often questioned 
as to why we would ever do this. A member opposite said we 
do it because we love this province and we’re committed to it. 
And that’s true. But we have to ask ourselves even further, how 
do we conduct ourselves in expressing that passion for this 
province? 
 
And I think Carl was an example in many ways because 
sometimes we get too wrapped up into the passion and the 
debate of this place. And what we do is we forget that there are 
people on the other side of the issue who believe equally 
passionately and equally appropriately in their point of view. 
And we get into the slippery slope of diminishing each other as 
people, as part of that debate. And Carl didn’t participate in it. 
 
And I agree he shouldn’t have had to cough up the 50 bucks. 
But it should be a lesson and an inspiration for us to make that 
differentiation. And while good-natured howling from the other 
side of the House or humorous catcalls that maybe are meant in 
good humour and good taste are probably not a problem, but we 
have to commit ourselves to not letting it ever get to the point 
where it diminishes each other as human beings. 
 
I know very often the impression from the outside of how we 
conduct ourselves here is very different than what’s going on in 
this last couple of hours in this House. But this is also real. It’s 
also legitimate. And it’s also something that we have to work 
towards authenticating, not in each other’s minds, but in all of 
our attitudes to the way we approach the challenge of this place. 
 
The second challenge that I think we have to take out of Carl’s 
life is the challenge that many people mentioned today about 

what this job and this profession does in our relationships to our 
families and to our friends and to the people back home. 
 
And they’re all different because each of our relationships and 
each of our points of family relationships are different. Some 
have young families. Some have grown families. Some have a 
closer environment and live closer and can be closer here. 
 
But you know we shouldn’t just think about, is there a life after 
politics. Surely there must be a life during politics. And that life 
should include our family and our friends in meaningful ways. 
And too often we think too much about the politics and not 
nearly enough about what the effect of decisions we make in 
exercising the politics of a decision is going to have on our 
families and friends. I think politics could be a family-friendly 
profession if we want it to be, if we choose it to be. 
 
It’s difficult and there are times, as members mentioned, when 
we’re alone on the roads and travelling distances and all of 
those things are true, but surely we can find ways to make that 
more family friendly. Not just for ourselves individually but for 
ourselves — as the member opposite talked about — that we 
are also a family. 
 
And so I would like to suggest in expressing my condolences on 
the loss of Carl — to his family and friends, to Leona and their 
children, and his parents — is to say that I believe we should 
commit ourselves to improving this place, to take Carl’s life in 
example as a challenge to make this a better place in the way 
we deal with each other and with our families. I don’t think Carl 
deserves any less. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, leave to move a 
motion of transmittal. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Cannington: 

 
That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 18:11. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Stewart.........................................................................................................................................................................................37 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................37 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................37 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...............................................................................................................................................................................37 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................37 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................37 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Julé .........................................................................................................................................................................................37, 38 
  Crofford .......................................................................................................................................................................................37 
  Lautermilch .................................................................................................................................................................................38 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................38 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................38 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................39 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................39 
  Higgins .........................................................................................................................................................................................39 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Fifth Annual Saskatchewan Party Leader’s Dinner 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................39 
 Thank You to the People of Saskatoon Fairview Constituency 
  Iwanchuk .....................................................................................................................................................................................39 
 Thank you to the People of Battleford-Cut Knife Constituency 
  Lorenz ..........................................................................................................................................................................................39 
 Congratulations to the Melville Millionaires Hockey Team 
  Van Mulligen...............................................................................................................................................................................40 
 Condolences to the Rob Sivell Family of Buena Vista 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................40 
 La Journée internationale de la Francophonie 
  Kasperski .....................................................................................................................................................................................40 
 Anna Rathje Celebrates 105th Birthday 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................41 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................41 
 Crop Insurance Program 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................42 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................42 
 Rural Business Telephone Rates 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................43 
 SaskTel Investments 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................44 
  Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................44 
 Treaty Land Entitlement Claims 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................45 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................45 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................45 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan Environment Drinking Water Compliance Report 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................46 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................46 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................47 
  Wiberg .........................................................................................................................................................................................52 
 
 



 

 

MOTIONS 
 Substitution of Member on Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................60 
CONDOLENCES 
 Penner, John 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................60 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................62 
  Cline .............................................................................................................................................................................................63 
  Lautermilch .................................................................................................................................................................................64 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  Atkinson.......................................................................................................................................................................................65 
 Kwiatkowski, Carl 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................66 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................67 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................69 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................70 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................71 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................72 
  Harper .........................................................................................................................................................................................72 
  Kasperski .....................................................................................................................................................................................72 
  Lorjé.............................................................................................................................................................................................73 
  Goulet...........................................................................................................................................................................................75 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................75 
  Lautermilch (transmittal motion)..............................................................................................................................................76 
 


	CONDOLENCES
	CONDOLENCES

