















































Hansard: March 24, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 103 
 March 24, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in lieu 
of the government’s reluctance to honour leases for Crown 
grazing purposes in the Southwest, many of my constituents 
have started a petition campaign. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from constituents from 
Tompkins, Cabri, Burstall, Fox Valley, Maple Creek, and other 
communities throughout the Southwest. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 58 between Chaplin and 
Shamrock. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 

This petition is signed by individuals all from the community of 
Shamrock. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition today, and it is from . . . citizens in my area very 
concerned about the safety of children and others who travel on 
Highway 47 south of Estevan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by residents of the city of Estevan and the 
surrounding area. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to 
rise on behalf of people in my hometown who are very 
concerned with the state of the hospital in Swift Current. The 

prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners again today are from the city 
of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by the citizens, good citizens for the town of Davidson: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at its current level of service at 
a minimum 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctor 
services available, as well as lab services, public health, 
home care, long-term care services, available to the users 
from Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s dealing with Crown land leases. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land leases maintain their first option to renew their 
leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood and Leask. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning maintenance of current level of 
service at the Davidson and Craik health centres; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 4, 5, and 6. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 5 ask the government the following question: 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

To the Minister of Health: since tobacco taxes were raised 
in the 2002-2003 budget, what has been the percentage 
increase or decrease in: (1) sales of taxable tobacco 
products; and (2) sales of non-taxable tobacco products? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 10 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: what were the terms of the sale of the 
fresh-pack potato plant at Lucky Lake to Pak-Wel Produce 
of Vauxhall, Alberta; when did the purchaser take full 
possession of the facility; on what date did the deal close; 
and on what date was CIC paid in full for the facility? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and a good Monday to you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I introduce to you and 
all members of the House . . . And I’ll ask them to stand as I 
introduce them. We have some visitors here from, not only out 
of province, but out of the country: Mr. Dimitri Logothetis, his 
fiancée, Suzie O’Donnell — congratulations to you both — Mr. 
Nicholas Celozzi. Now both gentlemen . . . Oh and as well Ms. 
Valerie Creighton, the CEO (chief executive officer) of 
SaskFILM. 
 
These gentlemen are from ACME Pictures, Mr. Speaker, and 
this is a Hollywood-based film and television production and 
distribution company. Mr. Logothetis is a director/writer, and 
Mr. Celozzi is the producer of The Lost Angel, which is a 3.5 
million — oh, you can sit down again, that’s okay; it’s kind of 
like being in church — that’s being shot here in Saskatchewan. 
The majority of the shooting will be on location, as well as the 
15,000 square foot studio at the Canada-Saskatchewan 
production studio. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both Mr. Logothetis and Mr. Celozzi have been so 
impressed with the opportunities here that they’ve expressed 
interest in bringing more projects to Saskatchewan, including 
three more feature films and a large series — so let’s do our 
best to encourage that thought. 
 
And I ask all members to warmly welcome our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And I have one more introduction, Mr. 
Speaker. Should I finish my second one? 
 
And as well — I’ve got a bounty of guests today — joining a 
hardworking staff member from my office, Margaret Giannetta, 
she’s joined today by Sophie Kups, who is her mother, who is 
83 years old today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And she is accompanied by another 
daughter, Halina Schoenthal. And I’ll just mention, Mr. 

Speaker, that such is our working schedule that our dear 
mothers are forced to come to the legislature if they want to be 
able to celebrate their birthdays with their families. So join me 
in wishing Sophie a happy birthday. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the loyal opposition, I too would like to welcome the 
folks here that are in Saskatchewan from out of province and 
out of country. I hope you enjoy the proceedings this afternoon 
and enjoy your stay in Saskatchewan. And we look forward to 
having you back when we are government. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again in 
the east gallery this afternoon I’m pleased to present Mr. David 
Karwacki, the leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Karwacki is in Regina for the gigantic leader’s dinner that’s 
to be held Thursday of this week. It promises to be an exciting 
affair, unlike the leader’s dinner of a certain other party that was 
held last week in Saskatoon, which I understand was so boring 
there were people going for smoke breaks who don’t even 
smoke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tickets are going fast but there are still a few 
available. Please help me welcome Mr. Karwacki. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of this hon. Assembly 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, my good friend Mr. Chuck 
Guilluame. Chuck has been successful in small business, has 
been a senior civil servant. Chuck now farms at Marquis and is 
the head of a local group promoting a large hog enterprise in 
that small community, and a very important member of my 
constituency organization. 
 
I ask all members to welcome my friend, Chuck Guilluame. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
also like to join with my colleague from Regina Centre and 
welcome Sophie Kups here this afternoon, and say happy 
birthday. I’ve known Sophie and her family for many, many 
years. Her husband, Walter . . . they’re immigrants from Poland 
who came to Regina shortly after the Second World War. And 
it’s nice to see Halina here. I wouldn’t want to embarrass her, 
but a few years ago Halina was my dance partner in the Polonia 
folk dance ensemble here in Regina for a little while. So Halina, 
it’s nice to see you. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Polish.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Junior World Curling Championships 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
curling fans are proud and excited that Canada is being well 
represented at both the women’s and men’s junior world 
championships by teams from our province. Residents of 
Biggar, the hometown of Olympic gold medallist Sandra 
Schmirler, are jubilant over the performance of our women’s 
junior team led by Marliese Miller. The team also includes 
Teejay Surik, from . . . where else but Biggar? Our Canadian 
champs won their first game against Italy on Saturday and sit on 
top of the standings today with a perfect 5 and 0 record. 
 
The Canadian junior women have overcome jet lag and are 
adjusting to playing with a rule change. Accustomed to playing 
with the five-rock rule, the junior women are doing extremely 
well despite the four-rock rule change. 
 
I know along with all members, I join about 1 million 
Saskatchewanians in wishing our two outstanding junior teams 
continued success. And particularly, we wish Teejay and 
teammates Marliese Miller, Janelle Lemon, Chelsey Bell, the 
best of luck. We hope that both the men’s and women’s teams 
can bring home the world championship gold. 
 
Good luck to you all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Partnership Between Sask Water 
and Prince Arthur School 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Sask Water is partnering with the Prince Arthur community 
school in Moose Jaw to provide guided reading books, 
specialized software, and learning aids for about 285 
pre-kindergarten to grade 8 students. 
 
Partnerships between schools and Crown corporations have 
become an important part of the value that Crown corporations 
bring to the province. This partnership provides additional 
funds for Prince Arthur community school and gives Sask 
Water an opportunity to be more closely integrated with our 
community. 
 
The school will use the partnership funding for enriched 
content-levelled reading sets, aerobics, computer software, new 
books for the library, award items for student agendas, and for 
the school’s swimming program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Arthur’s principal, Wayne Wolsfeld, said 
having Sask Water partnership with the school to provide 
foundational learning tools for students in this community is a 
valuable step towards building our community’s quality of life. 
We are grateful for this contribution which allows us to reach 
every student in our school with learning aids that may 
otherwise not be available to them. Learning tools will help to 
increase their capacity for academic life and success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more proof of our Crowns’ value to every citizen 
of Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Water Day 2003 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to bring to the members’ attention that March 22 was 
World Water Day 2003. The United Nations Environment 
Programme is the lead UN (United Nations) agency for this day 
of water quality awareness. The goal is to inspire political and 
community action and encourage greater global understanding 
of the need for more responsible water use and conservation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme for this year is water for the future. It 
calls on each of us to maintain and improve our fresh water 
available to future generations. We must all work towards a 
millennium development goal, a goal to cut in half by 2015 the 
number of people living without safe drinking water and basic 
sanitation. 
 
In Saskatchewan, we must give a lot more attention towards 
critical water testing, infrastructure improvement, and water 
quality. 
 
This year’s water awareness day was most importantly in the 
public eye. It was the highlight of the world water forum held 
this past week in Japan. However here in Saskatchewan we 
have a long way to go towards becoming the best example of 
water purity. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Towns and villages across the province are still struggling to 
replace old water infrastructure equipment while risking 
drinking water quality. Obviously this government does not 
give this critical health concern much priority. We can only 
hope that the members opposite recognize this most important 
responsibility to this province, this country, and to the world. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Party Slogan 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, members 
opposite finally realized they have only empty slogans to offer 
voters so they decided to latch on to the BC (British Columbia) 
Liberal plan. 
 
As their leader declared in a speech to the Saskatoon business 
community, “One initiative that I believe holds tremendous 
value for Saskatchewan is a project launched by Premier 
Campbell called the Core Services Review.” He went on to say, 
“A Saskatchewan Party government will launch a similar Core 
Services Review in this province within 30 days of taking 
office.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here are the results of the Campbell plan so 
far: hospitals closed, nurses and other front-line health workers 
laid off; schools closed, classroom class sizes up, and teachers 
laid off; an average 25 per cent cuts to all public programs; 
11,000 jobs lost in the public service; 23 per cent cut in early 
childhood development programs; a training wage that is $2 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

under the minimum wage for the first 500 hours worked; and, 
most recently, a hike in the gasoline tax. It’s enough to drive 
you — that’s if you can afford to. 
 
That party has slogans, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan and it’s 
working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assiniboia Hosts 2003 Masters Curling Championships 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the town of Assiniboia and specifically the Assiniboia Curling 
Club hosted the 2003 Canadian Open Men’s and Women’s 
Masters Curling Championships, March 17 to 23. The event 
was held in the new Prince of Wales Cultural and Recreation 
Centre and provided some excellent curling for the numerous 
fans. 
 
Standings at the end of the round robin play had Quebec leading 
the men’s division with a 6-1 record and the Manitoba women’s 
team also had a 6-1 record. 
 
In the men’s semifinal playoffs, Alberta beat Ontario and then 
went on to meet Quebec in the final game. The final was won 
by Quebec in a very close and entertaining game. 
 
In the women’s playoffs there were two tiebreaker games which 
saw BC emerge as the semifinal opponent for Ontario. Ontario 
won the game and went on to meet Manitoba in the final. It 
took an extra end but Ontario prevailed and emerged as the 
champion. 
 
Congratulations to all curlers who enjoyed an excellent week in 
Assiniboia, and special congratulations to Dave Moon’s Pointe 
Claire Team Quebec and Gloria Sorley’s Niagara Falls Team 
Ontario for their championship performance. Also, chairpersons 
of the host committee, Trent Richards and Trace Corman, plus 
their many volunteers should be commended for the excellent 
organization and providing direction for this highly successful 
event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Agriculture Policy 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Party has been trying as hard as possible to keep its true agenda 
hidden from the public, but every once in while some of their 
members let a scrap or two drop. 
 
The latest came from the opposition Agriculture critic, the 
member for Watrous, demonstrating once again that her party’s 
understanding of significant agriculture issues is sorely lacking. 
 
First the member for Watrous revealed a crop insurance policy 
that would cost Saskatchewan farmers millions of dollars. In 
response to the reporter’s question, she suggested the crop 
insurance debt should be spread over eight or nine years. The 
debt is currently amortized over a 15-year period, Mr. Speaker. 
The policy she concocted would cost producers as much as 40 
per cent more in crop insurance costs in order to meet her 
accelerated repayment schedule. 

Mr. Speaker, the member should also know that Saskatchewan 
does not have the ability to unilaterally change the crop 
insurance premiums and how they’re calculated. They are a part 
of a federal and provincial agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, confusion reigns supreme on the other side of this 
House when it comes to agricultural policy. The last time their 
critic responded to questions about her party’s policy was in 
answering a reporter’s question about the drought. She was 
asked by a reporter: what would you do specifically about 
drought relief? Her response: right now, I wouldn’t know 
exactly what we would do. 
 
An empty slogan. That’s no plan, Mr. Speaker. We have a plan 
and it’s working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial High School Athletic Association 
Boy’s Curling Championship 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on March 
6 to 8, the community of Strasbourg hosted the Provincial High 
School Athletic Association Boy’s Curling Championship. I 
was very pleased to participate in the opening ceremonies of 
this curling championship and to support our youth in sports. 
 
I congratulate all the people from the community of Strasbourg 
for accepting the challenge of hosting such a competition. An 
event like this, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t just happen; it takes a lot 
of volunteers, a lot of hard work to host such a successful event. 
And I would like to take this moment to thank all those 
volunteers and let them know that their efforts were very much 
appreciated. 
 
The provincial curling championship consists of 16 teams from 
across the province who earn their berth in the playdown by 
winning their district championship. I congratulate every team 
and every team member for their energy and devotion to their 
team’s success this year. 
 
The final games were indeed a show of skill and strategy for the 
qualifying teams. The championship ended with the 
comprehensive high school from Kamsack receiving the gold, 
the Greenall High School from Balgonie receiving the silver, 
and the William Derby high school from Strasbourg receiving 
the bronze. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to at this time say a special word of 
congratulations to the team from Strasbourg consisting of skip 
Kevin Craswell, Dylan Uhl, David Craswell, Shea McLaughlin, 
and Kyle Lakness. Congratulations, boys, for a job well done. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Forthcoming Budget 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is for the 
Premier. Mr. Speaker, extensive details of the provincial budget 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

 

appeared on the front page of Saturday’s Leader-Post and 
StarPhoenix. In fact this is probably the largest budget leak that 
we’ve ever seen in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the question to the Premier is: why did this happen? Why 
did the government leak virtually its entire budget to one media 
outlet and one reporter a week before it was scheduled to be 
released here in this Legislative Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 
Opposition for his question. I understand why he and the 
Saskatchewan Party are upset about speculation around the 
budget which will be delivered on Friday. They’re upset 
because all of the speculation now is that this is going to be a 
very good budget for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The one thing that the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Saskatchewan Party can’t stand, it’s good 
news. So I understand why, Mr. Speaker, they’re a little upset 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I know the Premier is somewhat new to 
this position, has not been elected by the people of 
Saskatchewan, but he should realize the importance of this 
situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget leak was either a deliberate strategy by 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) or it wasn’t. Either way it’s a 
huge, huge problem. If the budget was leaked on purpose for 
some special reason, that shows disrespect for this Legislative 
Assembly, contempt, Mr. Speaker. If the budget was not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, if the budget was not leaked 
on purpose, then the Premier’s got a whole different problem. 
He’s got a major breach of confidentiality to deal with. 
 
So the question, Mr. Speaker, is: which one is it? We don’t 
want a glib reply from the Premier; this is a serious situation. 
Did the Premier’s office authorize the budget leak, or was it 
leaked without the Premier’s knowledge? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — For as long as I’ve been a member of 
this House and in many years before that, there is always an 
amount of speculation that occurs in the run-up to a budget — 
nothing new about speculation about the budget. 
 
Now, that the speculation would describe a stronger financial 
position for the province of Saskatchewan is not surprising 
because I think most people in Saskatchewan know that the . . . 
that in fact the province of Saskatchewan has seen some very 
significant growth. That there is speculation, Mr. Speaker, that 
our income tax revenues will be greater should not be a surprise 
because for several months now we’ve been announcing month 

after month that the job numbers in Saskatchewan are growing. 
That the financial picture in Saskatchewan is better today and 
therefore will be reflected in a provincial budget, that should be 
no surprise to anyone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a minor leak with 
a few details. This is not, as the Premier says, general 
speculation over the overall direction of the budget. This 
includes very, very specific details on the level of spending in 
health, in education, and agriculture. This leak includes 
information on taxes and this leak includes an admission that 
the deficit is going to increase by $400 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the Minister of Finance has leaked his 
very first budget, will he be asked to do the honourable thing 
and resign as Minister of Finance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will tell you exactly what 
this Minister of Finance is going to do. He is going to stand in 
this legislature on Friday morning and deliver a budget to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what he’s going to do, as opposed to, as 
opposed to what the Saskatchewan Party’s cousins in Ontario 
are about to do, which is deliver their budget at an auto centre 
— at an auto centre. Now that’s the theory of the right-wing 
parties in Canada, that’s the theory of the Conservative parties 
in Canada — that you can take your budget right out of the 
legislature and deliver it in an auto centre. 
 
Well no, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance will stand in this 
House on Friday and will deliver. And we will see of course 
how accurate the speculation is — or, Mr. Speaker, how 
inaccurate the speculation is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the budget shouldn’t 
be released at an auto plant nor should it be released in the 
office of a reporter here in Saskatchewan. It’s wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen this 
government perform. We’ve seen the minister of this Premier 
hide from the people of Saskatchewan information for six years, 
confess that he misled the people of Saskatchewan, and he still 
sits on the benches of this Premier’s government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a Minister of Finance who may 
have leaked the budget to a reporter in Saskatchewan and he is 
still sitting on the front benches of this government. Mr. 
Speaker, will the Premier do the right thing? Does he recognize 
the importance of this blunder? Will he commit to the people of 
Saskatchewan why the budget was leaked a week ahead of 
time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 
champion of democracy opposite. Mr. Speaker, delivered to 
many people in the last month was a brochure that talked about 
the Grow Saskatchewan plan. In here, Mr. Speaker, are a 
number, if I may say, a large number of spending commitments 
— spending commitments. 
 
Let me just start at the top. They say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, elect us and we’re going to have reduced and 
smarter taxes. Okay. Fair enough. They say right away we’re 
going to lower provincial income tax. That’s what they say. 
 
I challenge the Leader of the Opposition today: tell us how 
much — 1 point, 2 points, 5 points, 10 points? Mr. Speaker, it’s 
$100 million a point — $100 million a point. If they’re going to 
lower the income taxes by 5 points, what does that add up to — 
$500 million, half a billion. 
 
Secondly, they say they’re going to make Saskatchewan small 
tax . . . a small-business-tax-free zone. Mr. Speaker, $60 million 
a year. The list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. It’s time for this 
opposition to tell us how much — how much are they 
promising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course, the 
Premier is $80 million over budget on the land titles 
automation. There’s lots of money if it’s properly spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on at least three occasions — and I hope the 
Premier listens closely — on at least three occasions in recent 
years, provincial governments have been forced to table their 
budgets early after portions of the budget were leaked to the 
media. This happened in 1987 and in 1992 in Quebec, and it 
happened in 1995 in British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the leak in Saturday’s paper contained extensive 
detail about the upcoming budget. If the Premier is not going to 
demand the resignation of his Minister of Finance, will he then 
follow the precedent set in other legislatures in Canada and will 
he order his Finance minister to table the budget for the people 
of Saskatchewan today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat. On Friday of this 
week, soon enough — soon enough — the Minister of Finance 
will stand in his place and will deliver a budget for the people 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, I repeat again. I 
understand why the Leader of the Opposition and that entire 
caucus and their entire party are a little upset today because, I 
repeat, the speculation — and we’ll see how accurate it is — the 
speculation is that this will be a very good budget for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And they cannot stand good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, when we look at that budget that was released on 
Saturday, it’s very leaky. It’s very leaky in more than one ways. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, that budget is leaking a lot of red ink. 
 
Let’s take a look at what is proposed in that budget: an 
additional increase, Mr. Speaker, of $400 million to the debt. 
 
Now let’s take a look at what the auditor has said just a short 
year . . . two years ago in fact on March 31. The auditor said 
that the debt of this province was $11.1 billion — a staggering 
amount — but 11.1. 
 
The proposed budget, Mr. Speaker, is suggesting that that debt 
will rise to 11.4 billion. That’s a huge increase, Mr. Speaker. 
Third straight deficit that this government is proposing. Why 
does the NDP continue to run up one deficit after another and 
drive this province further into debt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. I think that the member opposite of course is again 
speculating that all the numbers will be out with regard to 
revenues, expenditures, and of course the detail on debt will be 
presented in this Assembly on Friday morning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when we talk about our performance in debt management, 
Mr. Speaker, I must remind the members opposite that the debt 
when this administration took over in 1991, which increased 
because of Crown stripping, equity stripping, has been paid 
down continuously over the past 10 years, Mr. Speaker. And I 
must admit that this province from being one of the worst 
performers on debt management in the early 1990 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just was finding it difficult to hear, but the 
member I think completed his question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: —Mr. Speaker, I need to clarify two things. I 
believe I indicated that the debt proposed in this released budget 
is actually 11.4. No, it’s not. It will be $12.4 billion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for the Minister of Finance’s information, if 
he happened to read the last document dated 2002, the debt, the 
combined debt of the General Revenue Fund and the Crown 
corporations in 1991 was $12.1 billion. The debt proposed will 
be larger than the debt started when this government came to 
power in 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the former premier that used to 
sit in that chair talked about a balanced approach. He said if 
there was any new money, we would spend one-third on debt 
reduction, we would spend one-third towards tax reduction, and 
one-third towards spending. 
 
According to the new Finance’s leaked . . . Finance minister’s 
leaked budget, this is a budget all spending. No tax reduction 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

 

and the debt’s going up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit the NDP is trying to buy 
votes with borrowed money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I can see that the 
member opposite, the Finance critic for the Saskatchewan Party 
is getting animated, but he’s also made a few mistakes. The 
debt peaked in ’93-94 at 14.8 billion and it’s been considerably 
lower since then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I must also indicate, Mr. Speaker, that the reason the debt 
peaked at that time was because this administration took on the 
debt of the Crown corporations which had been equity stripped 
by those members opposite for an entire decade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when we talk about, when we talk about the potential, 
possible potential of adding debt in any one given year, there’s 
good debt and there’s bad debt. 
 
And I’d like to ask the members opposite, would they not have 
paid out crop insurance payments of $1 billion? Would they not 
be fighting forest fires? Would they not be providing additional 
funds to help farmers and agriculture producers? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this administration believes that some debt 
is good debt and some debt is bad debt, and we are not adding 
bad debt and we won’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
according to the Provincial Auditor, the largest debt that this 
province has had, combined General Revenue Fund and Crown 
corporation debt, is in 1994 when that debt reached $14.2 
billion — $14.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you really have to wonder where the minister is 
getting his advice from. Apparently someone advised him to 
run a $400 million deficit again this year and then leak it to the 
media a week in advance. So the question is: who is giving this 
advice and has the minister sued that person yet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to 
speculate on the source of potential leaks. But I must say, Mr. 
Speaker, that this particular administration has done a very 
good job in debt management. And we all recognize that the 
news that is coming out in terms of what might be in the budget 
that will be presented here on Friday morning is all good news, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we talked about what this administration is going to 
do for the people of Saskatchewan in terms of good news, it’s 
been suggested that this might even be a pre-election budget. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you for a fact that it’s going to be a 
re-election budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Settlement with Potato Producer 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question related 
to the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) scandal. And just off the top, I might suggest to the 
Premier that had he had the current Finance minister in charge 
of SPUDCO from day one, he might not have this trouble 
because the current minister can’t keep a secret for more than a 
week — much less six years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation). On the weekend the Leader-Post 
reported that that . . . that the Government of Saskatchewan had 
settled with a potato producer by the name of Mr. Jim Massey 
over a suit that Mr. Massey brought to the government or a 
dispute he had with them. Apparently the government broke its 
contract with Mr. Massey and the government had to provide 
him with cash and a potato storage shed as a settlement. 
 
And the article says, and I quote: 
 

Maynard Sonntag, minister in charge of the file, declined 
comment Friday. He said he isn’t being briefed on the issue 
until Tuesday, and didn’t feel comfortable speaking until 
then. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Who approved the settlement of 
over $1 million in cash and assets if the minister hasn’t even 
been briefed yet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let 
me respond by saying, first of all, providing the facts. The story 
was completely inaccurate. The facility was not 1.2 million, it 
was 135,000 was the cost to Sask Valley Potato Corporation. So 
it’s completely inaccurate. The province did . . . the Sask Valley 
Potato Corporation did reach an agreement. There were 
absolutely no increased losses to the corporation whatsoever, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the article 
clearly outlines that the shed was originally valued at 1.2 
million. In addition to that, the story says that government 
officials claim that Massey had owed them $250,000. Either 
way, Mr. Speaker, the question is this. The minister is quoted 
indirectly as saying that he couldn’t comment, he couldn’t be 
interviewed for the article about the disposition of a 
taxpayer-owned asset because he wouldn’t be briefed for 
several days. Presumably though, somebody in the government, 
somebody in the cabinet approved this deal. Someone would 
had to have approved a taxpayer-owned asset being given to 
Mr. Massey in his settlement. 
 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

So the question through the Speaker is this: yes or no, did the 
minister approve of this settlement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, my question would be, 
given the level of inaccuracy in the story, is there any wonder 
that I wouldn’t want accurate numbers before I would say them, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the story is entirely inaccurate. Full stop. Period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Maybe, Mr. Speaker, if the minister actually took 
the time to comment and let the media know and let the 
taxpayers know exactly what he’s up to, maybe all the 
information would be accurate, Mr. Speaker. Maybe that’s the 
problem. Maybe this government has absolutely lost all respect 
for telling taxpayers what it is they’re doing with their assets, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now to the minister: the article says the shed is 
originally valued . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government has 
apparently learned absolutely nothing through this whole 
SPUDCO scandal. The question to the minister is this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the members to 
allow the question to be put. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question to the 
minister is this: did he approve of the settlement involved in this 
particular . . . reported in this particular story, and how many 
other cases like this are before Sask Water or CIC ready for 
settlement, and how many other taxpayer-paid-for assets will be 
used to settle the NDP’s broken promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to 
respond to the question from the member from Swift Current. 
Already the Minister of CIC has indicated, Mr. Speaker, that 
there have been no additional losses in this exercise. None at 
all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The opposition and Saskatchewan people know well that we are 
disposing of the assets across the province, Mr. Speaker, of the 
potato industry and the sheds. This shed, Mr. Speaker, today 
has been purchased or received by Mr. Massey. Mr. Massey 
wants this shed in the settlement, Mr. Speaker, as do other 
producers in the Lucky Lake development area want the sheds. 
 
And I want to know, Mr. Speaker, why it is, Mr. Speaker, that 
the opposition every day gets up and attacks the industry, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s growing the potatoes in that part of the province. 
Why is it that they get up, Mr. Speaker, every day and criticize 

it? I’ll tell you why it is, Mr. Speaker. Because they don’t 
believe in growing rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They 
don’t believe in what the industry’s got, capable of doing it. 
That’s why they attack it every day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Forthcoming Budget 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
government has challenged the opposition to come up with 
ways that we can save money and quit wasting money and what 
would be cut. 
 
I have a suggestion for the government today. As we speak, 
security guards are on a round-the-clock watch of a printing 
company in this city that I will not name, round-the-clock 
watch, guarding a budget that a senior member of that 
government has already leaked. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Now I think we can save some money here. I 
think we can save some money here. Why does the government 
pay to hire a security firm to guard a budget that a senior 
member of that administration has already leaked? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. I think the member from North Battleford is correct in 
that the budget documents are being printed at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, and those documents will be provided to the people of 
Saskatchewan on budget day, Mr. Speaker. And any talk about 
budget items at this point in time is speculative. 
 
I would say stay tuned, Mr. Speaker. The numbers will be out 
within three and a half to four days and everybody is going to 
know what a good news budget it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have another 
helpful suggestion for the government offered in a non-partisan, 
non-political tone here. I would suggest that if the government 
is trying to grow the security business in this province, if they 
want them to do well, it would be entirely appropriate and in 
order for the Premier to engage a security firm to investigate 
who leaked the budget. 
 
I think a prime minister or premier would want to know that — 
who leaked the budget — and take the appropriate measures. 
And I would suggest that would make far more sense than 
hiring a security firm to guard a budget they’ve already leaked. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I thought this was question period. I did 
not hear a question from the member of North Battleford. 
 
I will assure the member of North Battleford, as I’ve assured 
the members of the official opposition Sask Party, that on 
Friday of this week in this legislature, not in an auto centre like 
Conservatives like to do, but right here in this legislature, this 
Minister of Finance will stand and deliver the budget — all of 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

 

the revenue measures, all of the expenditure measures and all of 
the fiscal situation of the province of Saskatchewan. And when 
the people of Saskatchewan hear this, Mr. Speaker, they are 
going to recognize a solid, fiscal plan to grow a wide open 
future for this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3, The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 4, The SaskEnergy Act be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, The 
Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment 
Act, 2003 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to join into the Throne Speech debate again. I finished 
up on Friday and had a few more words to say this afternoon 
regarding the whole issue around growth, the whole issue 
around our plan to create an environment that attracts business, 
that attracts investment, that then will create jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what this province needs is more jobs, and 
we’re certainly lacking that. And, Mr. Speaker, one thing when 
we talk to businesses around the country, both in Canada and 
from south of the border, is one thing that they bring up often is 

the labour legislation. And they’re quite concerned with some 
of the labour legislation that we have in our province that isn’t 
typical in other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one thing that in order to increase growth and increase 
business and increase jobs — jobs whether they’re unionized 
jobs or non-union jobs, Mr. Speaker — will take some changes 
in labour legislation. 
 
We spelt out over the last couple of years, through our Labour 
critic who has done a great job, some of the things that we 
would like to see changed in the labour legislation that will 
attract business. And some of the issues will be . . . that we 
would put in place is we would implement a democratic 
unionism for certification and decertification by a secret ballot 
vote by the majority of the employees, Mr. Speaker. And we 
think that is crucial in order to attract business, is a secret ballot 
vote to unionize or decertify, and we feel that’s very important. 
 
We would implement freedom of speech in the workplace with 
the appropriate safeguards — and that’s very important, 
appropriate safeguards — in place to prevent intimidation or 
coercion tactics that interfere with this process, Mr. Speaker. 
We think that when a union drive is going on that both parties 
should be . . . have their say as long as the appropriate 
safeguards are put in place. 
 
None of this stuff, Mr. Speaker, has been . . . is new. It’s stuff 
that we have talked about over the last two or three years. But 
the government that stands in their place every time they get a 
chance and say, they have no plan, all that is is a slogan, Mr. 
Speaker, which is absolutely false. 
 
We would work with labour leaders to adopt a new, 
collaborative approach to the collective bargaining process that 
will focus on mutual gain for both employee and management, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s very, very important. 
 
We’ve got a government over here that says that they are the 
labour party but, Mr. Speaker, the longest health care strike that 
was ever seen in this province was under the labour party’s 
watch, so you do question whether how friendly they are to 
labour and not. 
 
We’ll also look at reviewing the mandate of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board to ensure that the Workers’ Compensation 
Board is not only serving injured workers efficiently and 
effectively, but also is fully accountable to the employer as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have listened to business leaders and we’ve also talked to 
many union leaders who say that they need more jobs in this 
province. Some of the things that we’ve outlined so far in our 
labour policy would go a long ways to attracting business which 
then would create more jobs, both unionized or non-union, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think if there is one thing that tells me how effective this 
government has been with their union and labour policy, is the 
recent issue with SPUDCO. In their own documentation, one of 
the major reasons why this SPUDCO partnership was 
introduced was to avoid its own Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement, Mr. Speaker. 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

And we’ve got a government over there that says, there’s no 
plans over here. Well there are plans over here, Mr. Speaker, 
and these plans are laid out in black and white; they’re not hid 
under partnership agreements and then you can play with the 
word partnership — oh it meant this or it meant that. Their 
partnership meant avoiding union contractors in their own 
buildings, Mr. Speaker — that’s what this government is all 
about. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the next time you hear this government say 
that there are no plans, that all it is is a slogan, I would think 
again because everything that we have talked about over the last 
three years is in print. It lays out a plan for the province that 
will create growth of 100,000 people in the next 10 years, as 
opposed to a decline in population which this government has 
overseen over the last 10 years. 
 
I’ll be supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and voting 
against the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
delighted to speak in favour of this Throne Speech today. It has 
definitely sparked a vigorous debate here in this House. But 
clearly, Mr. Speaker, our government has a vision that speaks 
passionately to and for all of Saskatchewan citizens. This 
government brings to vision . . . brings its vision to life with an 
ably articulated plan that allows all who are willing to plan well 
and work hard to enjoy our future — our future that is wide 
open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I start I do want to wish and to welcome 
and extend my congratulations to the newest members of our 
Assembly. To the member of Battleford-Cut Knife and to the 
member of Saskatoon Fairview, best wishes, because I too am a 
relative newcomer and I know what it’s like to come in as a 
result of a by-election. So I hope they enjoy the public 
discourse here. It’s rigorous and sometimes fun, but we work 
hard in this House. 
 
I also want to take a minute to welcome my legislative intern, 
Corinne Barnett. She is up in the west gallery there and she’s 
been helping out over the past few weeks. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I notice that there have 
been two or three times now that members have taken the 
opportunity to introduce guests. And I think guests are always 
welcome but usually the protocol is to request leave to do so. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a newcomer’s 
thing there, so I request leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Forbes: — To you and through you to the House, I’d like 
to introduce a special guest, Corinne Barnett, a legislative intern 
that’s been working with me for a couple of weeks, for the past 
couple of months actually. She’s been doing a whole host of 
jobs including research, writing, and following me around, and 
it’s been quite insightful to have her with me. So, Corinne 

Barnett in the west gallery. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, our vision is clear. We will be a 
province of opportunity. It’s a vision of expanding economy 
from which no one, Mr. Speaker, no one is excluded. Mr. 
Speaker, the Throne Speech rang true for me especially when it 
speaks of a province where all children have an opportunity to 
grow up healthy in safe, secure communities, and they will 
receive the best in education. And we have a vision for a green 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our future will be wide open to those who are 
prepared to dream big, plan well, and work hard. And this is not 
an empty slogan, Mr. Speaker, but a vision that’s becoming a 
reality for thousands of Saskatchewan citizens who are part of 
the record-breaking job numbers, 10 months of steady growth, 
our building independence program, and people who live in our 
towns, our neighbourhoods, our RMs (rural municipality), and 
our communities. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to share with 
you, with the Assembly today, two wonderful examples of our 
vision becoming a reality in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure of how many members here have 
spent time on 33rd Street in Saskatoon. It’s a pleasant business 
district, nestled between two wonderful neighbourhoods, 
Caswell and Mayfair. Now some say 33rd will be the next 
Broadway district because of its unique, small-town charm. But 
others say, let’s keep it our own little secret. But I say, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m most happy to tell everyone I meet about our 
wonderful main street, 33rd Street. 
 
Now it’s anchored by some old familiar businesses such Bruce 
Thomas’s Mayfair Hardware that’s been established in 1949 by 
his father. It’s a legend on our street. Mayfair Drug; Mayfair 
Sporting Goods; the Dairy Queen; and Lipsett’s shoes, also a 
family business that was established in the 1950s. All of these 
are outstanding community boosters. And how can I not 
mention Christie’s Mayfair Bakery established in 1932. They 
draw customers from all over the city and do a wonderful job. 
 
And we have some old businesses recently jazzed up such as 
the Scott Ludlow Fehr law firm who recently hung out their 
shingle in Jim Scott’s father’s old office which began on 33rd in 
the early 1960s. 
 
And we are keeping up with the times, Mr. Speaker. We have 
our own computer shop, Sage Computer, and new businesses 
such as the Medicine Shoppe with owner/operators Joan and 
Mike Cochrane; and my own personal favourites, Keo’s 
Kitchen and Nitotem coffee shop. 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

 

Now I want to speak a minute about Nitotem coffee shop 
because it’s a shop that markets or specializes in Aboriginal 
bannock and that type of thing. It’s a wonderful, wonderful 
place. So I really encourage people to come on by. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go on about our arts store, our new 
carwash, and so on. But suffice to say, we are doing well; we 
are doing okay. 
 
We are living this vision. These folks are making their plans, 
their hopes, their vision a reality. And so, Mr. Speaker, I invite 
everyone to come out to 33rd Street. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Now I also want to share with you some information about why 
Saskatoon truly shines. You may have heard that phrase, 
Saskatoon shines. As you know, Saskatoon Idylwyld is a 
downtown area and we play host to many summer festivals, 
including the jazz festival, the Northern Saskatchewan 
Children’s Festival, and then the Shakespeare on the 
Saskatchewan Festival, as well as numerous conventions 
throughout the year. 
 
But what kind of impact does this have for the people of 
Idylwyld, the people of Saskatoon? Well let me quote a letter of 
November 2002 from Bruce Eaton, chairman of Tourism 
Saskatchewan to myself. He writes and I quote: 
 

Congratulations are in order for Saskatoon Idylwyld 
constituency — it’s among the top 10 in the province in 
terms of tourism revenue with $84.4 million spent by 
travellers in 2001. 
 
(And) As well, (Mr. Speaker, as well) your Saskatoon 
Idylwyld constituency should be proud of the fact that it is 
among the top 10 in the province with regard to total 
tourism employment — with (over) 1,500 (people) 
employed. 
 
To provide additional perspective on tourism in your civic 
constituency, note that in Saskatoon in 2001, travellers 
spent an estimated $366.8 million, an increase of 31.2 per 
cent over their 1997 expenditures in the area. 

 
He also estimates that this spending generated an estimated 
$16.9 million in provincial tax revenue. Well, Mr. Speaker, this 
is indeed another amazingly good news story about a vision 
becoming a reality for thousands of people in Saskatoon, a plan 
that is bearing fruit for all of us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to highlight some of the plans 
that were outlined in the Throne Speech that I think are 
particularly good and I will then . . . and will lend to the 
balanced approach of our government to ensure that our 
province’s future is for everyone. 
 
I was particularly delighted to hear about agriculture, organic 
farming that has increased by some 20 per cent annually and 
now we have over 1,000 certified commercial organic 
producers. 
 
I was also delighted to hear about the Northern Development 

Fund Aboriginal development program where 40 Saskatchewan 
agencies and companies have become partners in the Aboriginal 
Employment Development Program. Fifteen hundred people of 
Métis or First Nations descent have been assisted by meaningful 
employment. This is truly good news. 
 
And I’ve already touched on tourism which I think is 
particularly important. 
 
I’m also very impressed and excited to hear about the green 
initiatives. Again we are ensuring that our economy is 
sustainable and fits within our natural environment. We must 
ensure that our environment is protected and that we as citizens 
have access to a healthy environment. 
 
The key points for me, Mr. Speaker, include wind power, a 
ninefold increase, and this is equivalent to some 50,000 homes, 
power to . . . to power 50,000 homes. This is outstanding news. 
Increased funding for SARCAN, other exciting news. The 
proper decommissioning of abandoned uranium mines in 
northern Saskatchewan. And I’m looking forward to this year, 
to this session, the state of the environment report that will be 
tabled during the session. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, health is a major concern for the citizens of 
Saskatoon Idylwyld. We have a number of senior citizens who 
have special needs. But we also have a very important group of 
young people who have, also have special needs and so we 
watch with interest and advocate for the best possible services. 
We are very pleased with the leadership our Premier and our 
minister has shown on this file, particularly in regard to the 
Romanow report and the federal implementations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of participating in the 
Canadian Diabetes Association special initiative, diabetic for a 
day. And I should note my colleagues, the MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) for Mount Royal and the MLA for 
Coronation Park, also took part in this event. And I think they 
would both agree that the experience was definitely an 
eye-opener. 
 
While as a teacher I felt I had a good grasp of the daily 
challenges diabetics face, this day really drove home the extra 
burdens of testing, needle shots, and just the extra cost to keep 
on top of this condition. For this opportunity, I do want to thank 
the Canadian Diabetes Association, and in particular Laurel 
Jungwirth for her time as she accompanied me for the whole 
day to ensure that I got the point. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my constituents are looking forward to 
continued leadership, and in particular we support the 
government’s commitment to primary health care, the 24-hour 
health advice hot line, and the Health Quality Council, and a 
surgical registry that is managing the waiting lists. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I must address the issue of education, 
opening doors to the future. I’m especially delighted to hear the 
renewed commitment . . . (inaudible) . . . government has taken 
for public education here in Saskatchewan. Truly, if we wish 
that all Saskatchewan citizens will be full participants in our 
society and reach their full potential, then education is the key. 
We will most unfortunately shortchange our future if we do not 
invest in our children and our schools. 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

Kids First is a superb example of meeting the needs of children 
and supporting families so children are fully ready for school. 
And I am also looking forward to the implementation of 
SchoolPLUS model, and I am confident that we will see positive 
results as the basic needs and learning needs to children are met 
in this very innovative and timely initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a minute to elaborate on what my 
good friend and colleague, the member of Regina Wascana 
Plains, had outlined in her speech last Wednesday, the 
Premier’s voluntary sector initiative. Through her able 
leadership we were able to complete on time a very thorough, 
comprehensive framework for our government in the voluntary 
sector. This framework, while not a legal document, is very 
much a moral imperative for these two partners, the provincial 
government and the Saskatchewan voluntary sector. 
 
I would like to highlight our report for you. The voluntary 
sector has historic roots in Saskatchewan. It continues to act on 
the tradition of enhancing our quality of life and teaching us an 
ethic of working together. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, it 
encourages community building; and out of community 
building evolves healthier societies. 
 
Government has forged relationships with numerous 
community-based organizations to support the development and 
the delivery of services in the areas of health, social services, 
culture, recreation, environment, community economic 
development, and youth services. 
 
Now this report, Mr. Speaker, is not just about volunteering. 
That’s a major part of it, but there’s more than that. We should 
all take pride in the fact that Saskatchewan has the highest rate 
of volunteers per capita in Canada. The figure speaks for itself: 
42 per cent of Saskatchewan residents aged 15 and older 
volunteer on an annual basis in their communities. There is no 
denying that citizens of this province have a vested interest in 
the well-being of their communities, as well as the condition of 
their province. Furthermore, in speaking . . . speaking in 
economic terms, the voluntary sector organizations represent an 
investment in our economy of approximately $800 million per 
year. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is the values identified within the document 
that will define a healthy relationship between the government 
and the Saskatchewan voluntary sector. And I am referring 
specifically to values such as active citizenry, whereby 
individuals or organizations have the ability to shape society; 
values like autonomy and diversity, where the government and 
the voluntary sector respect the work of one another and respect 
the rich and culturally diverse society that we live in; 
community, inclusion, and innovation are also valued because 
these concepts aid in the success of the voluntary sector and 
build a stronger relationship with government. 
 
Moreover, this initiative intends to build upon responsibility 
and social justice because all sectors of society need to 
understand that they play a role in shaping the future of this 
province. 
 
Saskatchewan already has a great network of community 
organizations that exist in the area of sport, culture, and 
recreation. Sask Sport, Sask Culture, and Sask Parks and 

Recreation provide support and services to an estimated 12,000 
community organizations throughout the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our report is indeed very good reading, but 
much more than that it serves as an excellent inventory of our 
government’s relationship with the voluntary sector. We have a 
vision, clear objectives that speak to recognizing the voluntary 
sector, building its capacity, and most importantly building a 
formal partnership between the provincial government and the 
voluntary sector. And, Mr. Speaker, this is merely the tip of an 
iceberg. 
 
With this government’s recognition of the voluntary sector 
initiative, we are reinforcing social trust, social networks, and 
common values within a community and across communities, 
ideas that we need to flourish for our own children so that we 
can provide them with a better quality of life and a better future 
— a future that is wide open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank once again the Chair of the 
committee, the member from Regina Wascana Plains, as well as 
the member from Cumberland who sat as Vice-Chair, and the 
members of the joint steering committee — both from the 
government side and the voluntary sector side — for their 
dedication and hard work which has resulted in this framework 
for partnership. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak for a moment on our Throne 
Speech which spoke of the hopes and prayers of those who seek 
peace and justice and security for all nations and peoples of this 
world. And I add wholeheartedly my support for this. Our own 
Premier added these words: 
 

We believe that it is essential that . . . all matters of 
international security that Canada establish its own foreign 
policy and uphold the role of the United Nations. We loathe 
the undemocratic nature of Iraq . . . of the Iraq government 
and its aggressive actions. 
 
(But) we support full United Nations intervention to ensure 
that Iraq does not jeopardize the peace and security of 
others. We also support (the) international efforts to stop 
terrorism, the most abhorrent and cowardly of actions of 
humankind. 
 
It is for these reasons that we believe Canada’s engagement 
in Iraq must be supported by resolution of the United 
Nations Security Council. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our federal leader, Jack Layton, also talked 
of this last week, and he said: 
 

Our first thoughts today are with the Iraqi civilians and the 
horror they’re experiencing. The tragedy (Mr. Speaker) is 
that (these) inspections were disarming Iraq and this war 
could have been avoided . . . (So together we must) . . . 
Together, let us renew our efforts to build a peaceful world. 

 
And my own thoughts, Mr. Speaker, on this are well illustrated 
by Martin Luther King when he says: 
 

Peace is not merely a distant goal that we seek, but a means 
by which we arrive at that goal. 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are excited about the future. Without a 
doubt, we see a future for our great province that is rich, 
productive, inclusive, and green. Our future is wide open. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to read this into the record. In 
conclusion. I want to put into the record the Leader of the 
Opposition admission that he has no plan, no intention of 
having a plan. In fact a plan does not even fit with his world 
view. 
 
Last Thursday morning I was listening to CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) radio. It was Thursday, March 20, 
and Kathy Fitzpatrick . . . and I’ll read the quote: 
 

Hermanson compared them to hockey referees who want to 
carry sticks. They want to be a referee and a player at the 
same time. 

 
End of quote . . . Oh, I’ll continue: 
 

And that is the problem, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
End of quote. 
 
Now at first this is a light-hearted jab and I found it very 
amusing and you have a lot of fun with it. But then I was 
thinking about this. This is like one of those jokes you hear that 
makes everyone a little uncomfortable because it really exposes 
the world view of the person telling the joke. 
 
This province is not a game. We are not simply referees. That is 
not the role of government, to be simply impartial and 
disinterested. And that means without interest. We do have an 
interest in the success of this province, and everyone in this 
province will be winners. This is not a game where there are 
winners and losers. 
 
So I am concerned because truly the Leader of the Opposition’s 
point of view is that there are winners and losers in this 
province, and that’s his world view. And that’s their world 
view, Mr. Speaker. So I am deeply, deeply concerned. 
 
I’m concerned on a couple of levels because, first of all, that 
idea that we are in a game over here and that that’s all there is, 
and it’s . . . we’re trying out for the position of referee where 
they are impartial, disinterested. But this second part which 
really worries me is the idea of this game, this hockey game, so 
therefore there must be two teams. Who are these teams? Are 
they the haves and the have-nots? Where are the haves from? 
Would they be from Alberta? Would they be from Calgary? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this really worries me. This is their idea of a plan 
— that we are in a hockey game. This is very concerning to me. 
So if you have the haves against the have-nots, who do you 
think people who ride the STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company) bus . . . are they on the have team or the have-not 
team? 
 
What about labour? Are they on the have or have-not team? 
Where will they be? Are they on the winning team here? Mr. 
Speaker, what about if you’re young, disabled? Are you on the 
have team or the have-not team? This is very concerning to me. 
What if you’re an Aboriginal? What if you are an artist? Where 

do you fit into this game? Are you on the have team or the 
have-not team? 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly last Wednesday evening in Saskatoon the 
Leader of the Opposition showed his true colours. He is not 
talking about a plan. He does not have a plan. He thinks his role 
is of gatekeeper and the big stick. And so I do have some 
concerns about this. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Our vision is clear and includes people right across this 
province. Everyone in this province will be a winner. We do 
have an interest in the success of this province and we are proud 
of that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be speaking in favour of this Throne 
Speech and against the amendment. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a 
privilege to stand and respond to the Speech from the Throne. 
And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that this is one of those times 
when it seems everyone in the province, even on the 
government side, agrees on that Speech from the Throne and 
what it was all about. 
 
Probably the first ones to actually hear it and listen to it were 
members of the opposition, the Sask Party. And I sat here, Mr. 
Speaker, and listened to that for what seemed an unbelievably 
long period of time — in fact is, even the Premier stopped 
paying attention to it and was chatting to the people beside him. 
And I said, well what’s happening here? I don’t hear anything 
about Highway 11, which is a very dangerous stretch of 
highway; it goes my place. Listening about education, listening 
about agriculture, I just had the sense there was nothing in it. 
And I even tried to, very hard, to pay some close attention and 
just nothing was there. 
 
So then next day I picked up the paper and I found out that it 
seems the public and the media said, what’s in it? There was 
nothing in it. Then we find out that what had happened to show 
that everyone agreed with this is the Premier . . . and this must 
have been a bizarre sight, Mr. Speaker. You have to picture this. 
He walks into that beautiful long office where they meet with 
his caucus — nice chairs, high ceiling, very dignified place — 
the Premier walks in, slams down his books, and starts to 
grumble in a very un-preacher-like way about what a terrible 
thing this was; who in the world had ever given him that advice 
to write a Speech from the Throne that was so vacuous as that 
particular document was. Unbelievable — it was totally empty. 
 
But what was the most frightening thing of this all, Mr. 
Speaker, is that this is the Premier of the province who has 
picked his cabinet and together they pick their advisers, and 
they’d spent all summer creating this document. The Premier 
has the speech read and all of a sudden it dawns on him, there’s 
nothing in this thing. Well where has he been, Mr. Speaker? 
Where has the Premier been the whole time that document was 
written? Didn’t he get together with his people and say, here’s a 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

few things I want to see in that particular document; this is what 
my government stands for; this is what the people in my 
cabinet, what they stand for in their departments. 
 
But somehow or other that whole document slipped by that 
whole front row over there, Mr. Speaker, slipped by every one 
of them. They hadn’t noticed it was empty; it was empty. For 
the first time in a long time I believe the NDP felt a whole lot 
like the farmers in Saskatchewan felt this year when they 
looked in their bins — there was nothing there, there was 
nothing there. It’s probably been the first time they’ve been able 
to actually sympathize or empathize with the farm situation. 
Totally bizarre. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a little bit of time discussing 
how the Speech from the Throne could or should have related to 
the people from my constituency, the Rosthern constituency. 
 
And by the way as you would know, Mr. Speaker, there have 
been a number of changes in some rural constituencies and 
urban ones as well, and mine is one of those. And so the 
majority — probably about 86 per cent — of the Rosthern 
constituency is going to be renamed the Martensville 
constituency. And I’m going to consider it a real privilege, Mr. 
Speaker, to run in that constituency for the Sask Party in the 
next election. 
 
Having done a little bit of research on it, Mr. Speaker, it did 
come to light that in the Martensville constituency, the one to 
be, the Sask Party won every single poll in that — every single 
poll — and they will again. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to relate a 
few things about that particular constituency, and probably start 
off with the community of Martensville. 
 
The community of Martensville. Unfortunately the NDP has 
discounted that community and a few of the other ones in the 
south part of the Rosthern constituency, and they have said, 
well those are just bedroom communities. 
 
I think they’ve done a major disservice to a few of those towns, 
and I’m thinking specifically of towns such as Dalmeny, 
Martensville, Warman, and Osler, which the NDP like to 
categorize as, well those are bedroom communities; they don’t 
have a personality; they don’t have a characteristic to them. 
Wrong, Mr. Speaker. Those communities have developed a 
great personality; they’ve developed a great character. 
 
I sat at a luncheon very recently in Saskatoon with an individual 
who says . . . told me . . . says, you know, I live in your 
constituency. And so we talked a little bit about it and then we 
started talking about the community of Martensville where he 
lives. It turns out that his family had moved there when he was, 
I believe, two years of age. And he formed a very good 
friendship with five other fellows that he’d gone all the way 
through elementary and secondary school. 
 
The interesting thing — and this underlines what I’m trying to 
say when I say that those communities have developed a good 
sense of personality and character — is that out of those five, 
four of those still live in the Martensville town, still live in the 
Martensville town, and one lives five miles outside. Probably 
no other place in Saskatchewan where that sort of thing happens 
— no other place where that happens. 

Now why is that possible in the Rosthern/Martensville 
constituency when it isn’t possible in the rest of Saskatchewan? 
In the rest of Saskatchewan when you have a group like that 
that goes to school together what’ll happen invariably, one will 
go to Ontario, one will probably go to Manitoba, one down to 
the States, two to Alberta, and one will stay here. That’s sort of 
the average; very few stay. 
 
There’s a unique thing that’s happened in this particular area, 
Rosthern constituency, and it underlines, Mr. Speaker, it 
underlines very definitely why the attitudes in that constituency 
are so positive. And that is — and it’s a political thing, Mr. 
Speaker — in that particular constituency, not once, never in 
the history of this province has that constituency voted CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) or NDP. Never once. 
That constituency, Mr. Speaker, grew more than any other 
constituency in this province — urban and rural. It grew more. 
 
And it didn’t grow that way because it was rural; it didn’t grow 
to that extent because it was next to an urban area. It grew that 
way because of the attitude of the people. The people in that 
constituency understand that if you want growth, if you want 
excitement, if you want things happening, you can’t have a 
socialist mentality — you can’t have a socialist mentality. 
They’ve never had it, and they probably never will, Mr. 
Speaker. They never will. 
 
I can understand . . . Three, four elections ago, the NDP would 
win the odd poll in Dalmeny, and I hear the member from 
across the way over there who has some association with 
Dalmeny. Well when he gets up to speak he needs to tell us 
how many seats the NDP won in Dalmeny in the last election. 
Not one — not one. Not one. 
 
Those particular towns in that constituency have all grown. 
They’ve all grown in spite of being next to Saskatoon, in spite 
of being in a rural area. It’s that thinking; it’s a forward 
thinking. Not a backward socialist NDP thinking that says, well 
government has to control everything. 
 
The speaker just before me, Mr. Speaker, as you recall, made 
some statement about how government has to plan things 
because our society’s not going to be the society that it ought to 
be if government doesn’t plan. Wrong, Mr. Speaker. Wrong, 
Mr. Speaker. And you know the very example that he used . . . 
And I don’t know why he picked this. It must have been the 
same advisers that wrote his speech, that wrote the Speech from 
the Throne, because similarly it was vacuous and full of error. 
 
Now he said, you need government to plan because look at the 
whole issue around STC — don’t we need someone to take care 
of all the bus lines? Who, Mr. Speaker, has been dropping bus 
lines around Saskatchewan and abandoning them? It’s the 
CCF-NDP socialists over there who’ve done that. They’ve 
abandoned the little old ladies in those small towns. They cut 
the bus lines. 
 
And who, Mr. Speaker — this is critical, Mr. Speaker — who, 
Mr. Speaker, filled the gap? Private enterprise. They filled the 
gap. They took those bus lines that STC said were losing bus 
lines; we’re going to abandon them and the people. Private 
enterprise moved into there. They’re running bus lines today 
and they’re making money. They’re providing service, making 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

 

money. And for the people across over there, the CCF-NDP, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s profit. They’re making profit and providing 
a service that a socialist government with government control 
couldn’t do and can’t do. That’s the big difference, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And when we look at this particular Speech from the Throne, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s full of those empties — full of those empties. 
It’s full of those empties. 
 
And there we have the expatriate from Dalmeny saying, what 
would we do with STC? We will ensure either by a government 
bus line or through private bus lines that those people will 
always be served. It’s in our platform. And had he read our 
platform instead of chatting from his seat, he would know that. 
He would know that. 
 
History totally on its own has shown it. The NDP abandoned 
the bus lines; private people come in and fill it. Between those 
two, all of those are being taken care of and they will be taken 
care of. You don’t have to sell the bus line; you just work the 
two together and you provide the best system there. You don’t 
have to abandon it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, looking at a few of the other things in this 
particular constituency that’s presently Rosthern and will be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I’d like to spend a bit more detail on the 
various aspects of my constituency. It has, I think, without a 
doubt more dairies, for example, in it than any other 
constituency in Saskatchewan; probably more dairies than all 
the rest of Saskatchewan together. 
 
It has hog operations, bird operations . . . (inaudible) . . . layers, 
breeding stock, grain, feedlots to a great extent, a great extent. 
And I can see the ex-Finance minister there understands that 
because most of his budgets were full of what he was just 
talking about. So, Mr. Speaker, I need to discuss a few of these 
things. 
 
The dairy industry in my constituency is growing. It’s not static. 
It’s growing. We have people coming in from British 
Columbia; we have people coming in from Alberta; we have 
people coming in from Holland; where we have two, three, 
four, five dairies every single summer that are being created in 
that particular area because they know it has a good work ethic. 
They know they have a mentality out there where they can work 
and survive. 
 
However they run into one particular problem and that is the 
bureaucracy and the red tape of this government. Had a dairy 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What colour tape? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Red tape. And you can easily eliminate that, 
Mr. Speaker, by getting a government with a different name on 
it. Green tape is much more attractive than red tape. You want 
to remember that. 
 
We had a dairy farmer just recently set up and he’s in operation 

now. Had to go through seven different arms of this government 
to get his business going — seven different ones. He came in 
from out of province. 
 
You would think if this government was at all interested in 
growing an industry, they’d have a one-window operation so if 
someone coming in could contact government, industry 
ministry, whatever they call it, and say okay, I want to come 
into Saskatchewan; I want to start a dairy; I’d like to do it in 
this constituency because there’s lots of other dairies around 
there; it has good land, good people, good supply of water, all 
of those things. Now, what do I need to do. 
 
Ideally he should be able to come to government, one person 
would talk to him and say, there’s quite a number of things we 
have to take care of; I’ll be the conduit for all of those; you just 
call me, I’ll take care of it. But, no. This government has seven 
different doorways a person had to walk through and we 
haven’t even started on the federal ones yet, Mr. Speaker. And I 
may have to take a minute on that one because it’s bizarre. 
 
Seven different ones. And the biggest problem was that those 
seven, none of them seemed to know what the other person’s 
area of responsibility was and they would overlap. So they 
would . . . two different groups of government, two different 
bureaucratic arms would ask for similar documentation. Totally 
bizarre. And then one would want it a little different; he’d go to 
the other one and say, well I was told to do this; no, but I say 
you can’t. It took him a long time to get through those seven 
arms of government. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Probably one of the more bizarre things happened right near the 
end when he decided that he needed some irrigation for his 
dairy. And when he set up where he wanted to put it, he 
contacted the government and the government said, we don’t 
know who owns that piece of land next to the river where this 
line’s supposed to go across. Totally bizarre. 
 
But I have to digress a little bit and talk about Oceans and 
Fisheries. This government, this NDP government, had the 
opportunity to keep Oceans and Fisheries out of Saskatchewan. 
But instead they said, no, federal Liberals, come on in; just 
walk on in and go ahead and tell us what to do. This particular 
dairy person that has a line to the river to get some river water 
for his cattle . . . And incidentally, Mr. Speaker, just the change 
in water quality brought his dairy production up 21 per cent. No 
other changes, just the improved water by being able to give 
them river water instead of some well water that was a . . . had a 
lot of chemical content. His production went up 21 per cent. So 
you would think government would be very excited about 
enhancing that kind of probability. 
 
So he has the line into the river. Along comes Oceans and 
Fisheries and says, well you know, we don’t want the little 
fishies to get in there because then obviously it might get up the 
water line and the cows might drink that water and the milk 
would get fishy. I don’t know. These are federal Liberals. You 
don’t know how they think. 
 
So they told him, you have to have a screen of this kind of 
mesh. So he put that mesh in there, and lo and behold if the 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

sand from the river doesn’t plug it. So it doesn’t work. So he 
says, well I’ll put a bit of a scraper on the outside of that that 
moves around that screen real slowly and moves it away. 
Oceans and Fisheries says, no, you can’t do that because the 
fish will get caught up in that little rotating thing, throw them 
up in the air, and they might gasp in the air. That is exactly 
what they told him, Mr. Speaker. It is just as stupid as telling a 
farmer when he’s got this chaff remover on the outside of his 
combine, so the air can move through to cool it, to say, you 
can’t have that turning out there because it might catch a crow. 
It is utterly ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. And this government could 
have kept Oceans and Fisheries out of Saskatchewan. They 
could have kept them out of Saskatchewan. 
 
That kind of nonsense, that kind of nonsense, goes on in 
agriculture throughout this province whenever they want to deal 
with anything to do with water. This government has to take 
responsibility for that. Mr. Speaker, that’s just a short note on 
dairies and the red tape that this government sets up. 
 
I need to talk on one or two more things. I know my time’s up 
but I’ll take another two, three minutes. 
 
I guess one of the biggest problems with an NDP socialistic 
government is the vindictive attitude they have toward anyone 
out in the province that doesn’t do things their way — 
vindictive, Mr. Speaker. And you check vindictive up in your 
dictionary, your Funk & Wagnall’s, and it’ll tell you it’s very 
much like trying to get revenge for something someone has 
done. And I’ll explain this to you. 
 
High-speed Internet. SaskTel’s been putting this throughout the 
province and that’s good, that’s great. They put it into a lot of 
small towns. That’s good. In fact is they put it in some very 
small towns, Mr. Speaker. However . . . Towns about 100 
population. But we do have three communities that have 
populations of seven, eight hundred. Those three they won’t put 
on Internet. The line goes right past them on the way to Prince 
Albert but they won’t hook them up. Why not? Because the 
NDP are vindictive. 
 
A couple of years ago the school said, in the Sask Valley 
School Division area, we would like to have some very fast 
Internet for our students, how could we do this? So they talked 
to SaskTel, SaskTel told them what it would cost. They said, 
well let’s see if we could do it a little more cheaply than that; 
there has to be an economical way of doing it. 
 
So what did the people do in this non-NDP constituency? They 
didn’t just, you know, slurp up all the information coming from 
SaskTel. They went and checked it out and they had a wireless 
system put in into all the schools in the system which cost 
hundreds of thousands of dollars to install. But the operating 
rate once it got going was so much less than what SaskTel was 
going to charge. They paid for it in three years, Mr. Speaker. In 
three years they had their very expensive system paid for and 
after that they were saving money every single year. 
 
However, what did occur is that SaskTel . . . This is a little 
blunt but they got their nose out of joint, Mr. Speaker. So now 
when the communities want high-speed Internet here’s the 
excuse that SaskTel uses: well now we have a business problem 
because we can’t have the schools in the system. They’re on the 

wireless, therefore we can’t make as much money as we would 
like to make. Whoa, that sounds like something a dirty capitalist 
would say, but it comes from SaskTel. So they won’t give these 
three towns, they won’t give these three towns high-speed 
Internet. They’ll give it to other towns that have a population of 
under 200, and have schools of under 100, and that’s great. But 
why not give it to these towns that have a population of just 
under 1,000? 
 
Furthermore, there are some very vibrant businesses in some of 
these towns. One of these towns has the only privately owned 
fire insurance with its head office in Saskatchewan. The rest 
these socialists have chased out of the province. And so when 
you sign up with the rest of them, you have some foreign 
ownership thing. 
 
But we have it in one of these small towns. They need 
high-speed Internet because they’re brokering a lot of insurance 
deals. SaskTel says no way, no way. We have very large 
financial institutions, probably six or seven in those three 
communities, that do a multi-million dollar business very year, 
Mr. Speaker — by far, by far outdoes all these other towns that 
have no business. These business people need it. They are not 
going to give them high-speed Internet because they say well 
we’ve lost the schools. They’re bitter, they’re vindictive. That’s 
unfortunate. 
 
A government should be in power to serve all the people in the 
province. Not an NDP government — not an NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The sooner we get rid of them the better, Mr. 
Speaker, the sooner the better. We were hoping that this budget 
leak was actually the Premier’s attempt to float an election 
budget balloon. And we thought we’d have an election this 
spring — good, we can get rid of these socialists. 
 
And here we find out, it’s this Liberal, turned NDP, it’s his 
budget. And he’s trying to leak it out — sort of like a Paul 
Martin wannabe — to let the people know what a good budget 
he’s created. Again it looks like something else has happened; 
the Premier had nothing in touch with it or the cabinet. So now 
we’ve had the Speech from the Throne, and we’ve had our 
finance statement coming out, and on both of those neither the 
Premier nor the cabinet knew anything about it. We need an 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot vote in favour of the motion, but I will be 
supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I want to thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, for the opportunity to speak in the House today, and to 
speak to the Throne Speech. 
 
You know, we’ve heard some criticism, Mr. Speaker, that it 
was a long speech, but you know, from my perspective, it was 
still not long enough to talk about all the very important details 
that I believe that people need to know. 
 
I want to just go back over the vision, and I’m going to quote 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

 

directly from the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, just the opening 
comments: 
 

Our government’s vision is a province of opportunity, 
where the future is wide open to those who are prepared to 
dream big, plan well and work hard. 
 

And that’s always been a recipe for success, Mr. Speaker. 
 

It’s a vision of an expanding economy from which no one 
is excluded. 
 

And I’ll get back to the theme of exclusion a little later on in 
my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 
 

It is a vision of a province where all children will have the 
opportunity to grow up healthy, in safe (and) secure 
communities, (and) receive the very best in education and 
training, and be encouraged to build successful families and 
careers . . . 

 
And I’m going to spend some considerable time on that, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think it’s important to understand the 
substance that’s behind those words. 
 

It’s a vision of a green Saskatchewan, where exciting new 
breakthroughs in renewable energy, environmental 
technology and energy conservation support a growing 
economy in harmony with our natural environment. 
 
(And it’s a vision) realized through comprehensive 
planning (and considerable action, I might add) in key 
spheres of activity. 

 
And I just want to mention something as a bit of a preamble 
about the remarks today. I am going to talk about three things. I 
am going to talk about our government’s support for young 
people, our government’s support for equality and diversity, 
and our government’s support for democracy as it relates to 
initiatives in the Throne Speech. 
 
But maybe you’ll enjoy this as much as I did, Mr. Speaker. The 
people who are starting university this fall were born in 1983. 
Their lifetime has always included AIDS (acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome). Bottle caps have always been screw off 
and plastic. The CD (compact disc) was introduced the year 
they were born. 
 
They’ve always had cable TV. They don’t know who Mork was 
or where he was from — well there might be a few who do, TV 
historians. They never heard, where’s the beef? Or, de plane, 
boss, de plane. They don’t particularly care who shot J.R. and 
probably don’t even know who he is. McDonald’s food has 
never come in Styrofoam containers. 
 
And probably are not all that sure who Grant Devine and Eric 
Berntson were but I’m going to shed a little light on that later 
because I believe, Mr. Speaker, that those who don’t know their 
history are doomed to repeat it. 
 
So today I’m going to spend just a little bit of time focusing on 
our government’s work with young people. And I just want to 
point particularly to two things that were mentioned in the 

Throne Speech — the intervention necessary to support 
children and families, the changes to The Child and Family 
Services Act which will be proposed to recognize the 
importance of kinship care as a first option. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, today this Bill was first introduced in the legislature. 
 
And, you know, I worked for a long time in Aboriginal 
communities and I can’t begin to tell you how important this 
initiative is. One of the young men that I worked with at 
Rainbow Youth Centre who was one of the staff members, he 
said, you know when I went into foster care, I didn’t just get 
removed from my immediate family — I got removed from my 
whole support network. I got removed from my aunties and my 
uncles and the neighbours and all the people around who might 
have . . . (inaudible) . . . able to give me some support. 
 
So I think that this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is exactly in the 
right direction because that old phrase, children are raised by a 
village. And whereas an individual foster family can and does 
provide very excellent care, we also have to think about the 
community of support that surrounds that individual. 
 
And as well, the change in name of the Department of Social 
Services to the department of community resources and 
employment. I think it’s important to reflect the changing 
purposes of government departments and we certainly have 
gone from a view of dependency on social assistance to a 
department that helps people get on their feet, get on with their 
life, and get the skills and the supports they need in order to do 
that. And I think this is a very good move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, we have a lot to be proud of. Our government does 
have a vision of world-class education because we believe that 
education is the foundation for both successful individuals and a 
successful society. So I want to just provide a few facts because 
I don’t know if people understand what a world leader 
Saskatchewan is in education. 
 
In a recent international study of 32 industrialized nations and 
all provinces, Saskatchewan was number one, Mr. Speaker, as 
providing the highest level of education to the broadest income 
and economic groups of anywhere in the world. I think that’s 
quite an achievement that we’ve managed to educate more 
people better than anywhere else in the world. 
 
We, in the last two years, have more than doubled the number 
of pre-kindergarten classes; doubled the number of community 
schools; has the lowest high-school dropout rates in Canada so 
we have more young people staying in school here than 
anywhere else in Canada. We have a new pioneering school 
model, SchoolPLUS, which I know that people are struggling 
with but essentially it puts the school at the centre of the 
community in terms of children and family development. 
 
We certainly have provided enhanced technology and career 
development opportunities and workplace transition in 
Saskatchewan schools. Every public school by 2003 will have 
access to high-speed Internet. This has made a big difference of 
what children are able to do in the classroom. 
 
(15:15) 
 
I toured around to a number of schools in the province and saw 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

the children actually working. And every single child was able 
to research a totally different topic simultaneously. It’s quite a 
sight to see compared to my own experience in education. But 
it’s a powerful new tool that every student in Saskatchewan has. 
 
In the area of First Nations, both in the area of curriculum so 
that people can understand that we have a history that includes 
treaties, that there’s language instruction available, there’s as 
well emphasis on bilingual instruction, understanding the 
benefits of being bilingual to students both from a learning 
perspective and for a practical employment perspective. 
 
And as well the Canada-Saskatchewan Student Loans Program 
is one of the most generous in Canada. We have over 30 
libraries that partner to bring access to 4,500 magazines and 
newspapers and on-line resources. I just mention this because I 
think it’s important to realize all the successes that we have in 
our education area. 
 
The SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) graduate employment statistics show that 92 per 
cent of graduates had a job within a year of graduating. In 
Regina, being a sitting member for Regina, I just want to 
mention that the University of Regina has had an exciting 
number of projects in its development of the knowledge 
corridor. We have the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College 
Building, which I’ll refer to a little later in my remarks; the 
Education Building addition; the Greenhouse Gas Technology 
Centre; student residence; the sports complex. There’s so many 
cranes out there, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to find your way 
through to a building. And it’s just wonderful for me. 
 
When I first went to that campus, Mr. Speaker — I don’t even 
like to admit this because it does tend to show how old I am — 
but there was two buildings. And I used to swim on the 
university swim team, and I’d have to walk across a bare field 
with my wet hair, so I’d always end up with frozen solid hair 
when I was done swimming practice every night. So it’s really 
changed around there. There’s so many buildings you can go 
from place to place without ever having to go outside. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just mention one of our particular 
initiatives, the centennial student employment program. We 
started this program because so many youth were having 
difficulty getting career-related job experience. Although there 
was a number of available jobs, there was less opportunity for 
them to get a start. And I just want to say that I went on a tour 
of 10 communities last summer to look at what was happening 
with these programs, and we had glowing reports from the 
various employers who hired students. 
 
Here’s one from the Yorkton Tribal Council: 
 

“Programs such as the Centennial Student Employment 
Program give students an opportunity to decide which area 
of employment they may wish to pursue,” Employment 
Counsellor with the Yorkton Tribal Council Jamie DeVos 
said. “The tribal council is very pleased to be part of the 
program . . . it gave students an opportunity to work and . . . 
gave our community two much-needed employees.” 

 
Last year’s survey showed that 95 per cent of students found the 
quality of their job very satisfactory. And here’s another 

employer quote — oh, this may be a little closer to home for 
some of our elected members here: 
 

“Last year we hired seven students through the . . . 
(Centennial Student Employment Program) and it was such 
a valuable experience,” Moose Jaw Parks and Recreation 
Board Director Scott Osmachenko said. “. . . (it) greatly 
improved our recreation programming because . . . (the) 
students . . . were passionate about their work, and . . . that 
is integral to success.” 
 

We have our Games program in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker: 
the Saskatchewan Games, the Western Canada Summer Games, 
the Canada Games program, and the First Nations Winter and 
Summer Games, as well as the national artist program that 
accompanies it. Every year 800 athletes from our province 
participate in these games and an additional 800 in the 
Indigenous Games. And this is a huge training ground for 
leadership and teambuilding. And of course in 2005, Mr. 
Speaker, those games are here in Regina, and we’re very 
excited about that. 
 
I want to mention just a couple of other youth programs before I 
move on to the other parts of my remarks. The REDAs 
(regional economic development authority) through Industry 
and Resources have a youth employment program so that youth 
can have training and employment opportunities with Economic 
Development. And we think, and the REDAs think, that that’s a 
very important program. 
 
And I just want to finish with a few summary remarks about 
why Saskatchewan is such a good place for young people. We 
do have the second lowest unemployment rate in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker; at 6.2 per cent it’s half of the national average of 11 
per cent. That is quite a striking difference — 6.2 per cent 
compared to 11 per cent. 
 
The minimum wage in Saskatchewan for young workers is 
higher than in every other province except for Manitoba and 
Quebec. And in fact many of the other provinces of the political 
persuasion of the members opposite have a two-tier minimum 
wage where young people are actually paid less for doing the 
very same work as older workers. For example, British 
Columbia, which the members opposite often brag about, they 
pay $6 per hour for people in their first jobs and $8 per hour to 
everyone else. And I think that’s an important bit of information 
to know. 
 
Also a lot of young people like to drive cars. Certainly there’s a 
lot more cars in those parking lots than there were when I went 
to school. But an 18-year-old single student, female with no 
claims or convictions, driving a 1996 Chev Cavalier to school 
will pay $872 in Saskatchewan. Now you’re not going to 
believe these figures, Mr. Speaker. The same student would pay 
2,177 for car insurance in Vancouver, 2,585 in Calgary, 999 in 
Winnipeg, and 3,504 in Toronto. So these are very high costs 
for the ability to own a car. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much in Tory Alberta and Tory 
Ontario again? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well we’re over 2,000 and going 
higher, so there we go. 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

 

The one thing I’m particularly proud of, Mr. Speaker, is from 
1970 to 2000 the University of Saskatchewan has produced 20 
Rhodes Scholars. This is more Rhodes Scholars than some of 
Canada’s top universities. And just recently . . . I just want to 
bring your attention to a young man, Jeff Millar, who was one 
of only three Canadians to win the Morehead Award and he in 
fact got a scholarship of 112,000 as a result of winning this 
award. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a long list of Saskatchewan 
young people that have been successful in many awards and 
unfortunately I don’t think, because of our agreement to speak 
for a certain length of time, I’m going to be able to go through 
all of them. But we have page after page of young people 
winning awards across Canada, in Olympics, in speaking 
competitions, in artistic competitions. We just have a 
remarkable bunch of young people in the province. And I 
always think that the news every night should have half of the 
news devoted to bad news and half of the news devoted to good 
news, because then we could get some of these stories. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the bits of bad news that I want to 
talk about just for a minute is, I just recently participated in 
several events for the annual anti-racism and the building of 
harmony in our society, and certainly intercultural groups, 
multicultural groups, multi-faith groups, community groups 
were all involved in this. And it kind of stood out in stark 
contrast to the remarks of the member opposite who decided 
that she needed to comment on the fact that the Indian 
Federated College had incorporated a teepee in their building 
design. 
 
I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I was pretty shocked to hear 
this, for a couple of reasons. One is that they did the fundraising 
for that building and if they choose a design that they feel 
reflects the cultural priorities and the educational priorities that 
they have, then I would say, Mr. Speaker, that’s their business. 
 
And I would also want to say that the teepee structure is also a 
commemoration to the veterans who fought in the wars. And 
it’s a functional space. It’s not a frivolous space. And you 
know, even from a pure architectural point of view, I don’t want 
to live in a world covered in cindercrete blocks. I want to live in 
a world with architecture and with people who are able to have 
a bit of a vision about how buildings should look. 
 
So I was very disappointed in the member opposite who seems 
to always have lots to say about the accountability of First 
Nations people but not much to say about the accountability of 
her own party. And it leads me into my next theme and that’s 
democracy. 
 
You know, I would be the first person to have not been a big 
supporter of Grant Schmidt for many of his policies. But the 
fact of the matter is I was pretty shocked when Grant Schmidt 
was denied his nomination. When you have 1,200 people come 
out to a nomination, that shows a pretty significant level of 
interest. 
 
I think, in fact, that . . . The other thing that’s very important, 
that a lot of people don’t know, is Mr. Schmidt was the . . . Oh I 
seem to have struck a nerve, Mr. Speaker. I can hardly hear my 
. . . 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — So, Mr. Speaker, this man was the 
president of his constituency riding for the last five years — 
apparently good enough to do all the work, but not good enough 
to have his nomination recognized. 
 
Now this is a party that’s refused to listen to their own 
grassroots. And I don’t know how . . . If they won’t listen to the 
people who most closely support their organization, I’m not 
sure how we can expect them to respect the democracy of the 
larger community. I think it does reveal that this is an extreme 
group of people who are prepared to do anything to get power, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I have to tell you that I have a handful here. These are just 
a small sampling of letters to the editor where people have 
written in who are equally appalled by this decision. We have 
The Four-Town Journal in Langenburg. Quote: 
 

The Sask Party has done a huge amount of harm to itself, 
both within the Melville-Saltcoats riding, and perhaps . . . 
across the province. 

 
Elwin Hermanson, on — well, it’s a quote — on CTV news, 
explaining why he supports overriding the choices of Sask Party 
members in Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

We don’t want to mess up the good chemistry we have 
right now in the party. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of different kinds of 
people in our caucus, and I don’t think we’ve ever ejected 
anybody because they messed up the good chemistry. 
 
Mr. Boyd, former Devine and Sask Party MLA: 
 

It has the potential to damage the electoral chances. 
 
And Grant Schmidt says: 
 

I don’t think the party that I’m a member of will go against 
the wishes of the people. 
 

Well we’ll see when they have their well-timed revisiting of 
that question because I think Sask Party democracy will be put 
to the test. 
 
The decision . . .Well here’s a few quotes out of letters to the 
editor: 
 

. . . the decision of 1,200 people is a trifle and an 
annoyance to the Saskatchewan Party political 
establishment. 
 
The warning has been sounded loud and clear to 
Saskatchewan voters: If you cross the backroom boys . . . 
the Saskatchewan Party . . . vengeance will be swift. 
 

Or this one, the Leader of the Opposition party: 
 

Schmidt doesn’t support the Sask Party’s position on 
government investment in the economy. 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

Well if Schmidt’s unfit, then I guess unfortunately the MLA for 
Lloydminster will have to go as well. 
 
I think actually, Mr. Speaker, as we move into a more open, 
democratic process with the new rules for the House that were 
announced in the Throne Speech, that quite frankly we have 
here a leader that’s afraid of what his members will say, and is 
trying to manage his messaging. And we certainly have many 
examples of foot-in-mouth disease over on the other side. 
 
So as the Sask Party casts about for a policy . . . And we’ve 
heard from them over the years, Mr. Speaker. They wanted to 
be just like Ontario, they wanted to be just like Alberta, they 
wanted to be just like BC, and now they want to be just like 
Nova Scotia, which by the way, Mr. Speaker, has a Crown 
corporation that invests in the Nova Scotia economy. 
 
I think this is a group that is grasping at straws, Mr. Speaker. 
The Sask Party doesn’t have a plan. Looking at the campaign 
brochure from the Saskatoon Fairview by-election, it’s clear 
what they do promise — a 10-cent slogan and a $10 billion 
deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think Saskatchewan people have been there, we’ve done that, 
and we’re not going back, Mr. Speaker. In fact, we even got the 
T-shirt. I think it had a chicken on the front and something 
about Mr. Devine. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to close by just again affirming 
my support of the Speech from the Throne. I do believe that our 
government has a vision and a plan that meets our shared 
aspirations. It’s a balanced plan, it’s sustainable, and most 
important, Mr. Speaker, it works. 
 
So I will be supporting the Throne Speech and voting against 
the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to enter into the debate on the Throne Speech. 
 
It was interesting to hear the member from Regina Centre 
saying that the Throne Speech wasn’t long enough. For 
goodness sake, Mr. Speaker, how long do you need to say 
nothing? You could go on and on and on and say absolutely 
nothing. I think it was fairly long enough to say absolutely 
nothing. 
 
There’s nothing new in the Throne Speech. And it’s obvious 
that the NDP is stagnant or heading in the wrong direction. A 
comment I had heard was that the NDP has placed their 
government on autopilot. And I would like to tell members 
something about autopilot. 
 
The autopilot . . . If you have a pilotless machine and put it on 
autopilot . . . And there’s a story that says, briefs the passengers, 
saying nothing can go wrong, go wrong, go wrong. And that’s 
the kind of autopilot that this socialist government is on. They 
have no direction and they think nothing can go wrong. 
 

They keep telling people that they are on the right track. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, they have been on the right track, according to 
them, for some time. But you know what? In my constituency, 
the tracks are being pulled. Is that the right track that this 
government wants to be on? They’re on the right track? And 
then they say they’re on the right road. Well, you can hide in 
potholes in some of the roads yet. Is that the right road that this 
government is taking us on? And I believe that it is. 
 
And also, they never addressed anything in the Throne Speech 
about the government using taxpayers’ dollars to compete 
against private business. That would have made one profound 
statement in a Throne Speech where they could have said, we 
will stop using government tax dollars to compete against 
private business. 
 
It did say they had a plan to reduce waiting lists. What is it? The 
waiting lists in hospitals have been growing for . . . for months 
and years and years. And every once in a while we hear from 
across the way, they say we have a plan to fix that or we have a 
plan to manage it. We never hear it. We just say they have a 
plan. They talk about us not having a plan and we have a very, 
very solid plan. 
 
And yet they are supposed to be government — so we thought 
— and yet they don’t have a plan. In fact when they ask us what 
our plan is, it’s intuitively obvious that it’s because they have 
no ideas of their own and so they would like to, like to borrow 
our ideas as evidenced in the ’99 election and even in our 
ethanol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech did absolutely nothing to help 
struggling farm families, increasing crop insurance premiums 
over the last two years by nearly triple. 
 
Now we wonder, we wonder what drives this socialist machine 
— this socialist group of men and women. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Speaker, I have . . . and I just want to, I want to . . . I want 
to readdress this because I think people in the public should 
really know what drives this socialist government. And this is 
called the Regina Manifesto. Mr. Speaker, this was a CCF 
documentation of 1933 but it’s very, very interesting to note 
that it was reproduced by the Saskatchewan NDP Party, in 
when? February 15. 
 
Now what I wish to do, Mr. Speaker, is read excerpts from this 
document to show what drives that party over there. And it 
starts off: 
 

We aim to replace the present capitalist system, with its 
inherent injustice and inhumanity, by a social order from 
which the domination and exploitation of one class by 
another will be eliminated . . . (we) will supersede 
unregulated private enterprise and competition . . . 

 
In other words, get rid of everything and have everything for 
the state, everything for the state. Mr. Speaker, that is what’s 
driving this government. 
 
And it goes on to say: 
 

. . . (we will have) natural resources and (the) principal 
means of production and distribution are owned, controlled 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

 

and operated by the (state) . . . 
 
I will reiterate the date on this is February 15, 2001. 
 
The CCF aims at political power in order to put an end to this 
capital domination of our political life. Well what a shame, Mr. 
Speaker. Want to put an end to capitalism. Profit is a poor word. 
In other words, thump out every business person. And gosh 
knows they’re trying to do it by competing with private 
businesses. But trying to thump out, through a government 
organization that believes only in socialism, to thump out 
private business, that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. That is an 
absolute shame. 
 

Socialization of finance. 
 
Socialization of all financial machinery — banking 
currency, credit, and insurance, to make possible . . . 
effective control of currency, credit and prices, and the 
supplying of new productive equipment for socially 
desirable purposes. 

 
My goodness. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a real slap at anybody 
that’s a business person or wants to make a profit in a business 
or on a farm because this document which is, again I will 
rephrase, reproduced on February 15, 2001 — two years old, 
two years old. So nobody can suggest that it’s an old document. 
It may have been originally, but it’s re-sanctioned by this 
organization in 2001. 
 

. . . our main industries (to) be saved from the wasteful 
competition (and) . . . ruinous over-development and 
over-capitalization which are the inevitable outcome of 
capitalism. 

 
A total, total slap at free enterprise — totally. And this is what 
the people of Saskatchewan have been putting up with primarily 
for the last 60 years where all this government wants to do is 
slap around private industry and take over and control it by the 
state. 
 
Now here’s one that I like also: 
 

. . . the evils of the patronage system as exemplified in so 
many departments of the Government today. 

 
Well there’s one they don’t even follow themselves, is the evils 
of patronage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s so much in this document that is just 
basically gut churning. It is absolutely a slap at free enterprise. 
It’s a slap at anybody in this province that wants to make a 
living outside of government-sponsored industry, 
government-sponsored positions. 
 
Now the very last . . . The very last paragraph I would like to 
read, Mr. Speaker, because I think this is the penultimate of 
what this government stands for. 
 

No CCF Government (insert NDP because it’s reproduced 
in 2001) no . . . government will rest content until it has 
eradicated capitalism (and I want to repeat that, Mr. 
Speaker, eradicated capitalism) and put into operation the 

full programme of socialized planning. 
 
Eradicate capitalism. I mean, how much of a slap can that be at 
people that want to try and make a living in this province? I 
think the socialist government, the socialist system has just 
shown its colours again by reproducing that document. 
 
And I’d like to address, Mr. Speaker, some writings that have 
came from other places and how they feel about what we’re 
doing in Saskatchewan. And here’s one, Mr. Speaker, from the 
western bureau chief and it says: 
 

Place proves socialism makes things worse. 
 
And that’s in reference to Saskatchewan. It proves socialism 
makes things worse. 
 
And there’s some excerpts from this, Mr. Speaker, that I think 
are very important that one should have on record. And it says: 
 

Sixty years ago Saskatchewan decided the only solution to 
the Depression was the CCF and . . . Tommy Douglas, 
Baptist preacher turned social gospeller, decided that the 
state was the only entity that could be trusted to fix things. 
 

Only the state, and I totally disagree with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this article goes on to have a small comparison with 
Alberta. It says: 
 

Today, (today) Alberta has a population of three million, a 
GDP of $150 billion, and lots of former Saskatchewanians 
making a lot of money for themselves and others in our 
province. 
 
Saskatchewan on the other hand has a population of just 
over 1 million (which this article was obviously just a little 
. . . wrote a little . . . a few months ago) and shrinking, (and 
shrinking population and) a GDP of . . . 25 billion, and the 
exodus of many of its best and brightest (people). This is 
what socialism has done for this province. 

 
But here is something also that I really enjoyed in this article. 
And you wonder why Alberta’s doing good and Saskatchewan 
isn’t. And this writer has captured this very, very accurately as 
far as I can figure. It says: 
 

Ah, you say, but Alberta discovered oil in 1947 (that’s why 
they’re doing better). Yes, (yes) I say, but Tommy Douglas 
chased the oil companies and wildcatters out of 
Saskatchewan in the 1940s, prudently arguing that 
Saskatchewan’s resources be left for future generations. As 
a result, some roughnecks went poking around Leduc with 
a rig they had with them when ejected from Saskatchewan. 
 
And now (and now) — oh, the cruel irony of it — 
Albertans are finding and pumping oil in Saskatchewan. 
 
The royalties from the oil and gas drilled from under the 
Saskatchewan soil last year by Calgary (by Calgary) 
companies (by Calgary companies because they were 
chased out of Saskatchewan) such as Nexen brought the 
current NDP government a much-needed 624.1 million in 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

revenue — a record. 
 
Isn’t that ironic? You chase them out and then you live on what 
they’re bringing back into your province — 621 million. So in 
other words the industry created when St. Tommy chased the 
evil wildcatting snakes from his socialist paradise is now saving 
Saskatchewan’s sorry skin. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to go on to the end of this article 
because I think it’s quite befitting: 
 

In the meantime let’s take pity on our little neighbour and 
let’s consider the Saskatchewan legislature as the future 
home of our super province. Perhaps it will give them the 
confidence they need to bounce back from Tommy’s rot. 

 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that about sums it up. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have another very interesting article. And 
this would . . . may surprise listeners because, I guess I can say 
it right upfront, this is from a Calgary paper but it’s wrote from 
a person from Saskatoon, who doesn’t get heard obviously in 
Saskatchewan, so wrote this article for the Calgary Herald. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the headline of this article says, “A poor 
cousin begs for mercy.” Please take us in, begs one desperate 
Saskatchewan resident who wants Alberta to come to the 
rescue. 
 
Well we know they’re coming to the rescue in the oil business. 
But here’s from a Saskatchewan writer that is asking Alberta to 
look at taking us in. It’s a little bit of a tongue in cheek article. 
There’s no doubt. And it goes on in this article, and it talks 
about: 
 

Yes, I’m writing from Saskatchewan, you know, the East 
Germany of the Prairies, the province that half rhymes with 
basketcasechewan. Thing is we’ve got a bundle of 
resources: uranium, potash, forests, diamonds, hydro 
potential, ranching, northern tourism, oil, gas, good urban 
centres, a hard working ethic, the country’s new and only 
Synchrotron, a giant grain belt — and you may have heard 
about it — and lots more. But where Alberta has a tradition 
of creating wealth from its resources, our practice has been 
to suppress our resource potential. 
 
Way back we shackled ourselves to the sorry creed of 
socialism. And although we just may oust the NDP in the 
next election, we’re still in a fair thrall to its paternalistic 
mindset. The current administration is still burdened with 
statist mentality that’s outdated and it’s been there since 
1933. 
 

Mr. Speaker, or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s just . . . there’s a 
whole bunch more in this article. And really what it does it just 
really explains what this group of men and women on the other 
side, they’re so ingrained with the socialist philosophy, that 
they can’t see anything but socialism in front of the sorry little 
programs that they’re putting out. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to now just address a couple of 
items from the Throne Speech. And there’s so little in the 
Throne Speech, or nothing of consequence. But I want to 
identify a couple of issues that are very pertinent to my area. 

And it talks about this government’s investment in the cattle 
industry, 433 million. It’s exactly what I’ve been talking about. 
Why for goodness sake wouldn’t we let some free enterprise in 
there rather than try and control it with government and 
taxpayers’ dollars? 
 
(15:45) 
 
And here is this Throne Speech that’s supposed to be our future 
is wide open, and I just want to quote something and then put 
some facts to it. 
 

Saskatchewan is home to 25 per cent of Canada’s beef cow 
herd. This year our government will release a 10-year beef 
production strategy. 

 
Well wake up. How long has this government been in 
government? Twelve years, and today they have a revelation 
that they want to do something to the beef production. 
 
Now let me give you some facts. We have . . . In this province 
we have a million and a half head of feeder cattle a year, of 
which we ship 750,000 out of this province — specifically to 
Alberta — to be fed. That just doesn’t make any sense. And 
then along with it we ship our grain to Alberta to be fed to the 
Saskatchewan cattle. Does that make sense? Then we ship our 
young men and women to Alberta to feed Saskatchewan grain 
to Saskatchewan cattle. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is there 
anybody in this province that can tell me that that makes sense? 
If anybody can, I will tell you right off the bat they’re a socialist 
who do not want to see any progression in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the time I have left I want to address a couple 
of concerns from in my constituency. We talk about, we talk 
about fastest growing tourism, potential for tourism, but how do 
you grow tourism when your infrastructure is in such bad shape 
that people will not come? 
 
Again, in my constituency the road structure is so bad I see 
people turned away . . . turning away, every other day. And 
what can we do about that? We could put a little bit of common 
sense into our highway structure. We could put a little bit of 
funding in some of the areas that it’s needed. It’s very easy to 
sit in Regina and talk about we want to increase tourism. And 
how are you going to increase tourism only here? I think we 
have to increase tourism province-wide. 
 
And another factor is cellular phone coverage. We hear a lot of 
discussion about what SaskTel is doing in telephone service, 
but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all it takes is for one to look at a map 
of Saskatchewan and you’ll see that my constituency is the one 
that has a huge area of no cell coverage — no cell coverage. 
And why would that be? Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
why would that be when we want to invest money in Australia 
for rural cell coverage? Again, we have to have somebody that 
will give their head a shake on that side except that it may rattle 
too much if they do. 
 
But here we have a government that’s far more interested in 
investing outside of the province than they are at investing 
inside the province to provide even such simple things as 
cellular coverage for rural residents of this province. 
 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in closing, if this is this 
socialist government’s idea of having a future wide open, I 
think this province is in for a very, very rough time. Thankfully 
there’s going to be an election soon and thankfully there’ll be a 
government change where we get some new and fresh ideas on 
the other side. 
 
With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be supporting the 
amendment but definitely will not be supporting the Throne 
Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a privilege to enter into this Throne Speech debate, 
and of course I’ll be supporting the motion in favour of the 
Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to begin by thanking my 
constituents, the residents of Saskatoon Greystone constituency, 
for the trust that they’ve placed in me over the past four years. 
I’ve had the privilege, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of serving for three 
terms in this Assembly, and it’s been a great honour. So I want 
to sincerely thank my constituents. 
 
And I also want to thank my family, Mr. Deputy Speaker: my 
mother, Trudy, who has been a very, very strong supporter of 
mine throughout my political career; my wife, Louise, and my 
sons Mark, James, and Michael, who have made many 
sacrifices to facilitate my participation in public life. And I’m 
very, very grateful for their love and support. 
 
And I want to thank my staff in my constituency office, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Sheila Gillgannon and Puck Janes are two 
very dedicated people who work to assist me in serving my 
constituents, and I’m grateful for their help. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased to support this Speech 
from the Throne which I think lays out a very exciting action 
plan for the future of this province. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
Throne Speech comes down as we see a time of significant 
economic expansion under the leadership of our Premier. We 
have in Saskatchewan an expanding economy. We’ve had a 
growth now in the economy for 10 consecutive months. And 
over six of those months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve broken 
employment records, employment highs, in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We see, Mr. Speaker, that the processing that people in this 
province have talked about for years, how we want to process 
our own resources rather than exporting raw material outside 
this province, Mr. Speaker, that processing is now happening. 
We have 126 plants that now process Saskatchewan crops right 
here at home, providing jobs for 1,200 people, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So we’re processing our raw materials right here at 
home. 
 
We’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, in the last two years, a very 
significant expansion of our highways network in this province, 
and see again in this year a commitment to reconstruct and pave 
another 750 kilometres of road. And we’re going to be 
accelerating the twinning of both the Yellowhead and the 
Trans-Canada. Simply put, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

government is fixing the roads of this province in a province 
that’s got a road network that would take you twice around the 
globe, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we’re making very good 
progress on this front. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I’m proudest about the 
record of this government is our investment in education and 
research. This is very important in my constituency which is 
home to the University of Saskatchewan and to a large number 
of students, and where the role of Innovation Place is very 
important to the employment of my constituents. 
 
And I’m pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that in this Throne Speech 
we’re making a commitment to invest another $50 million of 
direct provincial government investment in research, over and 
above the direct funding that’s given to the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, over the last five years under this 
government’s leadership we’ve seen a 42 per cent increase in 
the amount of money that’s being invested in K to 12 education. 
And I’m very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. And when I contrast 
that to the proposal of the official opposition, the Saskatchewan 
Party, that they made in the 1999 election to freeze funding for 
education, and I think about the difference that our 
government’s record has made to my constituents versus the 
proposal of the official opposition, I am very proud to be on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Throne 
Speech debate unfolds as the world’s attention is focused on the 
US (United States) invasion of the country of Iraq. And our 
government supports the decision of the Government of Canada 
not to participate in this war. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
decision that I’m very pleased that our provincial government 
has taken and that the federal government has taken. 
 
I view the US, United Kingdom, and Australian invasion of Iraq 
as a very unwise decision. And I say this for several reasons, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. First of all, I believe that the countries that 
are choosing to undertake this invasion are setting a dangerous 
precedent to go to war without the support of the United 
Nations. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they have not been able to muster 
even the support of a majority of countries on the UN Security 
Council. 
 
And I’m also concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because with this 
war I see a large number of innocent civilians being the primary 
casualty of this war to date, Mr. Speaker. It’s been tragic to see 
troops on both sides dying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it’s 
particularly tragic to see hundreds of women and children being 
injured and killed as a result of the bombing of Baghdad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also worry that this invasion is causing very 
troubling unrest throughout the Middle East, Mr. Speaker, the 
ramifications of which we don’t fully know yet, but they’re 
extremely troubling. And I regret, Mr. Speaker, that the 
decision by the United States and the United Kingdom and 
Australia has caused very serious divisions among our western 
allies, and that troubles me as well. 
 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is a war that could have been 
avoided if United Nations weapons inspectors had been given a 
continued mandate to finish their work. Unfortunately they 
never got the opportunity to complete the disarmament process 
that they were making progress on. 
 
And I say finally in this regard, Mr. Speaker, that this war, this 
invasion will cost at least $100 billion in terms of spending by 
the United States alone. And when we think in this Assembly of 
what one can do with $100 billion, Mr. Speaker, that is enough 
money, Mr. Speaker, to permit for clean water, clean water for 
all the world’s people who don’t have clean water so far, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s also sufficient resources to immunize every child in the 
world against every communicable disease that is causing tragic 
death and disease in so many countries around the world. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, in addition to those two initiatives 
which I’ve just mentioned, it would also be sufficient to allow 
for the rebuilding of Afghanistan — a commitment, Mr. 
Speaker, that unfortunately has been forgotten by many in the 
international community. 
 
And so I very deeply regret the unwise use of resources, given 
the other pressing needs that we see in the international 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of recent international events, I also want 
to reiterate the position that I’ve long taken in this Assembly, 
that uranium mining in the province of Saskatchewan should be 
phased out until such time as there are proper international 
safeguards in place to prevent uranium being diverted for 
military purposes. And I hold to that view, Mr. Speaker, which I 
want to emphasize is my personal view and not the position of 
our government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when I see the evidence before us in the last 
two to three years, when I see the fact that now India and 
Pakistan are both testing nuclear weapons and have nuclear 
weapons, and I think about the role that Canadian nuclear 
reactor sales played in both India and Pakistan getting the 
atomic bomb, when I look at the record of France in the last 
decade illegally testing nuclear weapons in the South Pacific for 
many years in the face of international protest — and of course 
France is one of our biggest customers in terms of purchasing 
Saskatchewan uranium — when I look at the war that is 
currently underway in Iraq and the previous war a decade ago 
when the United States and many other nations, including our 
own, took part in that earlier war in the early ’90s against Iraq, 
Mr. Speaker, and I look at the use of depleted uranium in that 
war, depleted uranium that is now scattered across the deserts of 
Iraq, creating serious health problems for the children of Iraq. 
And I think about the fact that much of that depleted uranium 
was of Saskatchewan origin. 
 
(16:00) 
 
When I look at those facts, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the sale 
of uranium from this province to the international community 
without a proper safeguards regime in place is unethical, Mr. 
Speaker. And I stand by that position. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I am very pleased with the 
position that this government has taken with respect to another 
dimension of the nuclear debate, which is the question of 
nuclear waste disposal, because I noted with interest the 
proposal from the Saskatchewan Party’s Energy critic that we 
have a nuclear waste dump in this province, Mr. Speaker. And I 
was very pleased with the position that our government has 
taken that we reject that notion because, Mr. Speaker, there is 
no country in the world that has demonstrated the ability to 
safely dispose of high-level radioactive waste which all 
uranium becomes. 
 
And when I see the protests in Germany where the German 
government has had to bring out 20,000 police, the biggest use 
of police since the Second World War in Europe, Mr. Speaker, 
to accompany shipments of high-level radioactive waste, and 
when I see German citizens — farmers, students, senior citizens 
— turning out, Mr. Speaker, to protest waste shipments to the 
point where they will literally tear up their roads and their rail 
networks to oppose those shipments, I believe we made a wise 
decision. 
 
I see . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member from Arm 
River on his feet? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. I wish to, in your gallery, introduce 
a constituent of mine from Davidson, Keven Duchscherer, who 
teaches math at Davidson High School. And I understand that 
the Speaker used to teach him math. And also the member from 
Regina South, they used to, he informed me, used to have some 
very good debates of which he used to beat the member from 
Regina South all the time in debates. 
 
So I hope the rest of the House will join me in welcoming 
Keven Duchscherer here at the legislature. And I hope he 
enjoys the proceedings here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you and I would also at this time take 
this opportunity to wish Keven Duchscherer a good visit here to 
the legislature. A pleasure to see him here. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. And 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

 

welcome to our guest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, I am very pleased that our 
government has taken a strong stand against the Saskatchewan 
Party’s proposal for a high-level waste nuclear disposal site in 
this province. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are . . . 
this is just one of many areas where members will differ 
significantly between this side of the House and the official 
opposition, and will . . . I’m looking forward to the election 
ahead where we will debate these issues and bring them to some 
final resolution. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on some other areas of 
the Throne Speech that I’m very excited about. And I want to 
focus on social policy for a minute and note that the Throne 
Speech makes many exciting commitments with respect to 
advancing this government’s record of social justice in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the initiatives, Mr. Speaker, that is very exciting is the 
proposal to continue our government’s efforts to expand 
medicare in this province. And the provincial budget will offer 
increased funding for diabetes education, prevention, and care, 
which I’m extremely pleased about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is also a commitment in this budget, Mr. Speaker, to 
provide more support for those with disabilities. And 
employment support programs for persons with disabilities will 
be extended to provide another 680 people with assistance in 
fully participating in the labour force in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In the Throne Speech, there is a commitment made to improve 
our foster care system by looking more to the relatives of 
children who might go into foster care to provide support for 
those children when they’re no longer able to rely on their 
parents for care; looking to extended family members for care 
and providing them with financial assistance rather than placing 
children in foster care. And I think that is a very, very positive 
vision that will significantly improve child and family services 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I look, Mr. Speaker, at this government’s record which is 
addressed in the Throne Speech in terms of what we’ve done 
with expanding community schools in this province; what 
we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, in terms of doubling the number of 
community schools just in the last three years. 
 
I look at our record, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
employment support program and what that’s accomplished in 
terms of reducing the number of single-parent families who are 
living in poverty in this province, by more than half, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I look at our record, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Kids First 
program and the initiatives that we’ve taken to increase the 
minimum wage in this province. Just a year ago, Mr. Speaker, 
the minimum wage was $6. Now it’s $6.65 an hour, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Then I look at the position that members opposite take. What 
would the Saskatchewan Party have done, Mr. Speaker? Well 
it’s clear from their comments that they wouldn’t have 

increased the minimum wage at all. In fact we had the member 
for Humboldt speaking on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party 
saying people in this province would be willing to work for less 
than minimum wage. And I think that tells a lot about the kind 
of minimum wage policy that the members opposite would 
implement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to comment for a moment on where else I 
think we should go in terms of creating and enhancing social 
justice in our province. And there are three initiatives that I 
want to touch on. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be encouraging our 
government in the year ahead to look seriously at introducing a 
children’s dental plan here for the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. I believe that as part of medicare, all children 
under the age of 18 should have their basic dental care costs 
covered as part of the medicare program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I believe the time has come to increase 
social assistance rates in this province for all those who are on 
social assistance and particularly as it pertains to the allowance 
that is available for clothing, and food, and personal care, and 
for transportation, Mr. Speaker. It’s been many years since we 
had a transportation allowance for those on social assistance, 
Mr. Speaker; I believe it’s time to reinstate that allowance. 
 
And I also believe, Mr. Speaker, that the allowance that’s 
available for food, clothing, and personal items, which currently 
sits at $195, should be increased by at least 40 or $50 a month. 
And I want to emphasize that that is my view, Mr. Speaker; it’s 
not official government policy at this point in time. 
 
I also think, Mr. Speaker, that we need to re-examine the 
decision that we’ve made with respect to the installation of 
video lottery terminals in this province which I believe are 
creating addiction problems, and health and family problems, 
Mr. Speaker. And I favour a gradual phase-out of VLTs (video 
lottery terminal) in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment for a minute on our 
government’s energy initiatives and say how excited I am about 
the green energy plan that our Premier and our provincial 
government is embarking on. Mr. Speaker, this plan that’s laid 
out in this Throne Speech is going to focus our future energy 
developments on wind power, small-scale hydro, cogeneration 
of electricity, and that is indeed a very, very exciting energy 
future, Mr. Speaker, which contracts sharply with the views of 
the official opposition that we ought to build a nuclear reactor 
in this province. 
 
And I’m looking forward to debating this on the hustings, Mr. 
Speaker, because our government believes that the future for 
energy development in this province is with the wind and with 
small-scale green energy initiatives, Mr. Speaker. And with, 
Mr. Speaker, investments in energy conservation that will 
ensure that our greenhouse gas emissions are not rising, Mr. 
Speaker, in contrast to the members opposite who don’t support 
Kyoto and don’t believe that climate change is a problem. 
 
And let me say, Mr. Speaker, in closing that I am proud of the 
record of our Crown corporations and I’m looking forward to 
debating that record, Mr. Speaker, with the members opposite. 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a record that has generated $1.6 billion in 
revenue for the people of Saskatchewan over the last decade, 
Mr. Speaker, and these people want to do away with many of 
those Crowns. And, Mr. Speaker, as long as we’re on this side 
of the House, we will never let that happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, again I want to close by thanking 
my constituents, thanking my family. I will be voting for the 
motion in favour of the Speech from the Throne and against the 
amendment put forward by the Saskatchewan Party. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure today to stand in this Assembly and to speak to the 
Throne Speech that was most recently presented in this 
Assembly. 
 
However I must add that it was very interesting listening to the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone and I’m pleased that he 
stood to his feet, and it’s unfortunate he didn’t take a few more 
minutes because I think every moment he spoke over the last 
few minutes the Saskatchewan Party was just seeing an increase 
in voter support across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this Throne 
Speech and as I observed the date of the Throne Speech and 
looked around the galleries in the Assembly, and I noticed how 
empty they were. And normally for a Throne Speech . . . There 
just weren’t as many people sitting in the . . . that had come to 
actually listen to the Throne Speech. 
 
And one has to wonder whether or not the government 
members were trying to invite people, but the public in general 
just felt that it wasn’t worth taking the time to come and listen 
to this Throne Speech because they didn’t expect a lot. Or the 
fact that the government members themselves didn’t have a lot 
of pride in the Throne Speech they knew that was going to be 
delivered by Her Honour, and therefore didn’t make the real 
effort to invite people to come and hear. 
 
Having said that, however, Mr. Speaker, as we listened to that 
Throne Speech and I’m . . . at some times I felt sorry for Her 
Honour having to go through the 55-minute dialogue regarding 
this speech, and this lack of vision, and the emptiness that was 
in the speech. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that this Premier, who 
to date has not really been duly elected by the electorate of this 
province to govern this province, would have . . . You would 
have expected this Premier to come forward with a real vision 
for the province of Saskatchewan as he anticipates going into 
his first full campaign as the Leader of the New Democratic 
Party in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But what we saw, Mr. Speaker, was in reality a leader who 
decided to put his government on auto pilot while he sits back 
and tries to gauge whether or not he should call an election in 

the near future, or whether he should put it off to a later period 
of time in the spring, or even possibly wait until the spring of 
2004. 
 
Regardless, Mr. Speaker, of when the Premier decides to call 
this election, I can suggest to you that have . . . from his lack of 
vision, his lack of a sense of direction for the province of 
Saskatchewan, that when he calls this next election, Mr. 
Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan are going to weigh what 
this government has done very heavily and . . . when they 
finally go to the polls and get to the polls. 
 
And as my colleagues and I have been hearing, that’s certainly 
the first question I think that is on most people’s minds is, when 
is the next provincial election? And that’s telling me, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan, in many cases, have 
already made up their minds. They’re just waiting for the 
Premier to screw up his courage and call a general election so 
they can tell this NDP government exactly what they think of 
the direction that they are putting this province into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, when we listen to the Throne Speech, and 
we see the lack of direction and the lack of vision, it’s basically 
telling the people of Saskatchewan that this NDP government 
doesn’t know where it’s going. They’ve lost a sense of 
direction, and in fact right now, Mr. Speaker, what they’ve 
actually been doing is actually been going in the wrong 
direction and they are certainly — in regards to many people 
across this province — aiming in a direction that really is not 
going to build the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:15) 
 
This government talks about the number of people that are 
working in this province. This government talks about the 
increases in different avenues of the economy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the Throne Speech talked . . . they talked 
about the economic activity. And yet, Mr. Speaker, one has to 
ask, well if we’ve seen such great economic growth, and if there 
are more people working today than there even were yesterday, 
what’s happening to the population in the province of 
Saskatchewan? One has to ask what is really happening. You 
would think these population numbers would really be going up 
dramatically. However, we’re not seeing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you have to ask the question: exactly what vision does this 
government have? What direction are they going in? We just 
heard the member from Saskatoon Greystone. Mr. Speaker, 
when we talk about the province of Saskatchewan and what this 
province has, the opportunities that are at our feet, and yet every 
time we turn around and especially when it comes to . . . And I 
won’t say all NDP members because I think there are some hon. 
members on the other side of the Assembly who recognize that 
there are some resources in this province that we need to start 
looking at developing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, certainly uranium is a resource that could 
play a major impact to the economy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And not just the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but we talk about our First Nations 
people, and we look at the mining sector that is taking place in 
northern Saskatchewan right now, Mr. Speaker, how many First 
Nations people are working in those jobs — some very high 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

 

paying jobs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that as we talk about 
building partnerships with our First Nations community, we 
need to start looking at how we expand the resource sector of 
this province, giving them the opportunities. And not only 
giving them the opportunity to be part of our community, but 
part of our economy as well so that they can reach out to meet 
the needs of their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look at this Throne Speech . . . sorry I just . . . 
As I was sitting there the other day listening to the Throne 
Speech, it just boggled my mind about the lack of vision, the 
lack of direction. And while there were a lot of platitudes that 
were given, Mr. Speaker, for example, the government talked 
about how they’re going to do more for agriculture . . . And as I 
understand it today, in the budget leak that was released on 
Saturday, whether or not it was deliberately leaked by the 
Finance minister without the knowledge of his colleagues or 
however that information was leaked to the press, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government in their Throne Speech talked about doing 
more for agriculture and I think the leak talks about as well 
increased spending in the area of agriculture. However, Mr. 
Speaker, coming from an agriculture related constituency, 
constituency that really relies on agriculture, I would have to 
say that many people in my constituency, if not all of them in 
the agriculture related field, feel very let down by this 
government over the last 12 years when it comes to agriculture. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture just announced crop insurance 
premiums for this year. And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 
increase and up to 52 per cent in some of those premiums and 
considering some of the difficulties the agricultural community 
has been facing, certainly crop insurance is an important 
component in the economic activity and the viability of many 
agricultural producers. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if we’re to face these types of increases on an 
ongoing basis and you look at the commodity prices where 
they’re at today, many agriculture producers continue to shake 
their heads and just ask . . . are asking themselves, where is this 
government going when it comes to agriculture? What 
commitment? And it appears, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
really has no commitment. 
 
And we just go back to 1992 when they retroactively tore up the 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contract. And since 
then we’ve just basically been on a downhill slide in regard to 
agricultural policy in the province of Saskatchewan and support 
for agriculture producers. 
 
And when you look at crop insurance premiums, well the 
Moosomin constituency in general, even last year, was quite 
fortunate in having more than adequate moisture and there were 
some excellent crop conditions. And while the fall harvesting 
became a tried and difficult time at parts of the harvest season, 
the facts were we did have some pretty decent crops. But a good 
part of this province suffered through one of the worst droughts 
in a number of years. And to have an added increase . . . I think 
most farmers expected a moderate increase, but 52 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, certainly is going to hit very significantly in the 
pocketbooks of agriculture producers. 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech talked about putting money 
into the agricultural industry and specifically expanding our 
livestock industry. Now we’ve seen, over the last few years, a 
number of dollars that have gone into expanding the livestock 
industry. We’ve seen expansion in the hog industry. 
 
And of course when it comes to the large hog barns that we’re 
now seeing erected across the province of Saskatchewan, in 
many cases it creates quite a debate, especially in communities 
where those barns are created. And it creates a debate amongst 
neighbours in their community because of the connotations that 
come with hog barns and the environmental impact it has on 
communities with the smell and what have you. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know that a number of producers over the 
past few years have really gone out of their way to establish 
their hog barns in an area that would not interfere with the 
well-being of their neighbours and I certainly compliment them 
for that. 
 
Another area of expansion, Mr. Speaker, is the livestock 
feeding sector. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we have people in 
our community, in our constituency, for example Pipestone 
Valley feeders where a number of farmers and business people 
got together and decided to do a venture capital fund and raise 
the funds necessary to build a feedlot and recently just opened a 
feedlot that will be feeding upwards, I believe at the present 
time they would be able to accommodate about 6,500 feeders in 
that feedlot. 
 
What it shows us, Mr. Speaker, is that there are individuals in 
this province who are willing to invest in this province, who are 
willing to put their hard work and effort into building this 
province by building feedlots of this nature so that, number one, 
it expands the economic activity of their community as well as 
creating job opportunities. But, Mr. Speaker, this will only take 
place if we create the right environment. And I would suggest 
that government involvement all the time is not the way to meet 
the needs of an expanding economy that we need in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, the Moosomin constituency is fortunate to 
have the expansion of West Central Pelleting of Wilkie in the 
construction, and now the plant at Wolseley now into full 
production making pellets out of by-products from the grain 
industry. And, Mr. Speaker, that while that isn’t as large an 
employer when it comes to the number of people employed that 
we had in other operations, or have had in other operations, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s just another economic activity in our community 
and in our area where the people of the area believed that this 
was a project worthwhile investing in. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated last year where they 
were attempting to raise just over $900,000, they ended up 
having to go to the Securities Commission to ask for an 
extension because they had more dollars committed and the 
intention to invest than they were actually allowed. And so they 
were allowed an extension is of I believe around $125,000. 
 
What that does, Mr. Speaker, is tells us that people in 
Saskatchewan themselves, if given the opportunity and the right 
environment, are willing to invest in their communities and in 
their futures. However, what does this Throne Speech do? Does 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

it give us any encouragement to look at investing in our 
communities and in our futures? Mr. Speaker, I would think as 
we listened to the Throne Speech we would have to say it was 
definitely lacking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area the Throne Speech talked about was 
the government’s plan includes a major investment in education 
and training, and no doubt as we move into this 21st century, 
education is going to be an important component. We need to 
create the avenues and the opportunities for young people to 
expand their educational opportunities; whether it means 
post-secondary education in a university or some of the 
technical institutes, it really doesn’t matter. But our young 
people need to have the opportunities to expand their learning 
as they enter the new technology and the new diversities that we 
see in the economy of the world around us. 
 
And while the government talks about including expansions in 
education and training, one of the concerns that we see 
happening in rural Saskatchewan is the fact that many 
communities are really facing a dilemma as local school boards 
are looking at the numbers of students in schools and deciding 
they’ve got to . . . the only step they can take is to close down 
schools or take grades out of schools. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to education, 
especially in rural Saskatchewan, we might have to revisit how 
we look at education. And it may not include all the schools that 
we have or all the buildings, but we certainly need to look at 
how we provide education to our rural communities so that our 
young people in rural communities have the same opportunities 
that young people do have in urban communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that we talk about in the Throne 
Speech and I want to just talk about for a minute is new green 
power, I believe is what the government refers to when they 
talk about the utilities. And basically the Throne Speech says 
we will welcome small-scale renewable energy proposals that 
generate environmentally preferred power and beginning this 
year, proponents will be invited to develop projects that can be 
fed into the provincial power grid. The first of these projects is 
expected to come on line in 2005. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I was listening to Her Honour give the 
speech and when she came to this part, I immediately went back 
to 1992. And the government of the day, under the leadership of 
Mr. Romanow, decided that they would ask communities to put 
forward proposals in regards to cogeneration projects. 
 
And I know the Gateway REDA community group put forward 
a project, power proposal, back in that time period. And 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, after the five proposals were 
brought forward at the cost of $20,000 a proposal that each 
community had to put down for their proposal, the government 
of the day decided they weren’t going to go ahead with the 
cogen project. 
 
And I find it very interesting because of the fact that those 
communities are still annoyed at the fact that when they put the 
$20,000 on the table, and they spent time and money and a real 
effort to put forward proposals, only to have the government 
shelve their proposals. 
 

And now today we see the government again talking new green 
power. I think what this government will find is that people are 
going to look back at what happened in ’92-93 and basically 
they’re going to look at this announcement with significant 
cynicism — wondering whether or not the government is 
serious, whether it really means what it has said here, or 
whether it’s going to be meaningful to even come forward with 
projects. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, however there are certainly 
opportunities if we give people the right venues to work in to 
develop some cogen projects. 
 
When it comes to health care, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech 
talks about securing medicare into the future. And the quote: 
 

Saskatchewan people have told our government that 
sustaining medicare and improving our access to health 
services, is a high priority. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of the Moosomin and 
surrounding area really want to see whether or not the 
government is really committed to that comment about health 
care being a high priority on their list. 
 
And having looked at the leaked budget, and I believe we see in 
the news item or the article on Saturday that the government’s 
talking about $183 million more in health spending in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We’ve certainly heard about the 
federal government putting more money into health care in the 
province, across Canada, and a significant portion will be 
coming here. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the community of Moosomin over the last 
few years has been looking for, as my colleague the member 
from Swift Current his community as well, looking for a new 
health facility and hospital. And the community has been 
working exceptionally hard. And it’s not just . . . While we’ve 
had communities kind of vying against each other for facilities 
of this nature, I can assure you that the Moosomin and 
surrounding area, people in a large surrounding area, have 
actually taken the bull by the horn and have gone on board 
recognizing that it’s important that not that every community is 
going to have a health centre, but it’s important to have a 
quality health service and hospital service in the vicinity. For 
example, to date I believe the community is within the $7 
million they need to raise in order for this project to go ahead. 
 
And for an example, the last couple of years I’ve been talking 
about the Moosomin Moose rec hockey team and their attempt 
to create a new Guinness world book of records for the number 
of hours continuously playing hockey. And they just this year 
again had another game and were on the ice for 56 hours, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And as a result of that game, they raised $220,000 for this 
project. Last year they raised 125,000. So the Moosomin Moose 
themselves, over the last two years, have raised upwards of 
$350,000 towards the health care project which . . . What it says 
is that the people of the community and the area really believe 
this is an important investment in their community, in their 
region. 
 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

 

(16:30) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to the budget that will be 
presented on Friday to see whether or not the Premier, through 
his Minister of Finance, has now recognized the hard work and 
efforts of the people in the Moosomin area and community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many other areas I could go on and 
speak to as well, but I’d like to just make a short comment 
regarding the highways in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about highways in the 
province of Saskatchewan, recently I had the privilege of sitting 
down with a number of community leaders and business leaders 
and government and civic employees to listen to the Prime 
Minister make a significant announcement regarding federal 
funding for a national highways program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at the time that announcement seemed to be 
something that really was worthwhile and was something that 
was long overdue. And when I look at the constituency of 
Moosomin, it really is long overdue. The fact that the No. 1 
East is pretty well going to be the last area that will be twinned. 
And so this announcement was very, very important to the 
community of . . . the constituency of Moosomin and the 
twinning of the No. 1 Highway. 
 
However, I must add this, Mr. Speaker. The $82 million that 
was promised, Mr. Speaker, is a far cry from the tax dollars — 
the federal tax dollars — that leave this province and end up in 
Ottawa, that it would seem right and only fair that they would 
be put back in the province to maintain our national highway 
system. Not only to complete today, but on an ongoing basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s quite evident that there’s so much more I 
could speak to in this Throne Speech. But unfortunately, I know 
a number of colleagues in the Assembly as well want to have 
their opportunity to speak to the Throne Speech and talk about 
some of the areas that they’ve noticed and picked up on. And 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, I can only end by saying this, that I will 
certainly be supporting the amendment, and not in support of 
the motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say how 
pleased I am to be joining again this year the Speech to the 
Throne. It was a speech that spoke about a great number of 
things. It began talking about agriculture; it talked about 
expanding our economy; it talked about our commitment, as a 
government, to quality education, training; it talked about our 
support, as a government, for the protection and ensuring that 
we have a secure environment; it talked about securing 
medicare into the future; and, Mr. Speaker, it talked about 
support for secure families and vibrant communities. 
 
And some have criticized it for being a long speech and, Mr. 
Speaker, it was; but there was an awful lot to say and there’s 
still an awful lot to say as it relates to the Throne Speech and 

the future of this province. The future of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, that I want to say very much hinges on democracy and 
the democratic process. And one only needs to watch television 
these days to see how it is so important for us here in the 
province and in our country to be protecting our families, to be 
protecting our country, and ensuring that we continue to live in 
a peaceful country in North America. 
 
And I think it also says that we need to be so, I guess so proud, 
of what we’ve been able to build as a province and as a country 
as it relates to quality education, health care, but most of all 
maintaining democracy and a strong base for democracy in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve had some very good successes here in Saskatchewan as 
it relates to growing our economy. We’ve been faced . . . 
boasting 10 consecutive months of job growth, Mr. Speaker. 
Our resource sector is vibrant and it’s growing. The oil and gas 
activity in our province is up over 80 per cent over last year. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen in this province in the past eight 
years, $1.6 billion from our Crown corporations returned to the 
people of Saskatchewan to support government services and 
government programs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s very much what this session of the 
legislature is going to be about. It’s going to be about our vision 
as it relates to using Crown corporations as a tool and as a 
vehicle to create wealth, to ensure jobs. We have 8,000 people 
working in our four major Crown corporations, all over this 
province. And it’s important, not only for urban economies, but 
for rural economies. 
 
And we believe, on this side of the House, that it’s very 
important that we protect those assets and we ensure that those 
assets are there for the people of Saskatchewan to use into the 
future to maintain stable power rates, stable insurance rates, 
stable energy rates, stable telephone rates, which is all that 
those Crowns have been able to deliver. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, very much on this side of the House, 
supported . . . these Crown corporations are. What is becoming 
very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the other side of the House, the 
Saskatchewan Party, takes a much different view of these 
vehicles and these tools as a way to ensure that we have a stable 
economy here in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our party is a party of democracy. And I 
want to say that we have a political party that doesn’t always 
agree. Members don’t always agree internally. But you know I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing that we do agree in. 
We do very much agree on this side of the House in the 
principles of democracy and the party being able to make a 
choice of nominations and the people of Saskatchewan being 
able to make choices during elections that are respected by all 
of us. And I think that’s another fundamental difference, Mr. 
Speaker, between us on this side of the House and on that side 
of the House. 
 
And I want to speak, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to speak to democracy, Mr. 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

Speaker, because it has become very, very clear that the Leader 
of the Opposition and the Saskatchewan Party pick and choose 
democracy when it suits their particular agenda. 
 
And I want to speak, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to democracy 
and as it relates to the decisions that we have and the 
opportunities that we have to make democratic decisions here in 
this province to the circumstance that happened just a few short 
weeks ago, as it relates to a decision that the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Saskatchewan Party have made, as it relates 
to a democratically elected member of their party in the 
constituency of Melville, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I refer specifically to the election in the democratic process 
of the former member of this legislature, one Grant Schmidt, 
who represented the riding of Melville. And, Mr. Speaker, he 
was fair and square elected, he brought together his members as 
other members did. And they had a secret ballot, Mr. Speaker, 
after they made speeches. And when they counted those ballots, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Schmidt was comfortable, he was satisfied. 
The members of the Saskatchewan Party who elected him were 
satisfied, but the Leader of the Opposition wasn’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition wasn’t satisfied with the 
democratic process because it didn’t fit into his particular 
agenda. And, Mr. Speaker, some of the members of the 
Saskatchewan Party said, oh it was because he didn’t conform 
to party policy because you see he believes, as we do on this 
side of the House, that there are times when government 
investment is appropriate, it’s reasoned, and it works. 
 
But ah, says the Leader of the Opposition in his purist style, we 
don’t believe in any government intervention, any government 
investment — not we. That is not what our political movement 
is about and so what we’re going to do is bring 58 people from 
across this province together and we’re going to overturn that 
democratic process because you know what, it just doesn’t fit in 
with how I feel about how things should be going. That’s what 
happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they single out the former member for Melville and they 
overturn the democratic process because he believes sometimes 
private sector investment makes sense for this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that was what one of them said, but you 
know what some of the others and the Government House 
Leader said? The Government House Leader said it’s because 
he’s an embarrassment. He was tied to the former Progressive 
Conservative Party. He was a cabinet minister. And the Leader 
of the Opposition’s House Leader, he says we can’t accept him. 
And so we want him overturned because he was a member of 
Grant Devine’s cabinet before 1991 and we just can’t have that. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, I had the 
opportunity to do a little bit of research. So I looked through 
who works for the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, and I 
looked through a list of who sits in the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus and who too have ties to the former Grant Devine 
administration prior to 1991. I looked through that list, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m going to share that with you and I’m going to 
share that with the people of Saskatchewan because they have a 
right to know. 
 

And I’m going to start by one Pat Bundrock who is a 
Saskatchewan Party candidate for the Sutherland constituency 
in Saskatoon. He was a defeated Progressive Conservative 
candidate for Saskatoon Mount Royal in 1995, Mr. Speaker. 
Oh, and by the way, a constituency assistant for Member of 
Parliament Jim Pankiw, who we all recognize as well. 
 
And so I go through a list of people who worked for the 
Saskatchewan Party and I come upon a Tom Lukiwski. And 
who is this guy? Well he’s the executive director of the 
Saskatchewan Party. And who was he? Who was he, Mr. 
Speaker? He was formerly the executive director of the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there you’ve got another one and I go 
through a list of . . . By golly, I come to the director of 
communications for the Saskatchewan Party. And where did he 
work, Mr. Speaker? Well he was a ministerial assistant to a 
cabinet minister by the name of Murray Meiklejohn who was 
minister of Education under the Progressive Conservative Party 
of Grant Devine. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not done yet. I’m checking a little 
further into their staff complement and I find Reggie Downs, 
who’s the chief of staff to the Saskatchewan Party caucus 
office. And what did he do in his old life, Mr. Speaker? Well, 
I’ll tell you. Before he became a Saskatchewan Party member, 
he was a member of the Progressive Conservative Party and he 
was a ministerial assistant to Conservative cabinet minister Pat 
Smith, who was then minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
So I’ve now got one, two, three, four staffers and party people 
senior who are directly connected to the Progressive 
Conservative Party of the Grant Devine administration. As was, 
as was, as was Mr. Schmidt. And then I started checking 
through some of the MLAs in the Saskatchewan Party caucus. 
And I see that the member from Cannington was a Progressive 
Conservative member of the legislature representing 
Souris-Cannington in ’91, re-elected as a PC (Progressive 
Conservative) MLA in 1995, and now he sits as a Saskatchewan 
Party member, Mr. Speaker. So he had ties to that 
administration. 
 
And I checked with the member from Moosomin. First elected 
as a Progressive Conservative member of the legislature in 
Moosomin in 1986, Mr. Speaker. And he ran again in the ’91 
election, ’91 election as a PC candidate. And he was elected 
then, but now he sits as a Saskatchewan Party member. 
 
So I’m thinking, this is interesting. There’s a pattern building. I 
look at the member from Rosthern who was elected as a 
Progressive Conservative MLA for Rosthern in 1995, Mr. 
Speaker. And they don’t want to hear this. And he now sits as a 
Saskatchewan Party MLA. 
 
And I checked with the member from Wood River who was 
politically active in the 1995 election as well, as a candidate for 
the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, who now 
sits as a MLA. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I checked further because I’m thinking, is 
this true? Is in fact there a connection between the Grant Devine 
Conservatives of the 1990s or 1980s or is there not? And I 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

 

come across the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy who was 
defeated as a Progressive Conservative candidate in that riding 
in the 1995 election who now sits as a Saskatchewan Party 
member on the opposition side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the point I’m trying to make is this. The point 
I’m trying to make is this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I thought I was through but I’m not, because I find that the 
member from Swift Current also had membership in that 
administration. And I find that the member from Swift Current 
was a chief of staff to John Gerich who was the associate 
minister of Economic Development. Under who? I’ll tell you 
who, Mr. Speaker. Under the same Grant Schmidt that the now 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party wants to fire after winning a 
duly democratic process — winning an election, winning it 
fairly and squarely, but he turns it over. And the Opposition 
House Leader says it’s because he was a former Tory. Well 
what about his friends that sit around here and what about the 
people that write the caucus memos, and what about the people 
that give him political advice? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you that you don’t change the spots on a 
leopard. And whether a Progressive Conservative Party comes 
from Melville and turns into a Saskatchewan Party MLA, or 
whether he comes from Swift Current and turns into a 
Saskatchewan Party MLA, or whether it’s from Cannington or 
from Moosomin, or whether it’s from Wood River, Mr. 
Speaker, you don’t change the spots on the leopard. And people 
of Saskatchewan, as it becomes closer to an election time, 
beware — beware — and know who these people are, Mr. 
Speaker, know who they are. Know who they are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got two 
trains of thought over there. We’ve got some of them who say 
we should be investing public money because it may in fact 
work and it may be good for the economy. And then of course 
you’ve got some of the purists who say if you even think that 
way you can’t sit in my caucus. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’ll become clear next 
Saturday when the executive of the Saskatchewan Party meets 
to make a final determination on democracy — not on the 
future of one member of the Saskatchewan Party but on the 
future of democracy in that party. 
 
And people are watching very, very closely, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to tell you why they’re watching. I want to tell you why 
they’re watching. Because as Mr. Schmidt was good enough to 
be the president of that constituency association for years, and 
as people by the hundreds voted for his nomination . . . And I 
want to quote from the Leader-Post, March 10, 2003, Mr. 
Speaker, because this member of the Saskatchewan Party 
summed it all up as concisely as anybody could. And I want to 
quote, said Wilf Rieger, who nominated Schmidt, of the 
council’s decisions, and I quote: 
 

“If this is not overturned, it will be a disaster for the 
Saskatchewan Party. And not just in Melville, but all over 

the province. I lived under apartheid (in South Africa) for 
14 years. This takes me back to those years (he says). If the 
Saskatchewan Party can do this, what kind of laws will 
they make when they get power? It’s a black day for 
politics in Saskatchewan (Mr. Speaker).” 

 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I wanted to speak to democracy 
and the process that we use — the budgets, how we build our 
budgets, how we choose candidates in this political party. It’s 
based on one member one vote, and it’s based on democracy, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to tell you that I’m going to be supporting this 
Throne Speech. And the reason I’m going to be supporting this 
Throne Speech is because it did have vision. And it spoke about 
the future, and it spoke about building the economy, and it 
spoke about our environment, and it spoke about our children, 
and it spoke about health care. It spoke to everything that 
people in this . . . the Saskatchewan province care about and 
hold dear. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you as well, that members on 
this side of the House are going to be defending the principles 
of democracy. We’re going to be defending the right of people 
to represent and be represented in this legislature. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that is a vision. And that’s a principle that the 
Saskatchewan Party never brought to it when it was put 
together in the middle of the night. They never brought that 
principle with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, in closing, there’s going to be one other test 
to the Saskatchewan Party, and that’s their commitment to 
democratic reform. Mr. Speaker, our Rules Committee is going 
to be meeting tonight and they have an opportunity to live in the 
spirit of their party policy with calls for democratic reform or 
they can deny it. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be watching very 
closely to see what opposition members on that Rules 
Committee do. My guess would be that they will deny 
democratic reform the same as they’re denying democracy in 
Melville, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say that members of this House have a vision of 
this future that includes democracy, and it includes fairness, and 
it includes people. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there is 
a clear division between members on this side of the House and 
members on that side of the House. 
 
And that’s one of the principles that the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to be using. That’s one of the issues the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to be using when they choose 
a government after the next election, which undoubtedly will be 
an NDP government. It’ll be a majority government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am voting against the amendment. I will be 
supporting the motion because it’s a good Throne Speech. 
There is good policy, there is good direction, and it will be 
confirmed in the budget on Friday, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a 
previous life I . . . when I was just thinking about politics and 
just thinking about public speaking, I joined Toastmasters. And 
in Toastmasters they have various categories of speeches. And 
in Toastmasters the House Leader from the NDP just gave a 
speech that fell into two categories. One, it was fictional; and 
the other thing, it was humorous. And you know I can’t 
understand what his speech had to do with the Throne Speech 
or the debate or the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy House Leader was way off base and 
unfortunately the people of this . . . Saskatchewan aren’t 
laughing too loudly because they would like to have an election 
and show the deputy . . . the House Leader from the NDP what 
they think of his Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have seen, the NDP government’s Throne 
Speech was clearly devoid of any new ideas, and the people of 
Saskatchewan are really asking for an election. They believe 
that the province is going in the wrong way. The trend of this 
government is going in the wrong way. The population of the 
province has been going down for the last four years, Mr. 
Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan are really looking for 
a change. They believe that this province should have a . . . 
improving the climate for economic growth, and this Throne 
Speech says nothing to improve the climate of the business 
sector in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have seen in the health sector, we still have 
the longest waiting lists in Canada, and clearly the people of 
Saskatchewan are struggling in many areas, including they will 
be . . . in the rural areas they’ll be struggling with increased 
crop insurance premiums. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has said on numerous occasions 
that the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t have a plan. Well I’d like 
to just let the people of Saskatchewan, and the NDP, and the 
House Leader for the NDP possibly just to listen to the 
Saskatchewan plan. 
 
The Saskatchewan plan . . . the Saskatchewan Party has put 
together a plan to grow the province by 100,000 people over the 
next 10 years. It’s made up of five components, Mr. Speaker. 
The first component is cutting taxes on growth and 
productivity. The Saskatchewan Party would eliminate the 
small-business tax for small businesses in the province — 
eliminate it. And the sad reality of this, it would only cost — 
it’s at six per cent right now — it would only cost the 
government $60 million. That unfortunately shows how few 
small businesses there are in this province. 
 
As we know, when we need to grow the economy, we need to 
grow the small-business sector, we need to expand the 
small-business sector, and that’s . . . the small-business sector is 
the area where new jobs and investments are created in this 
province, and this government is just doing exactly the wrong 
thing and deterring small businesses from expanding and 
growing in this province. 
 
The other . . . Step two is to stop the expansion of the Crown 
corporations. We would stop the Crowns from competing with 
small businesses in this province. And we’ve seen example 
after example, Mr. Speaker, of this government using the 

Crown corporation, using taxpayers’ money to compete with 
small business, again stopping or interfering with small 
businesses’ growth and development in this province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party plan would build on Saskatchewan’s 
natural strengths. We would focus on economic expansion in 
the areas of agriculture, technology, value-added 
manufacturing, processing, and natural resource sectors. I think 
it’s fundamental that we build on our strength in this province. 
Communities all over Saskatchewan have different strengths 
and we as a government would help those communities and 
help those regions and areas to develop with their strengths in 
those very important areas. 
 
Number four in the Saskatchewan Party plan, we’d have 
smarter, more efficient government, core service review of all 
the government’s activities, agencies, and corporations, and 
ensure that taxpayers receive the most for their tax dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. A core service review of all government activities — 
that would root out all the inefficiencies in this NDP-Liberal 
coalition government and get the province and the 
government’s books in order and get the province moving in the 
right direction. 
 
And of course number five, Mr. Speaker, is cut personal income 
taxes. Raise personal and family tax exemptions so families can 
have more disposable income, putting more hands into the 
pockets of small . . . of families and small businesses and 
individual taxpayers in this province so that they can go out and 
invest in the province and create more jobs in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Just as a point of this government’s inefficiency and 
wrong-headedness, I’d just like to point out some of the areas 
where the NDP have gone well astray, let’s say, Mr. Speaker, in 
the last few years. 
 
The NDP, through an Atlanta, Georgia-based dot-com, lost $7.5 
million. Another example . . . (inaudible) . . . lost $4.1 million. 
Another example, Mr. Speaker, is a Newfoundland-based cable 
television which lost $9.5 million. A Nashville, 
Tennessee-based company that provides streaming video 
services lost $2.4 million, Mr. Speaker. Vancouver-based 
telecom company lost $2.5 million. SaskTel established 
Clickabid.com in 2000 to compete with America Online auction 
giant eBay.com. How much did they lose, Mr. Speaker? $1.9 
million. Lost over $2 million on a Richmond, BC-based 
software company that provides mobile payment systems for 
businesses such as restaurants and delivery services. Also, Mr. 
Speaker, SaskTel established IQ&A in 1999 to sell personal 
health information across Canada — lost $2.3 million, Mr. 
Speaker. And of course Channel Lake lost $6 million. And of 
course the most recent loss is the $28 million in SPUDCO, Mr. 
Speaker — $28 million and it’s a huge loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s just an example of government interference in 
the business community. And that tax money should be used for 
cutting taxes so there’s more money in peoples’ pockets to 
invest in this province and more money in small-business hands 
to invest in this province, or maybe more money to go in health 
care, Mr. Speaker, and . . . or to reduced property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last three, four months I’ve been holding 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

 

open houses across my constituency and people have been 
coming and laying out the problems and concerns that they 
have with this government and with the economic conditions. I 
met with many reeves, councillors, alderpeople, and mayors and 
they have said that one of the biggest problems, Mr. Speaker, is 
a lack of a tax base, lack of a tax base. And they’re being dealt a 
blow with having to put millions of dollars, hundreds of 
thousands of dollars, out into infrastructure programs for water 
and sewer upgrades and improvements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And these community leaders are working very hard to try to 
broaden their tax base and encourage people to come to their 
communities to live and they are having troubles. They feel that 
the government is in place that restricts the communities. 
They’re looking to the provincial government for some help to 
get rid of regulation and red tape so that they can grow their 
economies in these communities. And naturally in the RMs one 
of the big concerns is the drought that we’ve had in the last two 
years; in some areas, it’s three, four, and five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seeing that it’s 5 o’clock, I would just like to stop 
now and continue at 7 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................103 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................103 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................103 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................103 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................103 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................103 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................103 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................103 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................104 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................104 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................104 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................104 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................104 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................104 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................112 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................126 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Junior World Curling Championships 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................105 
 Partnership Between Sask Water and Prince Arthur School 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................105 
 World Water Day 2003 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................105 
 Party Slogan 
  Jones...........................................................................................................................................................................................105 
 Assiniboia Hosts 2003 Masters Curling Championships 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................106 
 Saskatchewan Party Agriculture Policy 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................106 
 Provincial High School Athletic Association Boy’s Curling Championship 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................106 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Forthcoming Budget 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................108 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................108 
 Settlement with Potato Producer 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................109 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................109 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................110 
 Forthcoming Budget 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................110 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................110 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................110 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................111 
 Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................111 
 Bill No. 5 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2003 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................111 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................111 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................112 



 

 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................115 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................118 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................122 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................125 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................128 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................131 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................134 


