















































Hansard: April 02, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 323 
 April 2, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of producers in the southwest area 
of the province, particularly in the constituency of Cypress 
Hills. The petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by producers 
from Sceptre, Swift Current, Alsask, Tompkins, Cabri, and 
several other communities. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 42, particularly the 
section between the communities of Brownlee and Eyebrow. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway No. 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
This petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, by individuals from the 
communities of Eyebrow, Central Butte, Riverhurst, Moose 
Jaw, and Kingman, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition today signed by people that are very, very frustrated 
with the condition of Highway 47 south of Estevan. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, 
Lampman, people whose children ride the bus, and even some 
from Estevan, or pardon me, from Regina, actually. 
 

I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens opposed to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
2003 premium increases to farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly again to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned that 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
their leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

The petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 22; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 5, 12, 13, and 18. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Agriculture minister: how many Crown land leases 
are there currently in Saskatchewan; and further to that, 
how many total quarter sections of Crown lease land are 
there right now in Saskatchewan? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

Seated in the west gallery are two guests I want to introduce to 
the House this afternoon. Annie Alport is a grade 11 student at 
LeBoldus and she is running for the distinction of the award of 
Lester B. Pearson. 
 
And with her today is Mr. Bert Yakichuk, who is the principal 
at LeBoldus . And I’m going to be meeting with them later after 
question period today, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to be 
talking about ag issues in the province and ag subsidies and 
how they affect the international marketplace. 
 
So I want all members of the Assembly to join with me today in 
recognizing Annie Alport and Mr. Yakichuk. Welcome to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my 
colleague, the member for Regina South, I would like to 
introduce to you and to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I believe 
the member wishes to do an introduction. I’ve already passed 
that part on the agenda. Does the member have leave for a 
further introduction? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It is with great joy and thanksgiving 
that I now ask . . . have the opportunity to introduce these 
students from St. Matthew School — 22 students, grade 8 
students from the school who are in the west gallery with their 
teacher, Mr. Lawrence Biegler. 
 
And I would ask all members to join in welcoming them to this 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Opportunities for Youth 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As a 
government that is committed to building for the future, we are 
continuing our tradition of managing the province’s finances in 
a responsible, prudent manner while at the same time meeting 
the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
To this government, Mr. Speaker, meeting the needs of 
Saskatchewan people means a record $1.2 billion allocated for 
education and skills training to build our future by enhancing 
education facilities and providing young people better 
opportunities to learn. 
 
It means, Mr. Speaker, $76 million in capital improvements for 
schools and post-secondary institutions. It means 80,000 
post-secondary and training opportunities, including 30,000 
spots for university students. It means 5,400 training 

opportunities in the skilled trades and it means $66 million 
made available for student loans, Mr. Speaker, with half that 
amount as bursaries and grants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our vision is to build a high-quality education and 
training system that will allow the young people in this 
province to seize their own futures and provide all people of 
this province unlimited opportunity to enrich their lives and 
contributed . . . contribute to the economic, cultural, and social 
growth of this province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Couple Wins Volunteer Award 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to salute 
the outstanding efforts of two individuals in my hometown of 
Swift Current. Bob and Rachelle L’Heureux are the recipients 
of the 2002 Darrell Weber Award for their support of the local 
Big Brother/Big Sisters Organization. The award is presented to 
individuals who have made an outstanding volunteer 
contribution to the promotion and well-being of the Big 
Brothers/Big Sisters program. 
 
And that’s exactly what Bob and Rachelle have done, Mr. 
Speaker. Twice now the L’Heureuxs have donated a portion of 
the proceeds from their annual L’Heureux Agencies fundraising 
golf tournament to the Big Brothers and Big Sisters. 
 
And on top of that, Rachelle is a volunteer with the in-school 
mentoring program. Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think we’re all aware of the valuable role that the Big 
Brothers/Big Sisters play in each and every one of our 
communities and part of their success is because of the 
contribution of people like the L’Heureuxs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the entire Assembly to thank them for 
their ongoing commitment and contribution to Big Brothers/Big 
Sisters in the community of Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert’s New Performing Arts Centre 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I know that you’re already aware but I am pleased to 
inform all of the members of the Assembly that a ceremony will 
be held in our hometown of Prince Albert tonight. Mr. Speaker, 
tonight there will be a ceremony to name the theatre in the E.A 
Rawlinson Centre, Prince Albert’s new performing arts centre, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The centre has become a reality thanks to the efforts and the 
generosity of many people, including the Prince Albert Arts 
Board, the Diefenbaker Trust, the Prince Albert Kinsmen Club, 
Rawlco Communications. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, how 
pleased I am that this government has contributed two and a 
half million dollars to this project and proud, though not 
surprised, that our hometown has raised over $4 million to help 
the final construction. 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new theatre has seating for 612 people and 
comes complete with a fly loft, state-of-the-art sound, and 
wonderful acoustics. After the naming ceremony this evening, 
Mr. Speaker, the theatre’s premier performance will feature 
Chantal Kreviazuk . . . Kreviazuk. I didn’t do that very well; I’ll 
improve on that later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the E.A. Rawlinson Centre for the Performing 
Arts is a tribute to the vision of the people of Prince Albert, 
their love of the arts. And I’m sure every member of the 
Assembly will join us in congratulating Prince Albert on a 
great, great achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Inland Terminal 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Weyburn Inland Terminal, Canada’s first farmer-owned inland 
terminal, has once again shown a solid performance. In the 
word of Claude Carles, president of the terminal, and I quote: 
 

“Although it was a difficult year for grain operations, the 
efficiencies built into the terminal and the continuing strong 
support of our customers have allowed Weyburn Inland 
Terminal to stay profitable . . . Sound investments made 
over the years and no long-term debt are paying off today. 
Most of our shareholders are also our customers and we 
depend on their support.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Weyburn Inland Terminal has led the way 
with innovative ideas to better serve their customers and 
maximize returns to their shareholders. The terminal, started in 
1976, has also been at the forefront of change in the industry 
and continues to show leadership to improve the overall 
efficiency of Canada’s grain handling system. 
 
The terminal is one of the main contributors to Weyburn’s 
economy, creating jobs and providing a very valuable service. 
The Weyburn Inland Terminal’s philosophy, their goals, and 
the reason for their success are summed up in their mission 
statement: profitability through service, innovation, and 
integrity. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the board, management, and staff for 
providing an excellence in service that is second to none and 
wish them continued success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aboriginal Employment Development 
Program Agreement 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in keeping with this government’s commitment to 
developing an expanding economy from which no one is 
excluded, I’m happy to announce the signing of an agreement 
as part of the Aboriginal Employment Development Program, 
between the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations, and the Department of 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through the Aboriginal Employment Development 

Program, this government is working with Saskatchewan 
employers, unions, and our own departments to help break 
down barriers to employment for Aboriginal people. 
 
Since the inception of this program, over 40 partnership 
agreements have been signed and over 1,450 Aboriginal people 
have been hired. Mr. Speaker, when this program was 
introduced, less than 1 per cent of workers in the health sector 
were Aboriginal. Today I’m pleased to say that the number has 
risen to four and a half per cent; and, Mr. Speaker, this recent 
agreement will go a long way to bringing that number to the 13 
per cent it should be to reflect the percentage of Aboriginal 
people in the population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is part of our vision and part of our plan for 
this province, to build a future that is wide open to everyone. 
Thank you very much. 
 

Innovative Saskatchewan Farming Company 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our pioneers knew 
that in order to survive they had to be innovative. Farmers today 
continue to recognize that they have to be innovative in their 
farming practices to survive in competitive markets. 
 
Jim, Tim, and Greg Sowa needed a packer for their farm but 
they weren’t happy with the products that were available, so 
they designed and produced their own shank-mounted packers. 
This was not a new concept, but what was new was customizing 
it to fit their needs and then designing and creating other 
products to fit the demands of other farmers. 
 
Since the inception of their business, Valley Systems of 
Wadena, in 1993, they have produced such products such as 
shank- and gang-mounted packers, tine-type mid-row banders, 
anhydrous ammonia application trailers, and header-divider 
wheels for harvest equipment. Their products are custom 
designed to meet specific needs that were not being met by 
equipment manufacturers. 
 
This company has not only met the needs of the local 
producers, but they have secured an Australian distributor and 
Americans are also starting to look at their equipment. This 
company, which started from three innovative individuals 
recognizing a need for a product, has evolved into a company 
that is now being recognized internationally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating Jim, Tim, and Greg Sowa on their innovation 
and wish them well in their future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

New Business in East Regina 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our future is wide 
open. Saskatchewan’s economy is robust. And nowhere are 
both of these statements more evident than on the east side of 
Regina, which includes much of my constituency of Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

Yesterday morning I was proud to be present at yet another 
significant business opening by a major Canadian company — 
London Drugs. London Drugs is a 100 per cent 
Canadian-owned company with 58 stores across Western 
Canada, employing more than 7,000 Canadians. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, London Drugs has one more location, this 
one in east Regina. And there are 85 more jobs for Regina 
workers — more good news for our city and our province. 
 
I mentioned that London Drugs is a Canadian company. Mr. 
Speaker, as it does in other communities, London Drugs and its 
officials will be involved in the life of our city. It works with 
hospital foundations, local charities, promotional events, 
medical foundations, and other non-profit organizations. The 
same involvement will come to Regina along with, I’m sure, 
excellent customer service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to join President Wynne Powell, 
store manager John Vankoll, Mayor Fiacco, and many others at 
the ribbon-cutting ceremony. And I am delighted to welcome 
this new business to our community. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Estevan Bruins Sportsman’s Dinner and Auction 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Saturday I and over 500 others had the pleasure of attending the 
11th annual Estevan Bruins Sportsman’s Dinner and Auction. 
 
Everyone in attendance enjoyed great speakers — Ken Holland, 
who is general manager of the Detroit Red Wings and Scotty 
Bowman, retired coach. And an interesting note, Mr. Speaker, 
is Scotty Bowman is the only head coach in NHL (National 
Hockey League) history to win nine Stanley Cups and he is also 
the only coach to win cups with three different clubs. 
 
Congratulations to Jade Chipley of the Estevan Archery Club 
who was chosen Female Athlete of the Year — 14-year-old 
Jade has already won two gold medals at the national level. 
 
Congratulations are also in order for the Estevan Luscar Peewee 
AAA Haulers who as a team won Male Athletes of the Year. 
They were the provincial champions in 2002. 
 
There were many different types of auctions taking place 
throughout the evening, Mr. Speaker. At the live auction NHL 
jerseys of very popular hockey players were sold for as much as 
$3,600. 
 
This was a very successful event that again proved the 
generosity of Estevan and surrounding communities. Hats off to 
Ron Areshenkoff, chairman of the dinner committee; to Andy 
Schroeder, president of the Estevan Bruins, and to everyone 
who made Saturday night the success it was. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Harassment Allegations Against Former Civil Servant 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Environment minister. 
 
Last October six female employees of the Environment 
department complained that they had been intimidated, 
humiliated, and sexually harassed by their boss, Murdoch 
Carriere. The women all worked in the same Prince Albert 
office and ultimately reported to Mr. Carriere. 
 
In December an independent investigation concluded that 
Murdoch Carriere was guilty of sexually harassing these six 
women. On February 12 the deputy minister informed the six 
women that he had also concluded that they had been harassed. 
 
On the same day, February 12, the deputy minister wrote to all 
employees in Mr. Carriere’s Prince Albert office. He praised 
Carriere’s skill as a manager and announced that Carriere had 
been appointed to the position of senior adviser to the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Environment minister confirm that he was 
fully briefed by his officials that Murdoch Carriere had been 
reassigned as a senior adviser to the NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to assure the member opposite that the policy was 
followed and both the minister responsible for the Environment 
and myself were informed on or about the same day, February 
12, when the report was completed, but neither one of us were 
privy to the details of the report. We were told that there was a 
disciplinary action taking place, but none of the details of the 
investigation were available either to the Minister of the 
Environment or to myself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s comments are 
different than what she told the Assembly yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Murdoch Carriere was the NDP’s director of fire 
management in Prince Albert. Last year Mr. Carriere was 
responsible for managing 140 employees and a $100 million 
budget. When Mr. Carriere was suspended with pay from his 
job last October as a result of allegations of sexual harassment, 
the deputy minister must have advised the Environment 
minister of the situation. 
 
When the independent investigation confirmed Murdoch 
Carriere was guilty of sexually harassing six women, the deputy 
minister must have advised the minister of these serious 
developments. When the deputy minister reassigned Mr. 
Carriere as a senior adviser to the NDP government at $85,000 
per year, the minister must have been briefed. 
 
Will the minister confirm today that he was briefed on the 
Murdoch Carriere sexual harassment affair and that he was 
briefed on Mr. Carriere’s appointment as a senior adviser to the 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

 

government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 
want to clarify one thing. Mr. Carriere, having been a 30-year 
employee of the government, worked under Liberal, NDP, and 
Tory governments. So I think everybody understands that this is 
a professional civil servant. 
 
The next thing I would want to say is, where does the member 
opposite believe the line exists between political interference 
and the bureaucracy? In our view the professional civil service 
hires, fires, and disciplines people. We set the policy that guides 
those decisions but we do not directly interfere in those 
decisions. 
 
My concern here, Mr. Speaker, is, is the policy working 
adequately? I read the report. I have determined no, it isn’t. And 
I have taken action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have two 
very simple questions for the Environment minister. The 
Environment minister is responsible for his department and he 
should be accountable by answering questions today. 
 
What did government officials tell the Minister of the 
Environment about why Murdoch Carriere was suspended with 
pay last October? And what did government officials tell the 
Environment minister about the results of the independent 
investigation that concluded Murdoch Carriere had sexually 
harassed six female employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to 
outline exactly what Mr. Belanger and myself were told . . . Oh 
sorry, I apologize — the minister for the Environment. We were 
told that there was a matter involving a senior employee, Mr. 
Carriere, on or about February 12. It would be like earlier that 
day, maybe the day before. And the fact of the matter is, is that 
we are given no details, only the fact that there was a 
disciplinary action and that this is the result. 
 
However I will say that today I announced that we are not 
satisfied that in those very few cases where allegations are 
serious that we have a sufficient oversight process. So I have 
given the Public Service Commission one month in which to 
bring forward a suggestion for improvements to this process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
evident by now that according to the minister responsible for 
the Public Service Commission, the Environment minister was 
definitely aware on February 12 that Murdoch Carriere was not 
being fired, even though he was guilty of sexually harassing six 
female employees. 
 
If the NDP government has a zero tolerance policy on sexual 
harassment and the Environment minister knew that his deputy 
minister had decided not to fire Murdoch Carriere, even though 
he was guilty of sexually harassing six female employees, why, 

why didn’t the Environment minister step in and fire Murdoch 
two months ago? Why did it take a front page newspaper story 
and embarrassing questions from the opposition before the NDP 
government finally did the right thing and fire Murdoch 
Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can see that we’re 
clearly returning to the old Tory days of the Devine 
government, because the fact of the matter then in those days 
politicians did interfere in who was hired and fired. Public 
servants had no protection from the whims of their political 
masters. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, given that this employee in 
question has worked through three different governments, 
suggests that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, just on that point I’ll say 
that we believe in a professional public service where people 
are judged on their merits. But further, there was serious 
discipline action taken. The respondent was suspended without 
pay. He went from a job of supervising 200 people with a 
budget of 37 million to a demotion with no supervisory 
responsibility, no budget, and under day-to-day supervision. 
 
He never actually assumed that job because yesterday he was 
notified by phone that he is terminated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the citizens of this 
province watching this on television today are really 
questioning what serious discipline means when this employer 
of this government goes to another position, maintains a job for 
$85,000 a year, and six female victims are left without any 
recourse or any compensation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to many of those women who were 
harassed by Murdoch Carriere, Mr. Carriere would often boast 
about his political connections to the NDP government. And 
according to the report of the independent investigator, 
Murdoch Carriere often talked about his friends in high places 
in this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did the Environment minister ever discuss the 
allegations of sexual harassment or the investigations into the 
allegations, or anything related to the investigation and 
subsequent decision not to fire Mr. Carriere, with Murdoch 
Carriere or anyone else either in the government or outside the 
government, prior to yesterday? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of the 
Environment would have been privy to the report the same time 
I was, which was about 3 o’clock yesterday. And that is not 
even 24 hours ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second comment I would make is that there are two 
purposes to the zero tolerance policy. One is that women are 
protected in their ability to continue earning an income by being 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

safe in their workplaces. The second one is the removal of any 
confirmed offender from the workplace. He was actually 
removed from the moment the investigation began and has 
never since returned to that workplace. So the two highest tests 
of that policy were met. 
 
The question here is whether the discipline was sufficient for 
the purposes of zero tolerance. I read the report yesterday, not 
24 hours ago, and I judged that it was not sufficient. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my next 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Some of the women who complained about being sexually 
harassed reported an incident that occurred last summer when 
the Premier went to visit Mr. Carriere in the Prince Albert 
office. According to the independent investigator’s report, 
Murdoch Carriere often called one of his female employees by a 
nickname that she found highly offensive. According to the 
independent investigator’s report, Murdoch Carriere introduced 
this woman to the Premier by that nickname. Imagine, Mr. 
Speaker, a young woman who was excited about meeting the 
Premier of the province, and then is embarrassed by her boss, 
Murdoch Carriere, when he introduces her not by her full name 
with respect, but rather by a nickname that she feels highly 
offensive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier today, how did he feel about this 
incident, and was he aware that it was part of the Murdoch 
Carriere harassment investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I became aware of this 
circumstance yesterday afternoon when — late yesterday 
afternoon — when I first had an . . . If the Leader of the 
Opposition would care to be quiet in this House he could . . . he 
may hear an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I became aware of the comments in the 
investigator’s report yesterday afternoon. I well remember the 
day when I and a number of our caucus toured the Forest Fire 
Centre in Prince Albert to meet many of the men and women 
who were so ably taking on the challenge of the forest fire 
situation in this province last summer. Mr. Carriere did in fact 
take us round and introduced us to, I would not know the exact 
number, but dozens and dozens of people in that circumstance. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is now, by the report, indicated to me that in one 
of those introductions Mr. Carriere referred to one of those 
employees as quote, “pet.” Totally inappropriate and because of 
that kind of activity, the action that this government has taken 
today has been taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. The person who committed sexual harassment has now 
been fired but only after it was raised by the media and by the 
opposition. The government’s first reaction was to cover it up. 
Instinctively they chose to protect the man who was guilty of 

sexually harassing six women, according to the government’s 
own report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the initial decision — and this is important — the 
initial decision was not to fire him. Instead the NDP 
government condoned sexual harassment. They made him a 
special adviser at the taxpayers’ expense of $85,000. Mr. 
Speaker, the people who made that decision must also be held 
accountable and that includes the Minister of Environment. 
 
Will the Premier finish the job and fire his Minister of 
Environment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Grant Schmidt in 
today’s paper says in his view this group of men and women are 
not capable of governing the province of Saskatchewan. And 
they are making that exceptionally clear today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in relationships with public servants in this 
province, it is the principle of the government that I will lead 
that we will respect the public servants of this province. And we 
will respect the processes that are in place to protect those 
public servants at all levels, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We would not take the point of view that’s being expressed 
today: that in investigations of this nature, that the politicians 
should immediately move in and make the decisions. No, that’s 
not the case, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the case. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when in fact, when in fact this 
kind of issue reaches to the level of public exposure, when this 
in fact is brought to the attention of the minister for the very 
first time yesterday with the detail, she took the appropriate 
action as the minister responsible for the Public Service 
Commission, Mr. Speaker. And that is the kind of process this 
government will continue to follow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve known that the NDP 
has been financially negligent for quite some time, and now we 
recognize that they’re also morally negligent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP likes to talk about 
its zero tolerance policy, but it seems like the Environment 
department had plenty, plenty of tolerance for sexual 
harassment. 
 
One sociology professor at the U of R (University of Regina) 
says that the government’s actions trivialized sexual 
harassment. She said the NDP government has taken the 
attitude that boys will be boys. Well that’s not good enough and 
that’s not acceptable. The Environment minister’s decision to 
protect a sexual harasser is an affront to every woman in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Premier say that he has a zero 
tolerance policy on sexual harassment when he allows a 
minister to protect a sexual harasser in his cabinet? 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is offensive that the 
Leader of the Opposition would make that kind of accusation 
which is based on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The Premier 
may continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I repeat, when the Leader of the 
Opposition, based on no fact, will make that kind of accusation 
it is absolutely offensive. And it is offensive, I may say, to the 
due process that affects the public servants of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the great defender now stands in his place. 
Isn’t this the great . . . Isn’t this the leader who goes all over the 
province saying to working people, we’re going to eliminate all 
those labour laws that protect people. That’s what he says — 
that’s what he says. Now he shakes his head. 
 
Well I say then, Mr. Speaker, he’s got the party that has 
resolutions to get rid of the Human Rights Commission. I say 
then let’s . . . the jig is up. You please stand up, Mr. . . . Sorry, 
Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition should stand up in 
this House and tell us precisely which labour protections for 
working people that party proposes to eliminate — just which 
ones. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago the 
Premier had to stand up and confess that his government had 
been misleading the people of Saskatchewan. Seems it’s 
becoming a habit — seems it’s becoming a habit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again the government has only done the right 
thing after it got caught. For six years, the NDP misled 
Saskatchewan people about SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company); they finally told the truth after 
they got caught. The NDP allowed millions of dollars to be 
misspent by SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority); 
they only dealt with it after they got caught. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and now the NDP’s initial decision was to protect 
the job of a sexual harasser; they only fired him after they got 
caught. Mr. Speaker, the actions of the NDP reveals that they 
decided that sexual harassment wasn’t a problem. The real 
problem was taking the heat for it after they got caught. 
 
My question to the Premier: if the NDP really had a zero 
tolerance policy toward sexual harassment, why didn’t they fire 
this individual before they got caught? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again I agree with Grant 
Schmidt, this group of men and women are not capable of 
governing, Mr. Speaker. Because what the Leader of the 
Opposition just said, what the Leader of the Opposition just 
said, is before any due process is done, any due process is 
complete, that the politicians should terminate people in 
government. Now that rhymes very nicely with their pledge to 
have the witch hunt in the public service — they’ve . . . 

(inaudible) . . . that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remind you and I remind the citizens of 
Saskatchewan it is this government, Mr. Speaker, that has put 
into place the policies of anti-harassment in this province. It is 
this government. And it is that party that promises, if they are 
elected, to rid the province of labour protections for working 
people. 
 
Now I tell you who’s caught. It’s that Leader of the Opposition 
and that party. And today before the end of the day, they ought 
to stand out there in the rotunda and explain precisely to the 
people of Saskatchewan just which labour protections they are 
going to remove from the working people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Growth Projections 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people continue to question the credibility of the 
NDP budget. Earlier this week, a number of professors told the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Public Policy that the budget is 
unsustainable. Gary Tompkins said, the budget is not balanced. 
There is actually a $392 million deficit. And he said Enron 
executives in the United States went to jail for financial 
misrepresentations that weren’t much worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, economics professors are comparing this NDP 
government to Enron executives. It doesn’t get much worse 
than that. How can the NDP expect this budget to have any 
credibility with the public when it’s being compared to Enron? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we tabled 
our budget on Friday morning and we talked about our 
projections in terms of growth. And these have been confirmed 
by all of the independent forecasters because the number that 
we arrive at, Mr. Speaker, for 2003 is $32.5 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. And when I quote from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. Order, 
please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when we looked at the 
projections from the Royal Bank for a gross domestic product, a 
real GDP in 2002 with 31.6, they are predicting for 2003, 32.6 
— 31.6 to 32.6; Bank of Montreal, 31.5 to 32.4; Scotiabank, 
31.6 to 32.4 billion real GDP. 
 
And what is our prediction from Sask Finance — 30.5 to 32.5. 
 
We’re all getting to the same number. We’re all forecasting 
growth in this province and they should be happy about that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
glad that the Finance minister is talking about growth 
projections because that’s what the professors of the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Public Policy were actually talking 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

about, the NDP’s growth projections. 
 
John Allan, another economics professor says, the 6.8 per cent 
growth rate would be extremely large and that the province’s 
deficit is likely to rise if the NDP does not live up to this growth 
rate. 

 
That’s exactly what I was asking the minister on Monday, Mr. 
Speaker. One would think the Department of Finance might do 
some projections to estimate what would be the impact of a 
more realistic growth rate like 3 per cent. But according to the 
Finance minister they haven’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what would be the impact of a 3 per cent growth 
rate? How much would that impact revenues? How much would 
that drive up the deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, you know, 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite like to play fast and loose 
with the numbers, but the bottom line from all the forecasters is 
that the economy of Saskatchewan in 2003 is growing and it 
will be $32.5 billion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re predicting a normal crop. And guess 
what? It seems that everybody else now is predicting a normal 
crop because moisture levels in Saskatchewan are average or 
above average in most of the grain belt, so our predictions are 
predicated on a normal crop. And now people are saying, guess 
what, you’re likely going to have a normal crop. 
 
And they talk about fantasy this and fudge numbers that, but I’ll 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, what isn’t fantasy — $2.5 billion for 
health care, $1.2 billion for education, and 650 million in 
capital investment from our Crowns in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very hard to believe that 
the Department of Finance would not have a projection for 
different . . . for numbers of growth, Mr. Speaker. So either the 
minister is hiding it or if he doesn’t have it, he should get it 
right away. Either way, he’s not doing his job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister is betting his entire budget on an unrealistic 
growth rate according to many people, Mr. Speaker. And he has 
no back-up plan at all for when his government comes up short. 
Maybe if he spent a little less time suing people and releasing 
the budget pre-emptively, then he might get his job done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the impact of a 3 per cent growth rate? 
How big will the deficit be if the private sector forecasters are 
right and the government is wrong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious 
that the members opposite haven’t been listening to the answer. 
 
All of the forecasters, whether it’s the TD (Toronto Dominion) 
Bank, the Royal Bank, Bank of Montreal, CIBC, (Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce) Scotiabank, or our own officials 
in Sask Finance, we all come to the same number for real GDP 
in the province of Saskatchewan, which is in that $32.5 billion 
range. 
 
So we’re expected to grow. We’re expected to have a normal 
crop year. We’re expected to have improved revenues, Mr. 
Speaker. And we are going to spend dollars in the province of 
Saskatchewan to support the priorities of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I won’t be taking advice from the members opposite, 
especially that member from Canora-Pelly, who sat there 
unelected as the official leader of the opposition for two years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

SaskTel Extends High-Speed Internet Coverage 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning, 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel announced that it would invest another 
$156 million this year to ensure that Saskatchewan customers 
continue to receive the information, business, education, and 
entertainment opportunities that they have come to expect. 
 
SaskTel’s network investment is money well spent. Not only 
will this SaskTel investment bring world-class 
telecommunication services to more businesses, schools, and 
homes across our province, it will also keep jobs right here in 
our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since 1987 SaskTel has invested more than $2.3 billion — I 
repeat, billion dollars, Mr. Speaker — in Saskatchewan 
infrastructure. Not every communications company invests this 
much to improve their network. Not every communications 
company spends millions of dollars to extend high-speed 
Internet and digital cellular service to rural Saskatchewan or 
rural anywhere, for that matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskTel’s mandate is clear. It’s to provide reliable, low cost, 
cutting-edge service throughout this wide open province of 
ours, Mr. Speaker. That’s SaskTel’s number one job and it’s a 
job that SaskTel does very well. 
 
There is no other telecommunications company in Canada that 
has made the commitment SaskTel has made to deploy 
high-speed Internet service in sparsely populated areas. By the 
end of this year, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel will expand its 
high-speed Internet coverage to an additional 112 communities 
around the province. This year, Mr. Speaker, more than 74 per 
cent of Saskatchewan residents in 237 communities will have 
access to SaskTel’s high-speed Internet service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every dollar SaskTel invests in its network is a 
dollar invested in Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. The 
government is proud of SaskTel. We congratulate SaskTel for 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

 

the work it has done in the past and for the work that it will 
continue to do into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate SaskTel as I know Saskatchewan 
people do as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 
able to respond to the ministerial statement on behalf of the 
official opposition. I’d like to thank the minister for providing 
us with a copy of his remarks before the proceedings began this 
afternoon. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has long held the view 
— and made it very public, mind you, Mr. Speaker — that 
when our major Crown corporations stick to their knitting, 
when they focus on their market, when they focus on the task at 
hand here at home, they have been quite successful. 
 
We’ve said this of SaskTel. We’ve congratulated SaskTel on 
the fact that, even in the face of competition from the private 
sector, they’ve been able to hang onto such a large share of the 
market. And it speaks to the success that our Crown 
corporations can enjoy when they stick to their knitting, Mr. 
Speaker — when they worry more about Alida, Saskatchewan 
as opposed to Atlanta, Georgia, Mr. Speaker; when they focus 
on Nipawin, Saskatchewan, instead of Newcastle, Australia, 
Mr. Speaker. That is the message that the minister’s statement 
sends today. 
 
I think the minister’s finally starting to see the light when he 
makes comments like he made today that SaskTel and the 
province and the Government of Saskatchewan are all much 
better served when the major Crown corporations focus on the 
needs of taxpayers in Saskatchewan instead of . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — When they focus on the concerns of their 
customers in Saskatchewan instead of potential customers in 
Nashville, Tennessee, Mr. Speaker. This is the point we have 
tried to make again and again in this Assembly — especially 
with respect to SaskTel and SaskTel’s record. Because 
SaskTel’s record in international investments under this 
government with their hand-picked CEO (chief executive 
officer) of SaskTel and the former partner of Mr. Romanow, 
under Mr. Ching’s leadership, the international investment 
program of SaskTel has been an unmitigated disaster for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list is long. Retx.com, this is the dot-com they 
invested in in Atlanta, Georgia, lost 7.5 million. They continue 
to pour millions more in. SecurTek continues to lose money, 
Mr. Speaker; Persona, a cable company, has lost on about $9.5 
million; tappedinto in Nashville, 2.4 million; Navigata across 
the western region, 2.5; Clickabid, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel’s 
attempt to compete with eBay, lost almost $2 million; Soft 
Tracks, they lost 2.1; and IQ&A, a failed bid by SaskTel to sell 
people’s personal health care information, lost about a million 
. . . beg your pardon, two point million in operating loss, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

But when SaskTel focuses on Saskatchewan, good things 
happen. And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, I’m proud to be able to make the commitment today 
— through you to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and this 
Assembly — that a Saskatchewan Party government will focus 
those Crowns on Saskatchewan, will grow the Saskatchewan 
economy, and will put a stop to the international madness that’s 
going on in the Crowns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Regional Hospital for Swift Current 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
follow my colleague talking about the Crown corporations. I’m 
not sure it’s quite as much a pleasure to follow my colleague 
across the way when he talks about Crown corporations. I 
actually thought today we might hear some very positive things 
from the member for Swift Current, without a lot of the things 
that are going on. Basically what I want to say today, Mr. 
Speaker, is that I want to make an important announcement 
about health care. 
 
This morning I had the great pleasure of travelling to Swift 
Current to make an important health care announcement from 
this government’s 2003-04 budget. I was pleased to announce 
that our government is moving ahead with plans for the new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, this is another 
example of our commitments from the Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care for a renewed health care system 
promoting greater access to quality health care in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I announced 
that we are committing an initial sum of half a million dollars 
for planning and evaluation of the regional hospital project, 
building on the work that we’ve done with the Cypress 
Regional Health Authority to ensure this hospital is a provincial 
priority. This initial investment furthers the work begun many 
years ago by my previous colleagues in government, working 
with the then three health districts of the area — Swift Current, 
Rolling Hills, and Southwest. 
 
And I especially want to mention Mr. John Penner, who spent 
his years working in this legislature to get the Crown 
corporations back into shape so that they could provide 
dividends so we could do this kind of work, the kind of work 
that would benefit his community. 
 
The present board of the newly created Cypress Regional 
Health Authority has continued the valuable work of its 
predecessors with the many communities of this region. That 
includes the city of Swift Current, but it includes many of the 
towns around, many of the rural municipalities. And we want to 
make a special point of thanking all of those people, how 
they’ve come together to support this project. 
 
Saskatchewan Health will also be there to help develop a 
functional program for the new hospital and to finalize the 
scope, cost, and design of the project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new hospital is another step in the progress 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

we are making with implementing the recommendations in our 
Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care announced by the 
Premier and I in December 2001. This recommendation was to 
build a strong network of hospitals across the province, 
improving access to care for all residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
This new hospital will meet all of the standards and deliver the 
health care services that the action plan requires in a regional 
hospital, Mr. Speaker. These include a broad range of patient 
care services including internal medicine, general surgery, 
obstetrics, gynecology, and intensive care. 
 
Our provincial budget included a $61 million investment over 
the next two years for new and upgraded health care facilities. 
Mr. Speaker, this significant investment in this year’s health 
budget allows us to continue to approve and support a number 
of new health capital projects, such as this hospital, which are 
necessary to sustain our province’s medicare system into the 
future. 
 
This new Swift Current regional hospital will not only provide 
patients with the priority health care they need in this region, 
but will also provide an improved workplace for our valued 
health care providers of the Cypress Health Region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the officials at Saskatchewan Health and I look 
forward to working closely with the Cypress Regional Health 
Authority and their communities in that whole southwest corner 
of the province to develop the functional plan for the new 
hospital, to finalize the scope, cost, and design of the project. 
Construction is expected to begin in the 2004-05 fiscal year and 
we look for completion of the hospital within three and a half 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to recognize the involvement and 
dedication of the members of the Dr. Noble Irwin Foundation 
for their support on this project as well as the Action Swift 
Current community organization and the REDA (regional 
economic development authority) and the chamber of 
commerce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is proud of being the home of 
medicare. We are proud of our continued investment in health 
care in this province. And we will continue to do more to renew 
and sustain our system of publicly funded, publicly 
administered health care. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is truly a 
pleasure to be able to stand today in the legislature and 
comment on the ministerial statement that has just been given to 
the Assembly by the Minister of Health. 
 
And I want to say at the outset, I want to thank the minister for 
providing his remarks to us in advance, and again just indicate 
what a pleasure it is to be able to just say a few words at this, at 
this time. 
 
Today is truly a very positive day for the . . . not just the city of 
Swift Current, but really the entire region of southwest 

Saskatchewan. The Action Plan for Health Care quite rightly 
identified Swift Current as a regional centre, serving an entire 
region obviously. And in order to do that, of course, Swift 
Current needs to be able to have the kind . . . needs to have a 
regional scale and quality facility. And that certainly is not the 
case currently with the facility that we have. And this 
announcement today is welcome news indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are . . . This is really a day for various 
groups and individuals in our community to be celebrated and 
congratulated and thanked for their effort in this regard. And the 
minister has mentioned some of them here this afternoon. 
 
I know of four individuals in particular who worked tirelessly to 
collect names on petitions to the point where we estimated we 
had over 6,000 names on petitions calling for a new hospital, 
signed by residents of not just the city of Swift Current but 
indeed of the entire region, of southwest Saskatchewan and 
across the province. So thank you again to Gerald and Deanna 
Thorson, Roy Burnay, and Doreen Kern for their tireless effort 
on the petition front. 
 
As the minister had said, thanks to the Dr. Noble Irwin 
Healthcare Foundation, one of the . . . just an absolute excellent 
health care fundraiser that we now have in southwest 
Saskatchewan that’s worked hard on the project. To the 
previous board members of the district, to the current ones and 
their staff, thanks needs to be given to them for their effort. To 
the municipalities, to the city of Swift Current who stepped out 
a little bit on this one, Mr. Speaker, frankly, when they said 
look we’ll be there for the local share of this funding and we’ll 
try to raise the money after to lower the exposure for residents 
in the city. And thank you to those many rural municipalities in 
the southwest who have backed the city of Swift Current and 
backed the effort for a new hospital. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, 
in all fairness, thank you to the Minister of Health and to the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I will say this, Mr. Speaker. Today’s announcement was 
about a 500 . . . The actual money in the announcement was 
about a $500,000 evaluation process which is necessary and I 
think everybody understands that’s part of the process. But I 
think what we need to do is just get that final assurance, final 
written assurance that the government is saying that its capital 
commitment is also in place, obviously if not in this fiscal then 
in the fiscal 2004-2005 because the minister has said that is the 
year that construction is expected to begin. That’s good news. 
But, but right now the money that’s solid, it looks like, is the 
half million for the planning — that’s important — but we need 
solid to be the commitment of the capital share, the 16 million 
in capital funding from the health care department. 
 
And I also want to make this other assurance, Mr. Speaker, that 
in between now and when construction begins, there may be an 
election in the province of Saskatchewan. We don’t know that 
to be the case, but there might be an election before 
construction begins. And I just want to let the Assembly know, 
and let the people of southwest Saskatchewan and my 
hometown know, that this announcement was a positive one 
today. And if this government is unable to finish it, the next 
government will. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

 

(14:30) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government today and answer written 
questions nos. 8 through 13. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 
13 have been submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 
amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a bit about 
the reason why I’m standing today in full and proud support of 
the budget that was presented by the Hon. Minister of Finance. 
Certainly I think we’re going to be very proud of the budget 
throughout history and certainly over the next upcoming year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very, very impressed with the amount of 
support that the agricultural community is getting — over $1 
billion in five years. And we think that’s money that’s well 
invested to help the agricultural community, to help our farm 
families, and to help those that are struggling throughout the 
entire province. 
 
And we in northern Saskatchewan appreciate the fact that when 
agriculture does well, we do well as well. So it’s very important 
that northern, southern, eastern, and western Saskatchewan, that 
this budget really provides a good balance. And the budget 
recognizes all of Saskatchewan people interests and certainly 
recognize that all of Saskatchewan people have needs. 
 
It’s always nice, Mr. Speaker, to also point out, as the member 
. . . the Minister of Health announced a few minutes ago, that 
there’s some good positive news with Swift Current in relation 
to some of their challenges when it comes to the whole notion 
of meeting some of the health care needs of Saskatchewan 
residents, whether they’re in southwest Saskatchewan or 
whether in southeast or the far north, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I want to do today, if I can, is put a bit of attention on 
some of the comments made by the Leader of the Opposition, 
the member from Kindersley or the member from — I’m not 
sure where he’s from, Mr. Speaker — but we . . . Rosetown. 
 
And what I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is that when this 
budget came out, Mr. Speaker, the member of the opposition — 
who many people say he’s the Leader of the Opposition — 
what does he do, Mr. Speaker? 
 

He doesn’t get up and talk about the great health care programs, 
he doesn’t talk about agricultural support, Mr. Speaker. He 
doesn’t talk about some of the great, grand plans we have in 
some of the larger centres, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t talk about 
any of the development we have in the oil and gas industry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What does he do, Mr. Speaker? That’s supposed to be the leader 
of the great opposition there. What does he do, Mr. Speaker? 
He gets up and he accuses this government of buying votes in 
the North, Mr. Speaker. This budget buys votes in the North, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me explain to that Leader of the Opposition, like why is 
he focusing his attack on northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
I come from northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in the hopes, 
in the hope that we can come to this Assembly and we can 
recognize the great work that the budget does, that the budget 
does for the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
We recognize the great work that the budget does to help the 
farm families and we respect that, Mr. Speaker. We recognize 
the work that some of the budget does when it talks about . . . in 
highway improvements throughout all of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And we recognize that in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We respect that and we say, hooray for the rest of the province, 
we’re very proud of what the budget does for you. It is good 
work and it’s good help for you. And the people, especially in 
the agricultural sector, they need and they respect and they 
certainly need that kind of recognition. And this budget 
certainly helps them out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But instead of the Leader of the Opposition getting up and 
saying this is great for the economy, this is great for the 
agricultural people, what does he do, Mr. Speaker? He 
complains about the little bit of money we’re spending in 
northern Saskatchewan. For what? For what, Mr. Speaker? For 
safe roads, Mr. Speaker. For decent health care facilities, Mr. 
Speaker. For water and sewer. 
 
And I’d like to share a point here, Mr. Speaker. When you talk 
about Stony Rapids in the far North, Mr. Speaker, we are 
pointing out today that the people of Stony Rapids have been 
fighting for years to get water and sewer, decent water and 
sewer, Mr. Speaker, where they’re able to cook with this water, 
or they’re able to serve their children with this water, and to 
make sure the water is safe, Mr. Speaker. And this government 
is spending a significant amount of money on that water and 
sewer system in northern Saskatchewan and Stony Rapids. And 
they’ve been crying for this for years. 
 
And what does the member of the . . . the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Rosetown-Biggar say? He says, 
oh you’re buying votes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you go to La Loche, Mr. Speaker, there’s hundreds of 
families that are crammed into homes that need a lot of work. 
We build new housing in northern Saskatchewan. We help La 
Loche. What does the member from Rosetown say? The Leader 
of the Opposition, the Saskatchewan Party leader, he says, oh 
you’re buying votes, you’re buying votes. 
 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of talking about helping the people of 
Turnor Lake get water and sewer, get a decent road, and get 
their water and sewer upgrades, what does the Leader of the 
Opposition . . . The Leader of the Sask Party says this NDP 
government is buying votes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What happens when we build a hospital in La Ronge, we build 
a hospital in the far North, Mr. Speaker? What does the Leader 
of the Opposition say about this budget? You’re buying votes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly we believe in 
all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We believe that La Loche, 
we believe that Stony Rapids, we believe that Sandy Bay, we 
believe that La Ronge, we believe that Black Lake — all of the 
communities of the North are part of this province and that they 
deserve equal treatment. 
 
And that’s what they always talk about — equal treatment, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s only equal if it suits them, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
equal if it doesn’t suit the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say to you today, I was total . . . in total support of the 
budget, Mr. Speaker, total support. But I was totally 
flabbergasted and quite frankly offended when the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party gets up and says, oh the NDP are buying 
votes in the North. Shame on him, Mr. Speaker, shame on him. 
 
Because in northern Saskatchewan we have families that need 
decent housing like southern Saskatchewan does. In northern 
Saskatchewan we have families that want water and sewer 
projects, Mr. Speaker, like southern Saskatchewan does, Mr. 
Speaker. In northern Saskatchewan we want safe roads to travel 
on, Mr. Speaker, like southern Saskatchewan does, Mr. 
Speaker. And in northern Saskatchewan we want decent 
hospitals, we want decent schools like southern Saskatchewan 
does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And how in the world, Mr. Speaker, can that Leader of the 
Opposition, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party get up and 
say, oh the NDP are buying votes? What kind of logic is that, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Instead of getting up and celebrating with us that there’s $1 
billion for the agricultural community, $1 billion over five 
years, Mr. Speaker, that this budget talks about, Mr. Speaker. A 
brand new hospital for Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, and tons of 
roads being fixed throughout southern Saskatchewan. He 
doesn’t mention not one bit of that, Mr. Speaker, but he gets up 
and he criticizes northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say today, and I say today, if this . . . on this side of the 
House, if we put money into highways in northern 
Saskatchewan and if we put money into schools, Mr. Speaker, 
into hospitals, into families, into protecting the communities, 
and to position the communities to be benefactors of 
Saskatchewan, if that member charges and that Leader of the 
Opposition coming along and says, you’re buying votes, well, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re guilty as sin. We’re guilty as sin in northern 
Saskatchewan, but we’re going down there and we’re helping 
out the North as we are helping out the South, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are balanced, we will respect all needs, and we will not pick 
on one region as the Leader of the Opposition did following the 

budget, Mr. Speaker. And I say to him, shame. Shame, shame, 
shame because northern Saskatchewan has every right, Mr. 
Speaker, have every right to enjoy the social and economic 
justice that people of Saskatchewan want. Well we want that 
too in northern Saskatchewan and I say shame on them, shame 
on the Saskatchewan Party, and especially shame on that 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, that gets up and talks 
about the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And I say again, and I say again, 
people of northern Saskatchewan are glad we’re helping the 
farmers. People of northern Saskatchewan are glad that we’re 
helping roads being built in southern Saskatchewan. People of 
northern Saskatchewan are glad that our economy in mining, in 
forestry, in tourism, that we’re glad that people of the South are 
coming to enjoy those benefits too, Mr. Speaker. We’re glad to 
share in the wealth of Saskatchewan. 
 
But the message is, when we talk about share, we want our 
share as well, Mr. Speaker, and this government delivers. And 
what happens? As soon as we deliver, they get up and say, oh 
they’re buying votes. they’re buying votes. Mr. Speaker, shame 
on the Leader of the Opposition and shame on the 
Saskatchewan Party, and shame on their total disrespect and 
disregard for northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Often, Mr. Speaker, I say to people 
throughout the North that we have to make sure the agricultural 
community is doing good because their benefits and their 
progress economically has some good impact on us in northern 
Saskatchewan. They understand that. 
 
And they’re saying to me, you’re our MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), you’re there to go forward and fight for 
us. And we’re going to fight for them. But we’re also going to 
fight ignorance and some silly comments when it comes to 
members of the opposite party that call down northern 
Saskatchewan and refuse to recognize northern Saskatchewan’s 
challenges. And I say again, shame on them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another matter as well, when they talk about 
the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. And he talks about, oh 
well, we shouldn’t invest — government shouldn’t invest — in 
northern Saskatchewan. This budget does. This budget does, 
Mr. Speaker. It invests in northern Saskatchewan because, as I 
mentioned, they have every right to share in the economic and 
social justice of this province called Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And when we say they shouldn’t invest, Mr. Speaker, what he’s 
saying is that the mills in Green Lake, the mills in La Ronge, 
the opportunity in forestry development throughout the North 
— they’re struggling right now but — hey you guys, we’re not 
going to invest in you; our policy is that no, government 
shouldn’t invest. So we’re not going to invest in that OSB 
(oriented strand board ) plant in Meadow Lake. That’s gone. 
Your investment portfolio is something that we wouldn’t look 
at if we’re ever elected government. 
 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

 

So not only do you have the Leader of the Opposition 
criticizing us for spending money in the North, you have 
another member saying they’re not going to invest in the North. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I remind people back home, I remind people 
back home, that several . . . about a year ago, when the Leader 
of the Opposition visited La Ronge and they asked about the 
future of Northern Affairs, and he said would it continue under 
their government, and he said likely not. 
 
So likely not that the people of the North are going to believe 
these guys, Mr. Speaker. And likely not that these guys are 
going to invest like this budget does in northern Saskatchewan. 
And likely not, they’re not going to respect northern or 
Aboriginal people when it comes to them saying very clearly 
we want to be part of the economy, we don’t want to simply be 
cheerleaders to that economy, we want to be an integral part of 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say to them, this budget says to you, the Leader of the 
Opposition and to the Saskatchewan Party, we’re not taking 
your advice. We’re not listening to your doom and gloom. We 
are not picking on any one section or any one people in this 
budget. We’re balancing all the needs of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re saying no to you; we’re not taking your advice. Mr. 
Speaker, on this side this budget believes in northern 
Saskatchewan as it does in southern Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this government will treat everybody fair, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Now I say to them and I say to the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, this budget backs up 
families, safe and secure families. And I’ve travelled many 
northern Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker, and we see 
some of the housing needs, when you have 10, 12 people 
crammed in a house, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they say they don’t believe in that. They say, oh no, no. 
The North, you’re buying votes. Don’t build them houses. 
Don’t give them a decent standard of life. Don’t give them 
equal opportunity. Oh heaven no, don’t give them investment 
dollars so they’re able to economically build themselves. No, 
no, don’t do that because if you do that, you’re buying votes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to them that this budget does not buy 
votes. This budget talks about fairness, equality, and respect, 
Mr. Speaker. It talks about safe, secure families. It talks about 
us planning well and dreaming big and working hard, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what this budget does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And I go on further, Mr. Speaker, 
about the investment. And that member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers comes from an area, Mr. Speaker, I believe around Big 
River where they’re doing quite well with forestry. 
 
But the moment we say in northern Saskatchewan, hey you 
guys in Big River, you’re doing great, we’re proud of you, but 
we in northern Saskatchewan would like to have the same 
standard of living, and he says oh no, no, no. We can’t invest in 

that. Government investment shouldn’t go there. We shouldn’t 
be doing that. We shouldn’t be investing in these forestry 
opportunities and these oil and gas opportunities. Heavens no, 
because if we do that, then the northern Saskatchewan people 
will get rich and they’ll become independent. We can’t have 
that. We can’t have that. That’s what he’s saying. 
 
So I say to him, Mr. Speaker, and to his leader, we’re not going 
to listen to you and your advice ever, Mr. Speaker. And on this 
side of the House we’ll back up the North and we’ll back up the 
entire province with this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And we will, Mr. Speaker, through one 
way or another, we will position northern people and the 
Aboriginal people to take full advantage of the resources of our 
land and we will make sure that they’re trained, that we invest 
with them. We’ll make sure that we give them quality of life. 
We’ll look forward to the great opportunity with the young 
people. We’ll look at sport development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re going to have the future wide open with this budget 
about what we’ve planned for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say to those members opposite, all your doom and gloom 
and your feigned attempts and your crocodile tears about 
northern Saskatchewan or some of the Aboriginal people in 
some of the other areas in southern Saskatchewan that are 
hurting, people in the North and people in Saskatchewan are not 
fooled one bit, Mr. Speaker. Not one bit, not for one minute, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to them today, this budget backs up northern 
Saskatchewan; it does not buy votes. This budget backs up 
southern Saskatchewan; it does not buy votes. This budget 
backs up the agricultural community; it does not buy votes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
This budget backs up all sectors of our province, our great 
province, and it does not buy votes, Mr. Speaker. And I say to 
the members opposite — your leader and your critic and all of 
your members, you stand there today . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just ask the member to make all of his 
remarks through the Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I say to 
them, you can take your ideals, Mr. Speaker . . . they can take 
their ideals, Mr. Speaker, and they can spout all they want of 
their innuendo and their doom and gloom, and they can say 
you’re buying votes and all the negative criticism that they can 
come up with, Mr. Speaker, and we are going to fend them off. 
 
And every time these guys get up, Mr. Speaker, and start 
criticizing the North, or criticizing the Aboriginal people, or 
criticizing the agriculture sector, or criticizing the cities, you 
know what we say on this side, Mr. Speaker? Shield on — just 
to repel that negative vibe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in northern Saskatchewan we believe in this great province 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

and this great province believes in northern Saskatchewan as 
well. And this province . . . and I wish they’d get it through 
their PC (Progressive Conservative) heads, Mr. Speaker, to get 
it through their PC heads that this province is not a good 
province for any of us unless it’s a good province for all of us, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, I say this to them. 
I say the North . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
I would ask the members to take their conversation behind the 
bar so that the member from Athabasca can have his say in this 
legislature as he ought to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I say to them again, Mr. Speaker, that the northern 
Saskatchewan people, as in the South, that compassion is the 
base root of all humanity. Humanity is very important when we 
start talking about fairness and equality for all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say today that on this side compassion, humanity, and 
caring for each other, that this government dares to care, Mr. 
Speaker, about the North. It dares to care about Stony Rapids, it 
dares to care about Cumberland House, it dares to care about La 
Ronge, it dares to care about the northern people, about the 
resource initiatives, Mr. Speaker — it dares to care for every 
single individual in this province. 
 
And what do these guys do, Mr. Speaker, they get up and say, 
we’re not going to invest in the North, we’re not going to invest 
in the North, and hey why don’t they turn around and why don’t 
they . . . from what I can gather, Mr. Speaker, that they’re going 
to start exporting bulk water, selling the water of Saskatchewan. 
They’re going to put a nuclear waste site in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to sell all our land 
and resources to foreign countries, Mr. Speaker. That’s their 
version . . . that’s their version of economic development. You 
sell our water, you put a nuclear power dump, and you sell all 
our land and resources to outside interests. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the North doesn’t want you; they don’t need 
you, Mr. Speaker. They want this budget, and they like this 
budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll finish with this is that northern 
Saskatchewan is going to stand up, they’re going to stand up 
proud. They’re going to say the budget was needed, more work 
is required, but we’re going to stand together with this 
government and with this budget to propel the infidels at the 
gate, Mr. Speaker, that want to come along and they want to 
destroy the hopes and dreams that northern Saskatchewan has 
for their people, for their children, and their future. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s one 
of the great ironies of the political history of our province that 
the Saskatchewan Party was born when our now Minister of 
Finance invited Bill Boyd to a meeting to discuss amalgamation 

of the Tories and the Liberals to form a new right-wing party to 
be known as the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Although I was a Liberal MLA at that time, Mr. Speaker, I was 
not invited to that meeting. However, participants at that 
meeting said that discussions broke down when the then Liberal 
leader, the now Minister of Finance, insisted he be leader of the 
new party without a leadership convention. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I look around this building, the NDP have 
done a good job of making sure that the founder of their party, 
the Hon. T.C. Douglas, is well-memorialized around this 
building. So my question of the Saskatchewan Party is: if they 
form the next government of this province, will they make sure 
that the founder of their party, the Minister of Finance, will also 
be properly honoured and remembered? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor in his last report said 
something I think that we should all listen to very carefully. He 
wrote in his report: 
 

. . . making transfers from one fund to another, and back 
again, has no effect on the Government’s overall . . . 
(fiscal) position . . . the only consequence of recording 
these transactions in the . . . (General Revenue Fund) 
financial statements is that the actual amount of the . . . 
surplus is changed to another amount chosen by the 
Government. This is worrisome because the Government 
. . . (chooses) the amount of the . . . (surplus’s) deficit as 
one of its . . . indicators. 

 
Those words, Mr. Speaker — that transferring funds from one 
fund to another and back again makes no difference to the 
government’s financial position — is something that I think the 
Minister of Finance and this government have forgotten. I think 
that came through loud and clear when the Minister of Finance 
told us the budget is balanced but we are another half billion 
dollars in the glue. And you know, how does this work? This is 
what people are saying to me. How does this work that we have 
a balanced budget but we have half a billion dollars in increased 
debt? This sounds very much like I balanced my chequing 
account but there’s new debt in . . . on my Visa credit card. 
 
Well, well the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member for Moose Jaw 
North says, well we just go to the savings account. Well that 
would certainly make imminently good sense if that savings 
account existed. But when you go to a savings account that 
doesn’t exist to balance the budget, then again things don’t 
really hang together very well. And people are having trouble 
understanding the Minister of Finance when he says, I balanced 
the budget but our debt is increasing this year by half a billion 
dollars. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the government is telling us that they’re able 
to do wonderful things with this budget thanks to the Crown 
investments. And just . . . we just heard a few minutes ago that 
Swift Current is going to get a CT scan, they’re going to get a 
new regional hospital. And according to the Minister of Health 
this wouldn’t have been possible if he hadn’t lost all that money 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

 

in Nashville and Australia. And this seems to be an example of 
the same economics — if we hadn’t lost the money in Nashville 
that we invested there, if we hadn’t lost the money on 
information services, we wouldn’t be able to build the new 
hospital. 
 
Well, that is going to be hard for people to understand. We lost 
$11 million on the Coachman Insurance Company purchase in 
Ontario. That was a purchase I opposed. I opposed that 
purchase. We were going to save jobs in Toronto was the 
rationale for making that purchase. Now we’ve lost $11 million 
in Ontario. How has that benefited the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we did invest in FarmGro, an organic 
food-processing company in this province. Now that money has 
been lost. When it went into receivership, we had $12 million 
losses after only two years. Why did FarmGro fail? It failed 
because administrative costs were too high, markets were not 
secured before the building of a $12 million plant, markets were 
not secured, and FarmGro could not support its debt. 
 
Well there are several other examples of failed investment. We 
have the example of Information Services that was going to 
automate our land titles system for $18 million. It’s now over 
100 million and counting. Mr. Speaker, the new land titles 
system was going to produce a land titles system for under $20 
million that would be cheaper, faster, more accurate, easily 
accessible, and what was most important of all, it was going to 
be so state of the art that it would result in people around the 
world beating a door . . . a pathway to our door so that they 
could purchase this new state-of-the-art technology. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, instead land titles fees have skyrocketed; 
Information Services officials have spent tens of thousands of 
dollars globe-trotting without a single sale of the technology to 
show for it; and the system continues to be problematic for 
lawyers, bankers, and real estate agents. Not one sale around the 
world. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has lost $30 million on its foreign 
investments. Here are some of the other investment losses we 
have had. Retx.com, internet information services in Atlanta, 
7.5 million in losses. Newfoundland-based Persona Inc telecom, 
9.5 million in losses. Tappedinto.com in Nashville, losses of 2.4 
million. Navigata Inc., telecom company, losses of 2.5 million. 
Clickabid, losses of 4 million. That was an attempt to beat out 
eBay. Soft Track Enterprises Ltd., software company in British 
Columbia, 2.2 million. IQ&A Partnership, health information, 
2.3 million. Channel Lake Petroleum Company, 6 million. 
Eighty million wasted in Australia and 20 million in Chile. And 
the list goes on. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, and yet the government will tell us that 
these international losses are how they are able to pay for the 
province’s infrastructure today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations have a proud record of 
building infrastructure in this province and serving this 
province, but the international and foreign investments have not 
served this province. They have simply resulted in a lot of 
losses by people who claim to understand the global financial 
situation and they simply do not. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when the new Premier was sworn in two 
years ago, his first act with great fanfare was the Department of 
Rural Revitalization. To date no one knows what this 
department does or whether it even exists. The Department of 
Rural Revitalization has become the department to devitalize 
and demoralize our rural areas. This budget has been roundly 
rejected and criticized by farm groups and farm organizations of 
all stripes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community-based organizations — those are 
the people who staff our group homes, SARCANs, sheltered 
workshops, and many other community-based organizations 
around the province — they were promised by the NDP in 1991 
that they would have wage parity with the public sector. Well, 
the hon. member from Regina Centre says they’re getting there. 
Let’s check. What’s the situation today? 
 
The situation today is that they have salaries a third to a half 
below public sector wages. And I’m told by the people who run 
those organizations that attracting and retaining staff is a serious 
problem when the same job in the health district pays as much 
as 50 per cent more. 
 
(15:00) 
 
In terms of are we closing the gap, well today’s budget gives a 
3 per cent increase to those employees. Mr. Speaker, if the 
health district employees secure an increase of greater than 3 
per cent — and history would lead us to conclude that they will; 
their increases in recent years have been well above 3 per cent 
— if the health district employees get a higher than 3 per cent 
increase, then the wage gap is not going to narrow, it in fact is 
going to widen and it’s going to become increasingly difficult 
for group homes and other such organizations to attract and 
hold staff. 
 
On another topic, Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak for a 
minute on the new Youth Criminal Justice Act that became law 
just yesterday on April 1. The new Act allows for publication of 
young offenders’ names in appropriate circumstances. It 
provides for longer incarceration for violent offences and repeat 
property offences, and it provides for more crimes to be 
transferred to adult court where offenders will receive adult 
sentences. Most important, the new Act provides for 
community-based sentences. This means strict supervision of 
youth on bail or on probation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Act, the success of the new Act will 
depend largely as to whether or not we put the proper staff in 
place and sufficient resources and staff in place so that bail or 
probation will mean something and have real teeth. 
 
What has tended to happen in the past is that probation orders 
have been made but there simply isn’t enough staff to monitor 
these probation orders to make sure they are obeyed. 
Consequently the youth is back in court with a new offence in a 
few months time and there seems nothing else to do but to put 
him in custody. If we don’t allocate the resources as a province 
to make sure that the youth will follow the terms of probation, 
then probation orders will become a joke for the youths and 
they will soon be back in court on a new offence. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to those who think that the 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

solution to all of our youth crime problems is more and more 
incarceration, that they should be very careful, very careful in 
what they demand and what they ask for. We are now being 
told by the experts, by the people who work in the system, that 
gangs such as Indian Posse are actively recruiting in youth 
detention centres. To put a rebellious teenager into the youth 
centre is to put him at risk of being recruited by some of these 
violent urban gangs that are working very hard in the detention 
centres. 
 
That is why we have to allocate more resources to 
community-based offences because otherwise when we put a 
rebellious youth who needs more structure in his life into a 
youth centre, we may in fact be making a bad situation much, 
much worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina has had a program in place for two years 
now, I believe, with impressive results. They have seen their 
rate of car theft cut in half. When Chris Axworthy was minister 
of Justice, he was on the verge of instituting a similar program 
for North Battleford and it is my hope that his successor will 
introduce it into North Battleford as soon as possible. These are 
the programs we need to move into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the health budget there is a recommendation or 
a promise of an additional $180 million in new health spending. 
Our health expenditures are nearly double the next highest item 
on our budget. People I talk to are happy about the new health 
spending. 
 
However, unfortunately they have become cynical and are 
questioning. Will the new health spending actually do 
something to reduce three-year waiting lists for hip replacement 
surgery? Will the new health spending actually mean that it no 
longer takes eight months to get an MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging)? Will the new health spending mean that our MRIs 
operate more than 40 hours a week? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a number of promises have been made 
throughout the province in the government’s health action plan, 
and specifically to North Battleford, which we are still waiting 
to see if those promises will be fulfilled. In 1996 North 
Battleford was promised a new $25 million long-term care 
nursing home. We’re still waiting. In the year 2000, we were 
promised a renal dialysis unit in North Battleford at Battlefords 
Union Hospital. We’re still waiting. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance visited North Battleford last 
Saturday and he hinted that we would now receive that renal 
dialysis unit that we were promised three years ago. I sincerely 
hope that is right and I will be very thankful and grateful if we 
do get it. But the fact is it was announced — not promised, but 
announced — three years ago. We’re still waiting and we have 
renal dialysis now in communities like Yorkton, Swift Current, 
Tisdale — all communities smaller than the Battlefords. In fact, 
the member for Yorkton recently bragged that they have 
doubled the capacity of the Yorkton Unit. 
 
So if we are finally getting the renal dialysis unit we were 
promised three years ago, that is some good news. 
 
In the year 2001, the government committed to CT 
(computerized tomography) scans in the regional hospitals. Last 

Friday the Minister of Finance said that there would be a CT 
scan installed in Swift Current where up until now they have 
had the part-time services of a mobile CT scan, and now they’re 
going to have a permanent fixed one. 
 
What happened to the commitment, Mr. Speaker, for CT scans 
in all of our regional hospitals? I hope that commitment will be 
kept but we’re still waiting. 
 
You know it has been common for this government to say they 
would like to do more but the federal government needs to 
contribute. Well now the federal government has done that. We 
have significant new federal dollars which is to go to diagnostic 
and high-tech equipment. Will it get through? 
 
Now the first time the federal government committed to new 
dollars for diagnostic equipment, most of that money 
disappeared into the ether. You will recall that in this province a 
lot of it was spent, not on high-tech and diagnostic equipment, 
but on beds, which is somewhat of an improvement over the 
NDP government of Manitoba which spent their high-tech 
money on lawnmowers. 
 
So my question is, what are we doing to make sure that this new 
budgeted health care money actually brings us up to standard in 
terms of CT scans, MRIs, the diagnostic equipment that we 
recognize has been allowed to fall behind, not only in this 
province but right across Canadian health care generally? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud of our role as the province where 
medicare was born, and I stand with my friends across the way 
in saying we do not want two-tier health care. But the fact is if 
we continue to have eight-month waits for an MRI, and 
three-year waits for a hip replacement, and two-year waits for 
cataracts, that can only result in a two-tier health care system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we had the Fyke Commission and it 
reported a few years ago on ambulance fees, that there was 
discrimination against rural people in this province on the basis 
of ambulance fees. And this is what Fyke said: 
 

Ambulance fees should not be based on distance. Rural 
(residents) . . . are . . . disadvantaged by their distance from 
. . . specialized service. It is unfair that they should . . . pay 
higher rates when transport to service is required. 

 
Well the Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services 
Association has recommended a standard ambulance fee of 
$200 across the board. Instead, Mr. Speaker, we have a 
patchwork across the province in which . . . some places 
interfacility transfers are free, other places they are not; where 
standard rates vary by hundreds of dollars; and of course, as 
Fyke points out, where rural people who have to go further for 
specialized services have to pay a high mileage rate. So it can 
run all the way for free for some people to take an ambulance to 
get specialized care to hundreds or thousands of dollars to other 
citizens. What is the government doing to address that? 
 
Recently we received a report saying that one-third of our 
ambulance inventory vehicles do not meet standard. One-third 
of them should not be on the road, Mr. Speaker. What plans 
does the government have to end that problem? 
 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

 

What plans does the government have to make sure that the 
same salaries will be available for EMTs (emergency medical 
technician), no matter what health region they work in? 
 
What plans are made to take those one-third of substandard 
ambulances off the road and bring them up to standard? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, last year Ron Dufresne, the president of 
Saskatchewan Emergency Measures said that we have been 
trying numerous times to meet with the government to develop 
a mutually acceptable go-forward plan. But he went on to say 
it’s falling on deaf ears. We want to build a plan but the 
provincial government won’t play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for the Minister of Health to sit down 
with the ambulance operators, the ambulance associations of 
this province, and end this discrimination of patients who are 
unfortunate enough to live in rural Saskatchewan. This is 
critical to and has to be the foundation of medical services to 
rural Saskatchewan in a day and age when the reality is that the 
government is closing the small rural hospitals. People must go 
further to access services and yet interfacility transfers in the 
city of Saskatoon are free; in the rural area they cost. This is 
discrimination, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses says that the budget 
fails to address the nursing shortage. We need more trained 
nurses. The Minister of Health responds that, well there is no 
point in training more nurses because they will only leave the 
province. Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the full ramifications of a 
statement like that for a moment. 
 
If the Minister of Health is right that there is no point in training 
nurses because they would leave the province, then on that 
theory we may as well shut down all training programs, all 
post-secondary education in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the president of Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association describes the budget as an insult. 
And the Premier accuses the mayors of the province of being 
greedy money-grubbers, whose only concern is the welfare of 
urban residents. Well, Mr. Speaker, when civic and provincial 
elections roll around later this year, property tax payers will 
know who to blame if their property taxes skyrocket this year. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as we know, this budget is based on a 
prediction of a 6.8 per cent growth projection. I sincerely hope 
that is true. I sincerely hope that comes to pass. Unfortunately, I 
just can’t find anyone who accepts that figure and who believes 
that it’s realistic. 
 
Unfortunately, the budget sets out no contingency plan if it is 
— as most experts agree when they look at the figures — if it is 
a deficit budget and if there is a shortfall in revenues. 
 
The Minister of Finance and the Department of Finance have 
not considered any growth projections other than 6.8 per cent. 
So where does that leave us if instead of half a billion dollars 
increased debt, we are going to have substantially higher 
increase in debt? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a budget that takes a bold, bold step into 
the future, that leads this province forward into growth and 

development, that diversifies our province, that offers 
something more than slogans and shell games and figures that 
don’t add up, and unfortunately this budget does not have that. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So I am forced, Mr. Speaker, to support the amendment to the 
motion and I will not be supporting the budget motion. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to stand today to speak this afternoon on the proposed 
budget for our province. 
 
I believe this budget shows us careful planning and 
consideration. It is in fact balanced, not only in terms of 
revenue and expenditures but also it balances the vast number 
of interests that must be taken into account to meet our 
province’s, our people’s needs. It’s a budget that dares to care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it credible? Well Paul Martin speaking 
on CKOM/CJME radio on March 31 said all that needs to be 
said. I quote: 
 

Is this estimate too rosy? Well, normally I would say yes 
but there’s one nagging problem. Saskatchewan Finance 
Ministry has always gotten it right. In fact the department 
. . . (is) remarkably accurate in its economic growth 
forecasts. 

 
He goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

When the bean counting was done, it was our finance 
department that had nailed it. 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this afternoon I want to speak on 
four themes that make up our government plan that will build 
our future — building strong and vibrant communities, helping 
self-reliant families, opportunities for youth, and a prosperous 
and competitive economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe these are the critical pieces as 
they are the fabric of our province. If our province is to be 
successful, each thread must be strong and resilient. 
 
Building strong and vibrant communities. This budget does 
support the vision of strong and vibrant communities through an 
investment of over $115 million. Saskatchewan urban, rural, 
and northern municipalities will receive $75 million in revenue 
sharing this year. That is an additional $10 million this year, 
another $10 million next year. 
 
This funding will help municipalities meet their operating and 
capital needs and to limit property tax increases. 
 
These increases are in addition to the $10 million increase last 
year. With this additional funding over the next two years, 
municipalities will have received an additional $60 million in 
revenue sharing between 2002 and 2005. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what are some of the highlights of 
this $115 million investment in Saskatchewan? They include: 
Meewasin Valley Authority in Saskatoon will receive a 10 per 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

cent increase in funding this year — and being from Saskatoon, 
I think this is a great thing; $12.8 million in grants in lieu of 
taxes to local governments where Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation owns and manages property; $2.38 
million in subsidies for transit assistance for the disabled; and 
$1 million — that’s 17 new vehicles — for people with 
disabilities to the provincial fleet. 
 
This budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also includes funding to hire 
10 additional police officers to support integrated, targeted, 
community-based approaches to reducing crime. And this is 
very important for the people of Saskatoon Idylwyld. This 
brings to over 63 new police officers that are committed to 
community policing in our communities throughout this 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk about healthy and 
self-reliant families. Through our budget, Building for the 
Future, we demonstrate unwavering commitment to a publicly 
funded and publicly administered health system. We are 
boosting health care spending by 8 per cent to a record $2.5 
billion. And I was pleased to hear some of the announcements 
over the last few days and even today with the hospital 
announcement for Swift Current. 
 
The overall health budget will increase by $184 million to help 
create a high-quality, patient-focused health care system. 
Highlights here, Mr. Speaker, include a 6 per cent increase for 
regional health authority operations; $61 million has been 
allocated for building and renovating health care facilities over 
the next two years; and $74 million to support collective 
agreements that will help to recruit and retain health 
professionals. 
 
And as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are implementing the 
24-hour telephone health advice line province-wide. And we are 
training 80 new emergency medical personnel to EMT levels 
within a three-year target of 240. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are also providing funding for 300 
first-year students at the College of Nursing, including 40 in the 
new northern nurse training program and 60 first-year students 
at the College of Medicine; $4 million will be for return-service 
training bursaries to retain and recruit health care providers; and 
$1.2 million to municipalities on a 50/50 cost-share basis for the 
West Nile mosquito control programs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are deeply committed to support 
Saskatchewan families and I am particularly excited by the 
recent announcement regarding child care. Mr. Speaker, that 
means $1.8 million for Child Care Saskatchewan which 
includes 500 new child care spaces this year with a commitment 
to achieve 1,200 new spaces over the next four years and 1 
million — $1 million — to increase child care subsidies, an 
average of $20 per month per child, effective June 1. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am also very delighted, very delighted to 
see new funding for the YWCA (Young Women’s Christian 
Association) of Saskatoon emergency crisis shelter. This is truly 
deserving of our support and I know they worked very hard last 
year to put their case forward. And I’m truly delighted to hear 
that they have received that funding. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we talk about other people and interests who 
are supporting this budget. Well I want to talk about Mr. Ron 
Bort, provincial president of the Saskatchewan Voice Of People 
With Disabilities. He issued a statement this week entitled, 
“Good News Budget for People with Disabilities.” He says, and 
I quote: 
 

The government of Saskatchewan is to be commended for 
its commitment to advancing the full citizenship of people 
with disabilities in Saskatchewan. 

 
He goes on to cite the following as examples of the good news 
for people living with disabilities, in our budget: $1.85 million 
in new funding to enhance individualized employment supports 
for persons with disabilities to move from social assistance to 
employment; and $715,000 to replace 12 paratransit vehicles in 
our province. Mr. Speaker, that’s good news. 
 
And we are also, Mr. Speaker, providing an additional $1 
million in social assistance program for funding for persons 
with disability. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this seems like . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — It is good news. Now, Mr. Speaker, I am also 
delighted by these announcements: the support for 440 
additional families through Kids First program, a program to 
help families build independence and ensure their children get 
the best possible start in life. Funding for this program 
increased by 45 per cent this year to $13 million. 
 
And I’m excited about this one: 400 new affordable housing 
units will be constructed this year through the centenary 
affordable housing program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Now there will be . . . 1,400 new units will be 
added over the next four years for an investment of 
approximately 40 million, including contributions from the 
federal and municipal governments. And I can’t wait for 
announcements in the following short time for specific projects 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m looking forward to these 
announcements. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about opportunities for youth 
because I’m very happy about the emphasis this budget gives to 
needs of youth in our province. Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Centre 
is the replacement for Saskatoon Idylwyld, and I believe it is 
perhaps one of the youngest ridings in our province of 
Saskatchewan. Not only do many students from SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
Kelsey Campus and the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 
live in Centre, and young families, but Centre is also home to 
over 3,600 high school students, Mr. Speaker — 3,600 high 
school students. I don’t know of any other riding that has that 
many high school students in it. So I’m watching carefully for 
opportunities for youth. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the budget 2003-04, Building for the Future, 
truly does provide opportunities for youth here in our province. 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

 

It provides educational workplace opportunities, leadership and 
healthy living opportunities as well. Mr. Speaker, this is truly 
building for the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this budget provides a 5.2 per cent increase 
for education and skills training. That’s a total investment of 
almost $1.2 billion this year. This reinforces the government’s 
commitment to ensure that Saskatchewan people can access the 
educational opportunities they need to succeed here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also provides $5 million for CIF (Community 
Initiatives Fund) funding over the next four years to increase 
the physical activity levels of Saskatchewan youth — and this is 
very important — and another $5.5 million over four years to 
increase participation and access to quality culture, recreation, 
sport, and leadership programs for Aboriginal people. An 
important part of quality life here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Now, Mr. Speaker, our post-secondary 
institutions will receive a 3.3 per cent operating grant increase 
to help them provide a wide variety of high-quality education 
and training opportunities for more than 80,000 students here in 
our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as well, almost 17,000 post-secondary 
students will get relief through approximately $66 million in 
student loan assistance. Over half of this amount will be 
provided as bursaries and grants, ensuring that Saskatchewan 
student financial assistance program continues to be one of the 
most generous here in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, scholarship exemptions will be tripled from $600 
to $1,800 and in-study earning exemptions will increase from 
$600 to $1,700. Scholarship exemptions will allow students to 
retain more of their income. And this is very important. 
 
Provincial training allowance recipients will also benefit from a 
$1.5 million increase for transportation and utility allowances. 
 
And this year, Mr. Speaker, 700 students will have summer and 
part-time jobs through the Centennial Summer Student 
Employment Program. The government pays 75 per cent of this 
program, of their salaries, to a maximum of $3,500. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know if you’ve seen the posters, but I think 
they’re wonderful; take this job and love it says it all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Now, Mr. Speaker, an increase of $510 million 
this year will help school divisions provide our young people 
with programs and services they need to succeed. This 
additional investment in our K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) 
educational systems will include funding for 100 per cent of the 
recently negotiated teacher salary increases. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is important in my riding of Saskatoon 
Idylwyld. Community schools expansion will continue with 10 
new community schools and up to 15 new pre-kindergarten 
programs. This is important stuff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year the government will invest $76 million in 

new schools, upgrades and enhancements to schools and 
post-secondary institutions across the province. This is good 
news. This is building for the future. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about new technologies that are 
shaping the future of our education system, and almost $12 
million will be invested in on-line learning resources and 
high-speed Internet across . . . or access this year. 
 
And public libraries will receive . . . (inaudible) . . . 3 per cent 
increase to provide learning and recreational opportunities for 
children, youth, and adults. And, Mr. Speaker, an additional 
$250,000 increase in public library grants will also help to 
improve library services for Aboriginal people. 
 
Now in terms of building a prosperous and a competitive 
economy, I think we’re doing very well here, Mr. Speaker. Last 
week I rose in the House to congratulate the government on its 
Throne Speech that recognizes the importance of a strong 
economy. And we know, Mr. Speaker, our province is a great 
place to do business. The KPMG “Competitive Alternatives” 
site confirmed this in January 2002. Of the nine countries 
surveyed, Canada was the most competitive. And among all 
major cities in the North American Midwest, Saskatoon ranked 
second. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s our city. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — That’s right, that’s our city. Our four largest 
cities — Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw — 
all ranked better than the Canadian average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget, the 2003-04 budget, Building for the 
Future, continues the government’s plan to build a prosperous 
and competitive economy through investments in business, 
research, and small business. 
 
The energy sector is a major contributor to building our 
economy. Changes introduced last fall to oil and gas royalties 
and taxes ensure Saskatchewan remains competitive with other 
jurisdictions. This year the government will be providing $3.3 
million for the ethanol fuel tax rebate. 
 
An investment in the mineral exploration is an investment in the 
future. To further enhance the mineral exploration, the 
government will continue to provide $1.6 million for grants to 
encourage further exploration and geographical mapping of 
mineral deposits in this province. Response to last fall’s mineral 
incentives have been very positive. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mineral exploration expenditures were at $23 million in 
2001-2002, and they’re expected to increase by approximately 
30 per cent to $30 million in 2002-2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to supporting 
research and development in this province. Saskatchewan will 
match federal research funding with $8 million in its Innovation 
and Science Fund to provide support for Saskatchewan 
universities, colleges, and research institutes. 
 
Over the last three years more than $33 million has been 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

provided through this fund for 64 projects at the province’s two 
universities. This research funding, in addition to more than $26 
million invested to date . . . and the $173 million Canadian 
Light Source synchrotron is expected to be in operation in 
January 2004 and we’re all looking forward to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke last week about tourism — so important in 
Saskatchewan and in Saskatoon. Spending in this province 
increased last year and expected to increase again this year. And 
to further encourage tourism, Tourism Saskatchewan funding 
will increase from $6.9 million to over $7.1 million this year. 
 
And I want to say my own congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to the 
construction of a new Saskatchewan Forest Centre in Prince 
Albert which will begin this year. The province will be 
providing $2.5 million towards a $12.7 million facility which 
will showcase Saskatchewan’s wood products and new 
technologies and ensure that the industry has access to the best 
market research and growth opportunities from across Canada 
and around the world. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks with a bit of 
a story here. You know, I have a son in grade 12 at Bedford and 
sometimes I get in the car and I listen to whatever he has in his 
CD (compact disc) player. And so I was telling him this week 
how much I enjoy his music because it’s very positive and it’s 
upbeat, and I come into the House listening to his music and I 
feel positive. And my speech has been positive because I think 
that’s what we need to do here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote Reel Big Fish here — the band 
Reel Big Fish — and they say: 
 

We got a real good thing going and I don’t want to see it 
end. 

 
And if the naysayers, the cranks on the other side, get a hold of 
government, that will be it. I’ll say it again. We got a real good 
thing going here, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t want to see it end, 
and if they get a hold of it, it will crash to the floor. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, this budget is balanced. It comes from a vision 
that includes all people of Saskatchewan — the northerners, the 
southerners, the farmers, the people who live in the cities. This 
budget is balanced. 
 
It’s built on the idea that we have people here in Saskatchewan 
that are dreaming big, planning well, and working hard. And 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, we are building a future here in 
Saskatchewan, and this budget gives us the tools. 
 
I will be voting in favour of the budget and against the 
amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
an honour to stand today to speak to the budget of 2003. And 
before I begin, I want to welcome the new members to the 
Assembly, the member from Saskatoon Eastview and the 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the third budget of . . . underneath the 

leadership of our unelected Premier. And quite frankly it’s the 
third budgeted deficit budgets and it’s the third year that you 
can see mismanagement. We’ve seen never-ending 
investigations and court cases and we’ve seen a government 
that no longer believes that it has to be responsible or 
accountable to the citizens of this province. 
 
The NDP government, Mr. Speaker, have repeatedly said that 
they have balanced budgets, but the Provincial Auditor knows 
differently, Mr. Speaker. And the members on this side of the 
House know differently, Mr. Speaker. And more importantly, 
the people of Saskatchewan know differently, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The smoke and mirrors of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is 
growing a little thin and the people of Saskatchewan now know 
that it is not a fund. It does not contain any money and it does 
not collect interest. It’s a line of credit, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
liability and, simply put, it is a debt. 
 
I would like to focus most of what I would like to say today on 
the agriculture and rural revitalization budget. And with that I 
would like to begin with page 17 of the budget, which is the 
schedule of debt. 
 
And if we look beyond the astounding fact that the debt is 
forecast to be greater now, at $2.2 billion, than it was in 1991 
when it was 12.1 billion . . . I’m sorry, I’ll correct that, Mr. 
Speaker. It’ll be greater now at $12.2 billion than it was in 1991 
when it was 12.1 billion. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And if we look 
deeper than the obvious question of how our unelected Premier 
can possibly have lost control so badly that he is accumulating a 
debt in our province of about $1 million a day, we’re faced with 
the question of where is the 500 million debt that the Minister 
of Agriculture and the Minister of Finance, both, have kept 
using as an excuse as to why the government are having . . . or 
its fiscal difficulties. 
 
Where is the $500 million debt that they blame on the 
agriculture producers of this province for their crop insurance 
claims? They blame the producers and they blame the drought. 
And they say that they’ve run us down $500 million. Where is 
it, Mr. Speaker? When we look at the schedule of debt, in the 
column, the forecast of 2003, it lists crop insurance debt of 
$110 million. And in the estimated 2004, it lists the crop 
insurance debt at a $102 million. Where in that whole, entire 
page, Mr. Speaker, does it show a $500 million debt due to crop 
insurance claims? 
 
And if it’s not $500 million, Mr. Speaker, why are the NDP 
continually using that as an excuse as to why they’re facing 
financial difficulties? Why are they continually telling the 
people of this province that that’s the reason why they’re short 
of money whenever they’re asked if they could contribute to 
something? 
 
I shall be looking forward to being able to question the minister 
on that particular question later in the session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP commitment to agriculture and rural 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

 

revitalization is quite accurately summed up on their provincial 
summary card, which is this card, Mr. Speaker. And on this 
card, agriculture is not on there once, Mr. Speaker. That’s their 
commitment to agriculture. 
 
They do use a tactic that has been well used and well criticized 
— broadly criticized quite frankly — that the federal 
government uses, and it’s the tactic of adding up a number of 
years of spending on agriculture and putting it all together and 
then bragging about that sum of money. 
 
They state that they will spend $1 billion over five years to 
support farmers. And as I said, the federal government, that’s 
their tactic, that’s how they always brag about how they support 
the farmers of the country. And now the province has resorted 
to that, adding five years together. And it is the deceitful way of 
making the dollars seem larger than they actually are, if you roll 
them together. It doesn’t break it down in any way. It doesn’t 
explain it or substantiate the number in any way, and it doesn’t 
explain how much of that billion dollars is actually premiums 
and contributions made by the producers themselves. But it 
sounds good on that little cue card and it is, quite frankly, the 
only mention of agriculture or farmers on it. 
 
The actual fact is — and it doesn’t matter how this minister 
tries to spin it — they have slashed the agriculture budget this 
year by $40 million. And it’s close to the same amount that they 
slashed the agriculture budget last year. So that it’s very 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that after two years of a record 
drought in our province and after two years of the producers 
having to tighten their belts to refinance, to restructure their 
operations, and in many cases the producers have had to farm 
their equity, this is what the NDP government does. 
 
It turns their back on the producers and in doing so they’re also 
turning their backs on rural businesses. They’re turning their 
backs on agriculture industrial workers. They’re turning their 
backs on small manufacturers, rural communities, and they’ve 
turned their backs on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1992 the agriculture budget was $1.183 billion; 
517 million of that came directly from the provincial coffers. 
And do you know what it is this year, Mr. Speaker? It’s 251 
million and they’re bragging about it. It’s half of what it was 10 
years ago and that is unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a slashed budget at a time when the farm families are 
facing exorbitant crop insurance premium hikes for the second 
year in a row — premium hikes with slashed coverage where 
they don’t have spot loss hail; they will not have variable price 
options. 
 
This is at a time when they’re facing increased utility rates. This 
is at a time when they are . . . no longer have the opportunity to 
take advantage of the property tax rebate that the government 
implemented a couple of years ago — and then took away again 
— and that acknowledged that farmland is unfairly taxed for 
education. This is at a time when during a drought they cut the 
crop insurance actual fieldworkers, when assessing the crops in 
a timely manner was particularly critical. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, has been two years of significant cuts to the 
budget. Two years of cuts to programs and services to the 

producers of the province when input costs are rising. And there 
is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, this is two years too late for this NDP 
government to ever hope of winning a constituency in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at this year’s budget and last year’s 
budget as well, you have to wonder about our Agriculture 
minister. You know he’s been very preoccupied lately by, you 
know, by being able to stand up and say what I do or do not 
know about agriculture. 
 
He even got his staff to write a clever little member statement to 
be read by the NDP agriculture expert from Wascana Plains — 
Regina Wascana Plains. And, you know, one must wonder if 
the minister is feeling a little threatened that he has to resort to 
these tactics instead of answering any of his questions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one must really, really, wonder when they 
look at this budget about the effectiveness of this Agriculture 
minister in his own cabinet. He is the Minister of Agriculture 
and furthermore he’s the Deputy Premier of the province. He 
should be, quite frankly, a powerful man. And yet it’s his 
budget that keeps taking a beating every time they go and put a 
budget together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it looks like he’s just plain weak. He’s a weak minister, he’s 
a weak deputy prime . . . or premier, and he’s under the 
leadership of a weak Premier. We’ve always suspected he’s 
weak at the federal table, when he finally decides he’s going to 
get to the federal table, Mr. Speaker. And now it’s become 
more than apparent that he’s equally weak at his own cabinet 
table. 
 
He can prattle on and on about all the inadequacies that he 
believes I have, but he is the Minister of Agriculture and he has 
some explaining to do in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the department cuts have come in three main 
areas: there’s been cuts in research and technology, policy and 
planning, farm stability and adaptations. Cuts in any of these 
areas are cause for concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are the leaders in this province of research and technology 
and I believe it’s very, very important to our province. I believe 
we can expand even further in the future in these areas. And yet 
this is where our government has chosen to pull their support. I 
will be very interested to know why. I would be very interested 
to ask the minister why that’s an area that he chose to make 
cuts. 
 
The NDP have given a lot of lip service to value-added, 
increased food processing and yet their real intentions are 
demonstrated quite nicely when they pull the funding from the 
programs that will help agribusinesses grow in our province. 
 
The most alarming and the most substantial cut in the 
agriculture budget is in the category of stability and adaptation. 
And I’m sure the minister will be more than happy to correct 
me if I’m wrong, but I’m sure that is where the funding for any 
federal-provincial safety nets fall. The budget cut from $102.9 
million to 78.2 million, Mr. Speaker. That entry raises the most 
questions of what they’re going to be able to provide for any 
programs under the agriculture policy framework. 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

The agriculture policy framework, Mr. Speaker, has been 
shrouded now for some time with a lot of mystery, a lot of 
misinformation, and many, many, many unanswered questions. 
It has been the position of the Saskatchewan Party to sign the 
original agreement, Mr. Speaker. And that has been a very 
controversial position to take. There are some agriculture 
groups that were in agreement with that position and some that 
were against it. But in order to explain why we had taken that 
position, I think we need to answer the question of, what were 
we being asked to sign? 
 
And I’ve read the agreement quite thoroughly and it is a fairly 
extensive and ambitious set of goals and principles by which to 
design a future program. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The minister told the producers that it was a blank cheque when 
in fact the only dollar commitment under the initial agreement 
for the risk management sector is the $1.1 billion by the federal 
government. There is no designation as to how much money 
will be allocated to each of the provinces. That is to be decided 
later under negotiations with provinces. There is no 
commitment as to the cost-shared federal-provincial split. That 
too was to be negotiated at the table later with the provinces. 
The minister told the producers that once we signed we’d be 
locked in for five years, when in fact no risk management 
program goes into place until another agreement, the agreement 
of implementation, is signed. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting . . . And I’ll read right 
from the agreement. In Part One, “General Components of the 
Framework Agreement,” clause 11, “Withdrawal From 
Framework Agreement”: 
 

11.1 Subject to clause 11.2, any Party may withdraw from 
the Framework Agreement effective at the end of a fiscal 
year by giving notice in writing before the beginning of that 
fiscal year. All commitments undertaken by the Parties 
under the Framework Agreement will be honoured to the 
end of that fiscal year. 

 
And yet our Agriculture minister has told everyone in the 
province that once we’re signed, we’re tied in for five years; we 
have no choice. But in . . . but maybe he hasn’t read the entire 
agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So why does the Saskatchewan Party think that we should have 
signed the initial agreement, the agreement of intent, the 
agreement in principle? Well again, Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to use a few quotes. 
 
On July 23, 2002, Mr. Vanclief, our federal Minister of 
Agriculture, said, and I quote: 
 

Signing the APF doesn’t cost you a penny, not a penny. 
(Not signing on to the APF but . . . sorry, Mr. Speaker.) But 
signing onto the APF gets you to the table so that you can 
have a discussion about the implementation in your 
province. It certainly has a financial implication for the 
province. We haven’t even talked about provincial 
allocation of the APF money. I would think Saskatchewan 
would want to be there to talk about (the) allocation. I don’t 

think it wants the other seven provinces to do the carving 
up. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on September 6, 2002, our own minister 
acknowledged that without signing he was not going to be at the 
table. He said, and I quote: 
 

I’m probably 95% convinced I will now be signing the 
agreement. I’m being encouraged to sign it now so that we 
can be at the table full time. 

 
However he chose not to. 
 
September 12, 2002, Simon Kennedy, who happens to be the 
director general of the policy planning and the integration in 
Agriculture said, and I quote: 
 

The whole issue of the allocation of funds is something that 
will be developed in the implementation negotiation. There 
is no formula yet, so we cannot tell Saskatchewan what its 
share will be. 
 

October 9, Donald Boulanger said, who is a spokesperson for 
Mr. Vanclief: 
 

Nothing has been decided on safety nets and risk 
management will be designed with the provinces. That’s 
why it’s important for (the) provinces to be at the table. 
 

On October 24, Mr. Vanclief said: 
 

When provinces sign on to the APF the bilateral 
implementing discussions (will) take place between the 
federal and provincial government. That’s the process 
(Serby has) known from the start . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why the Saskatchewan Party believes that 
we should be at the table for the designing stage. 
 
The NDP government has always refused to sign onto the 
designing stage. We need not go back any farther than when 
Mr. Upshall was the minister of Agriculture and there was an 
agreement to be signed, and there was going to be a safety net 
program designed for all of Canada. Mr. Upshall chose not to 
be part of the designing process and he abstained from being at 
the table. 
 
However when it came time for implementation then he did 
sign, and that’s how we ended up with AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance). We ended up with AIDA that was 
bureaucratically and eastern driven and designed. 
 
Then we can look at the following program that came after 
AIDA. Again a different minister, Mr. Lingenfelter, was asked 
to be a part of the designing process. He chose not to sign; he 
did not participate until later in the game. Then when it came 
time to be implemented he did sign, and that’s how we ended 
up with CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program). 
 
And here we are again, Mr. Speaker, down the same road 
without signing while it’s being designed. 
 
Do I think that there will be adequate funding for the 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

 

components of the APF (agricultural policy framework)? No. I 
have serious doubts that there won’t be adequate funding. Do I 
think that we still need to lobby the federal government for 
trade injury compensation program? Yes, I do think we still 
need to do that. 
 
Do I think the 60/40 federal/provincial funding split is fair to 
Saskatchewan? No, I don’t. I don’t think that is fair at all, Mr. 
Speaker. Do I agree with Ottawa’s process for establishing 
these agreements? I don’t agree with that either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am not so naive to believe that being at the table will be the 
answer to all our prayers, but I have serious concerns that many 
of the components of the APF . . . But let’s make the best of 
what the federal government has put on the table while still 
lobbying for the other issues that are fundamental to the 
sustainability of our agriculture in our province. Let’s be a 
strong voice in Ottawa while these programs are being 
designed, instead of being one that’s simply ignored back here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve missed the boat of the design, and now 
Ottawa’s attempting to strong-arm the provinces into signing 
the implementation agreement. Some of the provinces — for 
example, Ontario, Quebec, and PEI (Prince Edward Island) — 
are lobbying for the federal government to extend the existing 
programs for one more year before implementation because 
they do not believe that this program is adequately funded or 
designed. 
 
Mr. Hillstrom made a motion to the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture on March 20, and that motion stated: 
 

That this committee formally requests that the Minister of 
Agriculture delay the implementation of the business risk 
management pillar of the agriculture policy framework for 
one year. 

 
Our minister has implied that he doesn’t think that should 
happen. He has implied that he thinks that we should sign the 
implementation right away. And I have to ask why? Why is he 
so reluctant to sign the agreement when he could be a part of 
the designing of the program? And why does he seem hasty in 
signing the agreement when we’re stuck with the program? 
 
Can this Minister of Agriculture tell us what advantage there is 
to using production margins instead of gross margins? 
 
Mr. Vanclief talks that the new program will have deeper 
coverage, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister explain to the 
producers of this province how that is so? 
 
The last proposal I’ve seen suggests that the producers will 
have to pay out 26 per cent upfront for the coverage that they 
will receive. Can the Minister of Agriculture explain how that is 
possibly affordable at any time to the producers of this 
province, let alone after two years of drought? 
 
Can the minister tell us today how the new programs are linked 
to crop insurance, Mr. Speaker? Will a claim from one program 
offset a payment from the other? So basically the producers of 
the province may be faced, Mr. Speaker, with paying two 
premiums for the same coverage. 

And if he cannot give us a straight answer on any of these 
questions, then why is he not actively and vocally joining the 
other provinces in lobbying for the federal government for a 
one-year extension of existing programs so that this new 
program can be designed properly? 
 
They’re calling it new NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) but quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t look 
anything like what NISA looked like. It appears to start with not 
enough. It has the potential to go to nothing. And then it’s 
designed to keep the producers of the province at that level 
forever. 
 
Will the minister commit to doing an independent analysis of 
the program using actual Saskatchewan farm family scenarios? 
Why won’t he commit to that? And let’s actually run some farm 
family scenarios through this program and see what the 
outcome will be and then we have a better idea of what it is that 
they want us to implement. 
 
Or is the real reason, Mr. Speaker — and I have to wonder — is 
the real reason why this minister is staying so quiet because he 
knows this program’s not going to work in Saskatchewan? He 
knows that very few of the producers in this province are going 
to qualify and that’s why, Mr. Speaker, he budgeted a measly 
$18 million for the APF in this year’s budget, because he knows 
it’s not going to cost the province a whole heck of a lot of 
money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the producers of this province basically only want 
three things from their Agriculture minister. They want a 
minister that will try to understand their issues. They want a 
minister that will do his best to address those issues. And they 
want a minister, Mr. Speaker, that will give them some straight 
answers. And quite frankly, they are not getting any of those 
from this Agriculture minister who has not given them any 
explanation or straight answers on what’s happening in 
agriculture today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget abandons rural Saskatchewan and any 
vision that it might have had for rural revitalization. 
 
It does have one increase, Mr. Speaker, and that increase, quite 
frankly, is in increasing the department staff by 20 more people. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment 
to the budget and I will not be supporting the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is the first time that I’ve been given an 
opportunity to speak to our colleagues in the Legislative 
Assembly. As you know, not all of us get to speak on the 
Throne Speech and the budget speech, so I really appreciate my 
next 20 minutes. 
 
The first thing I want to do is congratulate the new member 
from Battleford-Cut Knife on his election to this Assembly. I 
can already tell he’s going to enjoy his time here. In the thrust 
and parry of debate, I’ve noticed that the member has a good 
sense of humour and humour will serve him well in the months 
to come. 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

The second thing I want to do is congratulate our new member 
from Saskatoon Fairview on his election to the Legislative 
Assembly. The member has been a strong member of the trade 
union movement in this province, particularly the Canadian 
Union of Public Employees. He has represented his members 
well at the bargaining table and, as I understand, he got to know 
the member from Battleford-Cut Knife during negotiations for 
the town of Wilkie. So I’m sure that they will enjoy themselves 
as they come to know all of the various procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The second thing I want to do is to thank the member for 
Cumberland for his sixteen and a half years of service to our 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — The member from Cumberland and myself 
came into this House in December 1986 as brand new members, 
and the first thing that we had to do when we came into this 
House was to stand in this Assembly and oppose a unilateral 
rule change by the then Devine government. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I think there were 16 new members of the Assembly, and we 
were on that side of the House, and we all had to stand up 
without notes and talk about what a unilateral rule change 
would mean in terms of democracy. 
 
Well over those sixteen and a half years the member has served 
his constituents with distinction, and he has brought great pride 
to the North because he was the first Aboriginal person to be 
appointed to executive government, or Executive Council, by 
any leader or any premier in the history of our province. 
 
I do note that over the years, Mr. Speaker, the member has had 
to deal with some conditions that I don’t find all that acceptable 
in terms of how there have been members that have treated him 
on a personal basis. And I find that regrettable, that when the 
member from the North, for Cumberland, and sometimes the 
member from Athabasca, have stood in this Assembly, I think 
that they have been treated somewhat differently than the rest of 
us. And I think that that needs to be acknowledged today. 
 
And a good example of that would be when Mr. Berntson got 
into his criminal difficulties and when he was subpoenaing all 
of the various records of members of the legislature in terms of 
their constituency allowances, the only member that he named 
was the member from Cumberland, an Aboriginal member. He 
did not name the member from Saskatoon Nutana, or 
Wakamow, or Moose Jaw North, or Carlton. He only named 
one member and that really does say something about the tone 
that we have seen on some occasions in this House. 
 
And I have listened with great interest on some of the remarks 
made by the members of the opposition when it comes to my 
colleague from Cumberland. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And I do think the one thing we need to remind ourselves of, 
that when we speak of each other, we need to be respectful in 
terms of how we speak of each other and we need to 
acknowledge that sometimes when we speak it may sound 
somewhat racist. And there have been occasions during this 

session of the legislature where I have listened very carefully to 
what some members have said and I have been concerned about 
the tone and the nuance of those comments. And I think we 
need to be mindful of that. 
 
And I hear the members over there chirping. And one of the 
things that I’ve learned is that sometimes when people yell like 
that, when they yell like that, you’ve hit a nerve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third thing I want to talk about, the third thing 
I want to talk about, is the war in Iraq. And I also listened to the 
members opposite and their comments on the war in Iraq. 
 
And on the day that the Premier of the province talked about the 
need and the need to support the United Nations and the support 
for the Canadian government’s decision, I noted with interest 
that the Leader of the Opposition was silent when the press 
asked him his opinion. He didn’t really have an opinion on the 
war in Iraq. 
 
But I have noted that his members opposite on many occasions 
during the Throne Speech came out full square against the 
Prime Minister’s decision and in favour of the United States of 
America’s decision to enter into the country of Iraq. 
 
And the one thing I have also noted while listening carefully to 
the members opposite is that the one thing they need to 
understand is that we do have these things called international 
law. And under international law and treaties and covenants, no 
state can attack another state unless they have been attacked. 
That’s point number one. 
 
Point number two. To make a unilateral decision to attack 
another state when you have not been attacked, you need to 
have the confirmation of the United Nations. It’s called 
international law. 
 
And what I would say to the members opposite that . . . What I 
would say to the members opposite, that if they want to govern, 
if they want to govern, they need to think about this notion of 
law and following the law. And on this occasion they have not 
followed international treaties, international covenants, 
international laws in their non-support for the Prime Minister of 
Canada. 
 
And I am proud to say that the New Democratic Party of 
Canada and the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan 
supports the notion of the United Nations and therefore we 
support the Prime Minister’s action not to take our troops into 
Iraq in support of the United Nations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the fourth thing I want to do is I 
want to thank my constituents in Saskatoon Nutana for the 
support that they have shown over the last year. And I’m 
particularly pleased, Mr. Speaker, a magazine in our city called 
Planet S has just asked the readers of Saskatoon who is the best 
when it comes to the best bike shop, the best snowboard shop, 
the best restaurant, and the best city councillor, and so on and 
so forth, and I’m extremely delighted that many of the 
businesses in my constituency have been recognized as the best 
when it comes to providing services, retail services, and goods 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

 

and services to the people in our city. 
 
And I want to congratulate all of the people and all of the 
businesses that have been recognized as the readers’ choice in 
the city of Saskatoon when they have businesses in our 
constituency, they live in our constituency, and they work in 
our constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, now I want to talk about 
the budget. And I listened with great interest on the day of the 
budget when the Minister of Finance indicated in his budget 
that the real economic growth rate that was going to occur in 
this fiscal year was 6.8 per cent. And I noticed that it was clear 
to me that the members opposite had had an embargoed copy of 
the budget and that they had their response orchestrated when 
they laughed with great glee when the minister used this 
number. 
 
And so I thought in fairness to the Department of Finance, I 
should ask them to provide a little information in terms of when 
they have been right on their economic forecasts and when they 
have been wrong. And what I want to tell the members opposite 
. . . And I want to put these numbers into the record because 
they’re important. Let me say this. In 1992 the actual economic 
growth rate, the real GDP, was minus 4.5. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not according to Doug Elliott. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And in . . .These are Department of Finance 
numbers. In 1993 the budget forecast — if the members want to 
listen — the budget forecast that was put into the blue book was 
a 2.8 per cent increase. In actual fact the economic growth rate 
was 5.7. 
 
In 1994, Finance projected our economic growth rate would be 
2; actual fact, 3.7. 
 
In 1995, they were dead on. Their budget forecast was 1.8; 
actual, 1.9. 
 
1996, their budget forecast was 2.6; actual, 3.2. 
 
1997, their economic budget forecast was 1.8; actual, 5.7. 
 
In 1998, 2.7; actual, 3.7. 
 
1999, they projected a budget forecast of 2; actual, point one. 
 
2000, the projected budget forecast, 2.4; actual, 2.9. 
 
In 2001, budget forecast, 2.2; actual, minus 1.3. 
 
2002, actual, 1.4; budget forecast . . . or minus 1.4; budget 
forecast; 1.5. 
 
My point is that in seven out of ten years the Department of 
Finance has been dead on or low in terms of real GDP, and 
three years they’ve been off anywhere from 1.9 per cent to 2.9. 
 
Now what I will also want to do in terms of making the point, 
the forecast in 1993 was below the actual due to . . . and it was 

due to an above-average crop production. The forecast in 1994 
was below the actual because of strong growth in oil 
production. The forecast in 1997 was below the actual due to 
strong growth in employment and oil production. In the forecast 
in 1999, which was one year they were off dramatically by 1.9 
per cent, the actual was due to a decline in oil production. And 
we expect oil production to be up this year because of changes 
in our royalty structure. In the forecast in 2001 and ’02, the 
actual was off due to drought. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know, we know from soil . . . soil 
conditions, soil conditions in this province that we expect to 
return to normal crop production. And if we do, Mr. Speaker, if 
we do, we anticipate a real GDP — and this is projected — of 
6.8 per cent. 
 
Now when you think about what this province has undergone in 
the last two years in terms of drought, it is absolutely dramatic 
that our economic growth rate has been as small as it has been, 
given the dramatic climate changes and what has happened on 
farm. And we know last summer, Mr. Speaker, we know last 
summer that the crop was essentially written off. So people 
weren’t buying herbicides, chemicals, and so on because it was 
useless to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Nesbitt Burns, which is a financial house in 
this country, has indicated in their economic research that they 
believe — they believe — we’re going to hit our targets. 
 
And what I find most interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that they say 
provincial finances across the country are under pressure from 
rising health costs. And we have known this for some time, Mr. 
Speaker. Health costs began to rise in 1999 and since ’99 
you’ve seen some fairly dramatic increases in health spending, 
not only in this province but across the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well we know that there will be significant 
increases in spending for education. 
 
But if you look, according to Nesbitt Burns, our overall 
spending will actually decline by 2.9 per cent with the 
exception in health and education. And they say that our total 
operating expenditures are planned to rise by $186 million in 
real terms or 3.2 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the other important thing for the 
public to understand about this budget is that, in this budget 
year, the two lower personal tax brackets are dropping by a 
quarter of a percentage point, while the top tax bracket is falling 
by point five percentage points to 15 per cent. And on the 
business tax side, the capital tax exemption will be increased. 
As well the small-business rate will be reduced from 6 per cent 
to 5.5 per cent in 2004 and 5 per cent in 2005. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened carefully to what some of the 
members have said and it’s a bit of a contradiction. We have the 
member from Watrous complaining about what happened in the 
agriculture budget. And no doubt other critics will get up, stand 
up in this session of the legislature and complain about what 
happened in their particular budget area that they’re the critic 
for. And no doubt they won’t be saying spend less. They will be 
saying spend more. 
 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

And the question about governing is, where do you spend the 
money and how do you spend the money. You have to look at 
what your estimated revenues are and what your estimated 
expenses are and then you have to put together a budget. 
 
And there’s a couple of things that we know in this province. 
We know that our citizens want access to health services and in 
order to have access to those health services, we have to deal 
with the health budget. 
 
We know that our citizens want access to education for their 
children and their grandchildren. And we have to deal with 
education spending. 
 
We know that we’ve made a three-year commitment or $900 
million a year for increased highway spending. And this budget 
fulfills that commitment, Mr. Speaker, and we’re pleased about 
that. 
 
I think the thing that pleases me the most about this budget is 
that from a health point of view, we’re continuing to deal with 
water and sewer issues in northern Saskatchewan. And one of 
the things, the best things that we can do for the overall health 
status of our citizens is to have access to good quality water and 
have access to a sewage treatment system that makes sure that 
none of us gets sick as a result of a lack of sewage treatment. So 
we’re pleased that we’re going to have 41 new water-supply 
projects and 18 waste-water projects in order to improve the 
water and sewer infrastructure in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The second thing that I’m pleased about is that we were able, 
even in a tight situation, to add 10 new police officers in order 
to provide ongoing public safety and security to our citizens. 
And that means that we’re on our way to honouring our 
commitment to create 200 new police officer positions in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that I am most pleased 
about is the $1 million that we’re putting into social assistance 
allowances for disabled citizens who because of their disability 
are unable to work full-time, or in some cases, part-time or 
casually. And, Mr. Speaker, that was good news for those 
people. 
 
(16:15) 
 
The last thing that I want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is I am so 
pleased, I am so pleased that for the first time since 1982 we 
increased the child care subsidy to parents who have children in 
child care centres. And I want to congratulate the minister for 
doing that and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s $20 a month on 
average or $240 a year on average. And for low-income 
working parents or parents going to school, that $20 a month 
means four jugs of milk and that’s important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing I’m pleased about is that we were 
able to add 500 new child care spaces to young families in our 
province so they can access good quality child care. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important that if we want to recruit and retain 
our young people to the province that we have jobs for them, 
we have affordable housing, we have accessible education, and 
for those young parents with children, that we have good 
quality early learning spaces available so that their children are 
in good quality child care facilities while they work or go to 
school. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues are motioning that my time is 
up. I do want to say that I will be supporting the 2003-2004 
provincial budget put forward by our colleagues and I am proud 
of that budget. I think the budget is credible and it’s continuing 
to address the needs of the citizens of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 
rise in the legislature to make some comments on the 2003 
budget. First off though I would like to offer my congratulations 
to the member from Battleford-Cut Knife and also to the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview upon their election to the 
Assembly. I hope that they find their time here a learning 
experience, as I have; an enjoyable experience, as I have the last 
four years. 
 
And also before I get into it I would also like to express my 
support for the United States in their war against terrorism. I 
also . . . I hope a speedy end to this war, as everybody does, and 
I hope that it ends well. 
 
This very well could be my last budget address under what they 
call the old Arm River constituency, so with that I would like to 
express an honour and a pleasure it has been to serve the 
constituents that I am going to be losing under my boundary 
changes. And also looking forward to, looking forward to the 
new members, the new constituents that I’m going to be 
meeting when the election time rolls around. And I am 
confident the large majority of these hardworking rural 
residents will ensure their future by electing a Saskatchewan 
Party government in the next provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my capacity as Sask Water critic, I’ve had some 
opportunity to study the benefits of growing irrigation in 
Saskatchewan and I would like to discuss that for a little bit. 
 
There is no doubt that our province has a capability to greatly 
increase the number of irrigated acres. The resulting benefits 
would ultimately be to grow Saskatchewan economy in ways 
that the NDP simply cannot understand in Saskatchewan. 
 
In Saskatchewan right now we currently irrigate between 
250,000 and 320,000 acres out of a possible 2 to 5 to 3.7 
million acres which could be irrigated. There’s more than 
enough water in our province to support the development of 
these possible acres. 
 
According to the 1969 master agreement on the . . . on water 
appropriation between the Prairie provinces, Alberta is required 
right now to send 50 per cent of the outward flow of water in 
their province on to Saskatchewan. In turn, Saskatchewan must 
send 50 per cent of their outward flow towards Manitoba. 
 
However, even despite these drought conditions, Alberta has 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

 

been sending approximately 60 per cent or more of its flow on 
to Saskatchewan, and at the same time Saskatchewan is sending 
almost double its requirements on to the province of Manitoba. 
And that’s been happening ever since the agreement was first 
put in place. 
 
By using this excessive water, Saskatchewan would be able to 
expand irrigation to its full potential that would create a rural 
economic scenario that would surpass even Alberta in places — 
all without putting excess strain on the water system or by 
having to irrigate unsuitable land. 
 
Irrigation in the Lake Diefenbaker area alone is capable of an 
expansion of 115,000 acres, while many other irrigation 
districts in the province are ready to expand should the 
opportunity arise. 
 
The benefits of this expansion are vast and appealing, not only 
to the rural residents, but also to our urban centres as well. 
Irrigation increases crop yields, meaning that fewer acres will 
be needed to produce the same level of crop production we have 
now, whereby we can further diversify our dryland economy 
into other crops and also into forage production beneficial to the 
expansion of our livestock industry. 
 
Currently right now less than 20 per cent of the land suitable for 
irrigation on a worldwide basis is currently in use, yet this 
acreage still contributes to over 30 per cent of the world food 
production. Imagine how many acres of vital rain forest could 
be saved from clear-cutting or slash-and-burn destruction if we 
could irrigate 100 per cent of the acres that could be irrigated 
out there of these potential acres. 
 
Furthermore, it is estimated that 80 per cent of the additional 
food production by the year 2025 will come from irrigated 
acres. Clearly Saskatchewan could lead the way in irrigation 
development if indeed there was a government in this province 
with a vision to make that a reality. 
 
Everyone has always said that Saskatchewan is an arid 
province, and this is a reality. Basically 2 out of 10 years there’s 
always a . . . it’s a proven fact that in 2 out of every 10 years 
that there isn’t enough rainfall to sustain most of the crops 
grown in this province. 
 
Now with irrigation we have the capability to overcome this 
devastating weather pattern of our agriculture economy. One 
thing many people have called for, and throughout this 
province, is continuing diversification. Irrigation would allow 
farmers to grow more profitable crops than we have the ability 
to grow today. 
 
We would have the potential to dramatically increase current 
production in tree nurseries, the growth of timothy hay, and the 
expansion of a viable vegetable industry. This would include 
the proper development of a private sector potato industry — a 
potato industry free of government run and free of this NDP 
government. 
 
Certainly we cannot expect to grow irrigation in this province 
while the NDP, basically this government, is busy losing money 
in $28 million in SPUDCO and all the other fiascos that they’ve 
lost money investing outside this province when they should be 

looking at investing inside. 
 
Test studies have indicated that farm income nearly tripled after 
a switch from dryland to irrigation farming practices. Here in 
Canada, dryland agriculture has an average output of between 
80 to $100 an acre while at the same time timothy hay’s an 
average of output of maybe $600 per acre, while seed 
production — if the government isn’t running it — could 
realize up to $2,800 per acre. 
 
Another thing is on irrigated pasture land you could increase the 
number of livestock by allowing livestock ranchers to grow 
their herd size without having to expand pasture land. 
 
Currently Saskatchewan only produces 7 per cent of the 
vegetables that are consumed here, so each year our province 
must import approximately $30 million worth of vegetables. 
Now just think how much economy, economic activity could be 
generated if Saskatchewan became self-sufficient in the growth 
of vegetables and putting $30 million back in our provincial 
economy. This diversification allows our provincial consumers 
access to wider variety of products, locally grown and 
marketed. 
 
Lake Diefenbaker also provides huge tourism possibilities 
through camping, fishing, hiking, boating, and the successful 
operation of numerous parks. None of this would have been 
possible without the building of Gardiner dam. There are so 
many benefits right now that we can attain from the South 
Saskatchewan River and Lake Diefenbaker. 
 
One example of these benefits include the Wakaw-Humboldt 
regional water supply system which takes advantage of the 
abundance of fresh water from our major river systems. There is 
no doubt that we need to develop these freshwater supplies in 
order to ensure that many of our communities will no longer 
have to worry about the quality of their drinking water. 
 
Saskatchewan is more than capable of not only contributing 
more to our economy and our health care by carefully using our 
water resources, but able to do this without affecting water 
levels in our lakes or the river flow at all downstream. 
 
One of the major concerns that must be addressed is the issue of 
use it or lose it. Right now Alberta does not use its full share of 
their old water . . . (inaudible) . . . At the same time neither does 
Saskatchewan. 
 
However as we all know, Alberta is growing and one day will 
maybe need more water. Certainly if they are going to use up 
their full share of water, we should be utilizing our full share as 
well. 
 
Currently right now we are losing as much water from 
evaporation as is being used for irrigation — that’s 3 per cent. 
Three per cent of the water that is stored in Lake Diefenbaker is 
just used for irrigation and that’s basically what goes off in 
evaporation per year. Right now we are sending over 90 per 
cent of the flow into this lake downstream without using the 
benefits of this water for the surrounding area and the province 
as a whole. 
 
Saskatchewan must take advantage of this abundant resource as 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

soon as possible before it’s too late and we lose it. 
Saskatchewan’s present water development is at the stage where 
Alberta and the western United States were back in 1903. Lake 
Diefenbaker . . . And the hard part is done because we have the 
Gardiner dam and Lake Diefenbaker; we just need a 
government now that’s capable of developing this enormous 
water resource. 
 
Even though the members opposite seem content to disrespect 
House procedure by releasing many details of this budget well 
in advance of March 28, I’m content to respect the legislative 
process and speak on behalf of the constituents in Arm River. 
 
More importantly my constituents would like me to get to the 
bottom of the things in this budget so as to separate the facts 
from fiction. What we’re seeing today in this budget is a 
mixture of both a repeat performance of the smoke-and-mirrors 
approach that this NDP government continues in their ongoing 
effort to mislead the good citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP certainly has proven without a doubt that they are 
able to mislead the people of Saskatchewan, especially when 
you look at all the recent fiascos that have gone on there. 
Considering that it took months of pressure from our opposition 
to get the Finance minister to admit that the 2002 budget was a 
deficit budget, it comes as no surprise to us that the NDP would 
hail this budget as the answer to our province economic 
condition. 
 
With the idea of a spring election maybe a possibility — but I 
don’t think so the way this government is going on; I think it’ll 
be possibly the following spring — the NDP has already proven 
that misleading the Saskatchewan electorate on important 
money issues such as SPUDCO, we’ll start there, and all the 
other investments that have been going on in this province, it’s 
now a common practice for this coalition government. 
 
We already know that the so-called Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
has no money in it, yet we were told to believe that there is still 
$100 million left in this fund. You have the ongoing SIGA 
scandals, further proof that this government has lost control of 
its finances. 
 
And before we look at the various aspects of this budget, I want 
to talk about the NDP’s claim of what . . . what the NDP claim 
is to blame for the increasing of our provincial debt. They are 
now blaming the $28 million lost on SPUDCO, they’re now 
blaming their multi-million dollar losses on investments outside 
of Saskatchewan and Canada, they’re now blaming the fact that 
thousands of people are leaving Saskatchewan in search of a 
future — not blaming themselves for the continued 
mismanagement of our province. No, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
once again blaming our province’s most important industry 
which is agriculture. 
 
They’re blaming the farmers for the weather they faced in 2002 
and that’s why they’re having a deficit budget. They’re blaming 
it on the farmers. 
 
We were told that the Saskatchewan crop insurance program 
now has a $500 million deficit due to the claim put in by 
farmers who’ve experienced drought, grasshoppers, frost, and 
late harvest rains. And now, as a result of this deficit, farmers 

are now being informed that the 2003 crop insurance premiums 
will be raised by 52 per cent this spring. 
 
Many of my farmer constituents are still wondering how 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance allowed this deficit to occur in 
the first place. For great numbers of farmers, this was the first 
claim that they’d made since the drought of 1988; and for 
others, it was the first claim that they’d made in over 20 years 
of being in this program. So it’s not surprising the farmers are 
questioning why Saskatchewan Crop Insurance was not 
financially ready for 2002 but also for 2001 as well. 
 
Indeed, two straight years of drought, Saskatchewan crop 
officials had no plan to deal with the high number of claims and 
yet it’s the fault of farmers, not this government. That’s what 
this present government is saying. 
 
The NDP is also blaming rising natural gas costs as another 
contributor towards increasing our debt. Indeed they’re saying 
that due to rising natural gas prices, SaskEnergy now is in a $40 
million deficit position. Moreover the government indicates that 
it will be raising energy rates to compensate for their 
mismanagement. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Amazingly the NDP is also saying that the Crown corporations 
are returning dividends of millions into the provincial coffers so 
the obvious question is, why are the people of Saskatchewan 
being penalized by higher energy rates when supposedly the 
other Crowns are doing fine? The answer is clearly that the 
dividends in many cases are drawn from the Crowns who must 
borrow money in order to pay dividends in the first place — 
just another campaign of basically misleading people and 
driving up the debt of this province. 
 
We have been informed that the agriculture spending will 
decrease by $40 million this year. And again the remaining 
agriculture budget will not go directly to farmers who need it so 
desperately this spring. No, this money is going into a new 
national farm program which is not looking any better than any 
of the other failed farm programs that we have endured over 
these last few years. 
 
Indeed it looks like the NISA program, which is working for 
farmers, will now be gutted and turned into something 
resembling AIDA or CFIP, which have not worked for farmers 
to date. Clearly this new program will not provide timely 
assistance for farmers who have struggled through two years of 
drought and high input costs. 
 
Farmers are also asking why our Agriculture minister waited so 
long to sign with spring seeding just around the corner. Nobody 
is happy the way the federal Agriculture minister put pressure 
on our province to sign on a new farm program, but what the 
farmers are disappointed in is that our provincial Agriculture 
minister waited till he was boxed into a corner. By then it was 
clearly a take-it-or-leave-it scenario and Ottawa knew it. 
 
Any good negotiator would tell you that you should avoid being 
cornered into any business agreement but our Agriculture 
minister simply let the winter pass without any significant 
negotiating being done on behalf of provincial farm families. 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

 

A few people also talking about . . . I want to talk a little bit 
about health care. A few people believe that more 
administration in our health care system does little more than 
create jobs. This is little solace for the people waiting months 
and sometimes years for tests and surgeries. Waiting lists 
continue to grow and they have been under this past 
government for a number of years and they are going to 
continue to grow. 
 
What is so desperately needed is a much more efficient and 
better way to deliver health care to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Throwing more and more resources at the present system of 
health care is not a complete answer for a better health care 
system. 
 
But all this goes back to the basic philosophy of the NDP and 
the way it has governed Saskatchewan. The NDP philosophy is 
to encourage the growth of money-losing Crown . . . encourage 
the growth of money-losing Crown corporations but drive out 
private businesses with their own tax dollars and keep them out. 
The NDP philosophy is to ignore agriculture and forests and the 
exodus from our rural communities and in most cases taking 
families out of the province in search of a better future. 
 
People have been leaving this province in record numbers. In 
the last 16 consecutive quarters, we’ve had a population loss. 
While then the NDP claim that there are not enough people left 
to maintain full service health care and other government 
services. So then what do they do? They centralize everything 
in the major cities of our provinces, the cities being the only 
possible place they have chance of being elected in the first 
place. But with this next election, I think that’s going to be 
proven wrong. 
 
This philosophy is not only doomed to failure but sadly makes 
it clear that the NDP has no plan to grow the province of 
Saskatchewan. No plans but to sit back and watch our province 
slip slowly but surely into more and deeper economic 
depression. 
 
Well I want to tell the members opposite that the citizens of 
Saskatchewan will not tolerate their philosophy any more. It’s 
time for a new government and I’m very confident that it will 
be a Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear about the NDP budget plans for 
municipal governments. When we look at the funds this year 
that are going to municipal governments, there’s very little for 
mayors and reeves to get excited about. Certainly I’m not 
opposed to providing the councils with the funds they need. 
What bothers me is that this government deprives councils of 
money which they need to improve and maintain their 
infrastructure. There will only be $10 million in additional 
money for urban and rural governments. Money that they . . . 
they should have more money, that they need to improve water 
quality out there. 
 
What we have right now, Mr. Speaker, we have a non-elected 
Premier with no vision, who shuffles cabinet ministers like a 
deck of cards trying to find some luck in each draw but always 
coming up empty. This Premier is gambling with the future of 
Saskatchewan. And like any gambler, he keeps gambling until 
there’s nothing left to put on the table. And this is what the 

NDP government has come to now. They have no idea how to 
get out of the bind they’re in. The only way they know how is 
to draw more hard-earned money from Saskatchewan people, 
and then they roll the dice again and blindly hope that this time 
they can win it all back. 
 
And all the while this NDP government says everything is 
rolling along smoothly. They want to claim that their GDP is so 
much better than the other provinces, even other countries, 
when in fact this is just not the case. All this government can do 
is deny the truth while predicting the provincial economic 
growth will be an astounding 6.8. This is twice what the experts 
are predicting in the best-case scenario. Indeed the prediction is 
between 2.7 to 3.4 as the most accurate level of economic 
growth for the next fiscal year. 
 
So I would ask the Finance minister exactly how he determined 
that Saskatchewan would have economic growth that is double 
to what any other country, let alone any other province, is 
expecting this year? 
 
The Finance minister even claims that average crop . . . that an 
average crop is a major determining factor in his economic 
growth. Certainly he’s basing his prediction on the idea that the 
present commodity prices remain intact until fall. But we’ve 
already seen indicators from the Canadian Wheat Board that the 
price of wheat is falling, and of course we all know that the 
price of specialty crops are extremely vulnerable to outside 
market pressure and weather-related issues, and as well in the 
last month they’ve all taken a dip. 
 
Every farmer, including myself, realizes how risky it is to plan 
for good prices and good yields on the continuing basis. Indeed 
our Agriculture minister certainly believes that the turnaround 
in agriculture is not only going to happen but has already 
happened. Just look at the new budget figures for agriculture. 
They already cut it by $40 million. 
 
And what about the ranchers in our province, Mr. Speaker? I do 
not see any significant initiatives on behalf of our cattle 
producers who would like to expand the industry, yet they are 
constantly being told by this government to diversify their 
operations. In my constituency today, there are a dedicated 
group of individuals trying to establish a new cattle feedlot near 
the community of Craik. The Riel Trail cattle feeders 
incorporated group has been working hard to generate enough 
investment to get this thing going. Would it not be easier for 
these entrepreneurs if there was some assistance in the form of a 
tax relief and also in the streamlining of government relations? 
 
Of course this would fly in the face of NDP doctrine which 
believes that they need to own part of any new business 
initiative, or failing that, to tax private business heavily and 
force them to cope with multiple layers of bureaucracy in order 
to even get a business started. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this government was elected it promised to 
deliver 200 new law enforcement officers to Saskatchewan. 
Now it seems clear that not only will they not deliver on this 
promise, but they are content and now it’s only 10 new police 
officers will be hired this year. Only 10 new police officers, 
despite the fact that rural governments were assessed on a per 
capita basis for policing costs based on the old census figures 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

instead of the new ones. So they have this money in hand, and 
before they actually change the rates, they charge the municipal 
governments for policing costs. 
 
Also, with that coming up I cannot support this budget, and I 
will support the amendment brought forth by the opposition. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased to enter into this budget debate and 
rise in support of the provincial budget that our Minister of 
Finance has brought down. A budget, Mr. Speaker, that is 
marked by no new tax increases, no health care premiums as we 
see in Alberta and British Columbia, Mr. Speaker. The only 
universal, provincial child tax credit in Canada — which I’m 
very proud of, Mr. Speaker — and a seniors’ tax credit that is 
going up again this year from $750 last year to $1,000 in 2003, 
Mr. Speaker. The elimination of the flat tax which of course the 
Devine government, the predecessors of the Saskatchewan 
Party, brought into this province. We’ve done away with it now, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a people’s budget. And you can see it, 
not just in terms of our tax measures like the ones that I’ve just 
mentioned, but also in terms of the priorities that we’ve made 
for spending in health and education. 
 
And I recall, Mr. Speaker, in the 1999 election when the 
Saskatchewan Party campaigned on the idea of freezing 
education and freezing health care, Mr. Speaker. And then I 
think about what our government has done over this past four 
years, and in this budget, which has been to invest in people by 
investing in health and education, Mr. Speaker. What a contrast 
between ourselves and the official opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this budget I see an increase to our 
commitment to medicare and to health care spending in general 
of over 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. To be precise, $184 million 
more invested in health care with a total commitment to 
spending on public health in the province of Saskatchewan of 
$2.5 billion, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very pleased to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that that includes an increase of 6 per cent in health 
care spending to support our regional health authorities and all 
the programs and services they deliver. 
 
It also includes a budget increase for support for primary health 
care, Mr. Speaker. And it includes a commitment to expand 
funding for diabetes education and care and drug coverage in 
the province of Saskatchewan, about which I’m very pleased, 
Mr. Speaker. Just one more example of how this government 
continues to expand and build on our commitment to medicare 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also invests in public education at both 
the post-secondary and the K to 12 level. We see a 3 per cent 
increase in operating grants for our universities. We see a 4.5 
per cent increase in operating grants for K to 12 education in 
the province. And we see a very significant commitment to new 
capital spending on public education facilities. 
 
And in my riding, Mr. Speaker, the investment that we’re 

making in the College Building, the restoration of the College 
Building on the University of Saskatchewan campus and on the 
Research Annex, will be very much welcomed by people in 
Saskatoon Greystone riding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget invests in young people. And I just want to give 
one example of this, and this is new spending that we’re 
committing to physical fitness opportunities in this province, 
and for ensuring that Aboriginal youth are able to fully 
participate, Mr. Speaker, in both cultural and recreational 
activities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party and our government, 
the NDP government, has a long commitment to social 
investment in our province. In addition to our investment in 
health and education, we’re also making some significant 
investments that I’m very excited about through the new 
Department of Community Resources and Employment which 
used to be the Department of Social Services, Mr. Speaker. And 
I want to just highlight four or five key budget measures in this 
area that I’m particularly pleased with. 
 
One of course, Mr. Speaker, is that we continue to support the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement, an important income 
supplement for working families with children. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to say that this year at least 7,900 families 
will benefit from that income supplement, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
a measure that you can see in very, very few parts of North 
America. This is quite a unique program in a North American 
and Canadian context, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that we are also 
demonstrating our commitment to children by our investment in 
child care, and specifically 500 new child care spaces this year. 
And also, Mr. Speaker, one measure that I’m very pleased with 
and that is a $20-a-month increase per child for each child in 
subsidized day care in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And that is a very positive measure indeed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — In total, Mr. Speaker, our provincial 
government has taken the additional $800,000 from Ottawa that 
has been committed for child care — which we very much 
appreciate — and we’ve added to it an additional provincial 
investment of $2.2 million, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what’s 
making the expansion that I just talked about possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder what members of 
the opposition would do with their freeze in social spending on 
child care in this province, Mr. Speaker? And I dare say we’d 
have seen no increase in the child care budget if we had the 
Saskatchewan Party behind the wheels of government in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:45) 
 
I want to make reference to the investment that we are making 
in terms of support for those with disabilities in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, because we see in this budget an additional $6 
million across various departments in government to support 



April 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

 

those with disabilities in our province. And in fact many 
organizations that represent the disabled in this province have 
commended the government for this budget initiative, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I’m pleased to say that that includes 
$1.85 million to assist those with disabilities to more effectively 
enter the workplace and overcome barriers to workplace 
employment. And it includes an addition $1 million for those on 
social assistance who have disabilities so that their annual 
allowance will go up by $120, Mr. Speaker — $10 a month. 
And I’m very pleased to see that initiative as well, for which I 
want to thank the minister of Social Services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about 
what this budget addresses in terms of the environment, and I 
also want to make a few suggestions about future environmental 
initiatives that our government should consider. 
 
But let me say first, Mr. Speaker, that this budget — the year 
2002, and now the new budget for 2003 and the early part of 
2004 — really marks a major step forward in terms of 
environmental protection and a green agenda for the province of 
Saskatchewan. And you can see this in so many areas, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I look at the $1 million of additional money for instance that’s 
going into properly inventorying our forest resource, Mr. 
Speaker, so that we can practise sustainable forestry 
management in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I look at the $1.6 million that we’re investing in environmental 
cleanup across the province, Mr. Speaker. And in addition to 
that, another $600,000 of extra money that’s earmarked for the 
cleanup of uranium mine tailings at the Gunnar and Lorado 
uranium mine sites in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I look at our investment in ethanol development, Mr. Speaker, 
which as you know is very major and involves of course a 
partnership with private sector companies, but that will put 
Saskatchewan at the forefront of ethanol development in 
Canada. 
 
I look at our investment in the Office of Energy Conservation, 
newly established with a budget this year of $490,000, Mr. 
Speaker. An office that will provide valuable resources and 
advice to the people of Saskatchewan on how they can upgrade 
the energy efficiency of their businesses and homes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I look at the support that’s in this 
budget for municipal government to help them to move forward 
with green projects, Mr. Speaker, with staff resources to help 
them in applying for both national and provincial monies that 
are available to pursue a green agenda at the local level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look at the expansion that SaskPower is 
undertaking in terms of providing assistance to schools and 

hospitals and community facilities to upgrade their energy 
efficiency on both . . . both in terms of electricity and natural 
gas. 
 
And I look at the changes that are happening, Mr. Speaker, 
within SaskPower, which I think are exceedingly exciting, as 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, moves away from thinking about 
more coal, moves away from the agenda that has been set by the 
Sask Party of a nuclear reactor in the province, and focuses 
instead, Mr. Speaker, on new cogeneration facilities. 
 
And on wind power facilities, we’ve seen the first two wind 
power stations, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan history open at 
Gull Lake last year. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? This 
year we’re going to be looking at a ninefold increase over what 
we did last year — over the next three years, a ninefold increase 
in wind power in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
looking at a Saskatchewan Power Corporation that is saying to 
independent power producers around this province, we 
welcome proposals for environmentally friendly electricity 
generation — whether it would be wind power or biomass 
development, Mr. Speaker, or an array of other green energy 
products, Mr. Speaker — and we’re willing to buy that power 
from independent power producers and integrate that power 
into our grid system, Mr. Speaker. This is all very welcome 
news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, it demonstrates that this government 
is on a green path that young people around this province will 
be truly excited about, Mr. Speaker, and that all residents of this 
province will support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take five minutes to look at some of the 
other initiatives around environment that I hope our government 
will consider in subsequent budgets. I’ve talked about the green 
agenda that we’re moving forward on, as spelled out in this 
budget. And I’m looking for four additional measures, Mr. 
Speaker, that I hope we’ll consider and that this legislature will 
consider in the next couple of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the priorities that I want to suggest revolves around 
the Great Sand Hills. And in our current budget, Mr. Speaker, 
we have dollars for a review of land use in the Great Sand Hills, 
which I see as one of the great resources of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. There are 20 species in the Great Sand Hills, animal 
and plant species that are endangered or threatened and that are 
unique — many of them unique in Canada; all of them unique 
in a Saskatchewan context, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I believe the time has come, Mr. Speaker, to not only look 
for leadership for the protection of the Great Sand Hills at the 
local level — we’ve been getting excellent leadership from the 
planning commission there and the three municipalities, three 
rural municipalities that are part of it, Mr. Speaker — but now 
it’s time for leadership at the provincial level. 
 
And I hope that the province in the months ahead, Mr. Speaker, 
will establish a special provincial designation for ecologically 
fragile lands in the Great Sand Hills that will allow ranching on 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2003 

 

these lands; in other words, will allow the grazing of cattle but 
will not allow natural gas or oil development or road 
development or other forms of commercial development on this 
land, Mr. Speaker. So that we have provincial protection as well 
as local protection, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, hope that our government in the months 
ahead will set an objective with respect to recycling in this 
province — a very ambitious objective. In this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, we see a $525,000 budget increase for the work of 
SARCAN in the province of Saskatchewan, about which I’m 
very pleased, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I believe the time has come for 
the province to set a target of recycling 50 per cent of all our 
waste products in the province of Saskatchewan. And we could 
take the budget allocation that currently goes to SARCAN and 
we could allow, Mr. Speaker, SARCAN to keep the money that 
it makes from recycling aluminum cans and invest that in a 
much more comprehensive recycling program right across the 
province of Saskatchewan that could create hundreds of new 
jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, an investment, a target of 50 per cent 
waste recycling needs to include a commitment by our 
government to curbside recycling, Mr. Speaker. And in the 
budget for 2004-2005, I’ll be urging the Minister of the 
Environment to move forward with such a commitment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on two other environmental 
matters and then make a few concluding comments about the 
budget. 
 
But in this budget, Mr. Speaker, we see support for our organic 
farmers in this province. I’m proud to say we now have 1,000 
organic farmers in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And we have a staff representative in place in the Department 
of Agriculture and Food to support their work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to go further. It’s time now 
to establish an office of organic agriculture and organic 
gardening in the province of Saskatchewan to help urban 
gardeners and our farmers move towards a more expansive 
organic initiative, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to see 
hundreds of research plots across this province, Mr. Speaker, 
that support the work of local organic producers and invest in 
their work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to see, Mr. Speaker, a move by our provincial 
government to phase out the use of . . . the cosmetic uses of 
pesticides in this province; in other words, uses of pesticides 
that are non-essential to food production, Mr. Speaker. And this 
is particularly feasible in our urban centres. We now see 30 
municipalities across Canada, Mr. Speaker, that have put a ban 
on the cosmetic use of pesticides and I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that the time has come for the province to consider such a ban 
as well. I support such a measure, Mr. Speaker, as the MLA for 
Saskatoon Greystone and I urge, Mr. Speaker, that we look at 
that as a provincial government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hear the Sask Party opposite saying well, 
what about genetically modified products. And I want to say to 
members of the Sask Party that I believe it’s time in the 

province of Saskatchewan to look at a ban on genetically 
modified wheat in this province, Mr. Speaker. Why jeopardize, 
Mr. Speaker, our overseas markets for wheat export, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s time, Mr. Speaker, to tell the Government of 
Canada that we don’t want GM (genetically modified) wheat 
grown at their field stations, Mr. Speaker, as they’re doing at 
Indian Head. And I support, Mr. Speaker, a ban on GM wheat 
in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few more words about the 
official opposition because they’ve been talking a lot, Mr. 
Speaker, about debt. And, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy of the 
Saskatchewan Party talking about debt in this Assembly is . . . 
It’s just beyond belief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The predecessors of the people who ran up a 
$14 billion debt in this province, Mr. Speaker — many of the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party were advisers, Mr. 
Speaker, to the former Devine government, working actively in 
the public service or as ministerial assistants for the former 
Devine government, Mr. Speaker, when they ran up that $14 
billion debt. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party member for Moosomin was 
part of the Devine government, Mr. Speaker, that ran up that 
debt. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to review the record, because this 
government has taken that $14 billion debt and we’ve reduced 
it, Mr. Speaker. We’ve reduced it year after year after year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, every year we have to deal with an interest 
payment legacy on that debt left behind by the predecessors of 
the Saskatchewan Party. And that interest payment every year 
comes to $650 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So then you know what the Sask Party has the nerve to 
complain about, Mr. Speaker? They have the nerve to complain 
about the fact that the debt is going up this year because, Mr. 
Speaker, because our crop insurance premiums for the year, that 
the farm community paid in, was $500 million and our payout 
to the farm community has been $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. And 
they complain about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of this government’s record 
in debt management. I’m proud of this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’ll be supporting the budget. 
 
And I’d like to adjourn debate. Thank you so much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................323 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................323 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................323 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................323 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................323 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................323 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................323 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................323 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................324 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Opportunities for Youth 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................324 
 Swift Current Couple Wins Volunteer Award 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................324 
 Prince Albert’s New Performing Arts Centre 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................324 
 Weyburn Inland Terminal 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................325 
 Aboriginal Employment Development Program Agreement 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................325 
 Innovative Saskatchewan Farming Company 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................325 
 New Business in East Regina 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................325 
 Estevan Bruins Sportsman’s Dinner and Auction 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................326 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Harassment Allegations Against Former Civil Servant 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................326 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................326 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................328 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................328 
 Growth Projections 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................329 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................329 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 SaskTel Extends High-Speed Internet Coverage 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................330 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................331 
 New Regional Hospital for Swift Current 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................331 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................331 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................333 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................333 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................333 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................336 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................339 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................342 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................348 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................352 
 


