















































Hansard: June 03, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1393 
 June 3, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and area 
concerned about the lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit in their community. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition this afternoon are all 
from the community of Moose Jaw, and I’m pleased to present 
on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents in the 
communities of Cabri and Hazlet concerned about the increase 
to their crop insurance premiums this year. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present this on behalf of my 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gravelbourg, Moose Jaw, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens concerned about the rapidly 
deteriorating Highway 20. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 

address safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth 
in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Nokomis, Humboldt, Lanigan, Regina, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
very concerned about the condition of Highway 47 South. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by people from North Portal, Estevan, 
Midale, Carlyle, and Lampman, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, along 
with my colleagues, I rise with a petition from citizens who are 
very concerned about the highway conditions in rural 
Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is in total signed by the good 
citizens of Vanguard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people of southwestern 
Saskatchewan and west central Saskatchewan concerned with 
health care between the cities of Swift Current and North 
Battleford. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure that current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley, Brock, and Major, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

from citizens opposed to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
premium rate increases to farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and Kerrobert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the Crown 
land leases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are all from the 
centre of Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 100, 114, 119, and 120. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 55 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Highways minister: can the minister please say if 
construction for repaving the section of Highway 42 from 
the junction of Highway 2 to the junction of Highway 19 
will begin in 2003; if yes, is the work scheduled to be 
completed in 2003? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 55 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: what are all the highway 
construction projects being undertaken in 2003-2004; what 
is the budgeted cost for each project, for each project listed 
on the 2003-2004 construction project list; what are the 
details of each project in terms of reason, location, and 
cost? 
 
To the Minister of Highways: what was the cost incurred 
by Morsky Construction in the fall of 2002 to repair and 

prepare for winter highway . . . for winter for Highway 13 
between Ogema and Highway 334 turnoff; who paid this 
bill, the original contractor or the Department of 
Highways? 
 
To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: in 
light of the fact that SLGA never received the cash and 
paper management system from Wascana Gaming, for what 
reason did Wascana Gaming receive $291,000? 
 
To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: what 
are all the details of the royalty agreement between 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming and Wascana Gaming 
for the cash and paper management system paid for but 
never received by Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming, such 
agreement referenced by Minister Osika in the Legislative 
Assembly on June 2, 2004? 
 
To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: with 
reference to the fact that Wascana Gaming pays a royalty to 
Western Canada Lottery Corporation if it sold the software 
developed for mega bingo, what are the details of this 
royalty agreement between SLGA and Wascana Gaming? 
 
To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: why 
was it necessary for Wascana Gaming to develop a new 
cash and paper management system for SLGA and bingo 
halls; how is this cash and paper management system 
different from the system Wascana Gaming had developed 
years prior to the mega bingo contract? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Once again I think the practice 
that members ought to use in all questions is the questions are 
of the minister rather than of an individual. Let us continue. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this Hon. 
Assembly, a group of 36 grade 6 to 9 students from Mossbank 
School seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. The students are 
accompanied by their teachers Arnelda Lawrence and Dale 
Guthormsen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that they’ll have an educational, 
informative, and fun day in the legislature and here in Regina 
and as I’m sure all members do, and I look forward to meeting 
with them later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to introduce to you and to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 36 grade 7 and 8 students from Queen 
Elizabeth School who are joining us today and they are seated 
in the west gallery. Along with the students are Mr. Thibodeau 
and Mr. Paterson, teachers for the grade 7 and 8 students, as 
well as the chaperones, Mrs. Bezaire and Mrs. Meakin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to have some 
refreshments with the students and answer some questions. I 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

 

know that the students are going to enjoy question period and 
they’re going to have an opportunity to tour the Legislative 
Assembly Building. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these grade 7 
and 8 students from Queen Elizabeth School in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Prince Albert Regional 4-H Finished Beef Show and Sale 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Again some good news from our hometown of Prince 
Albert which I hope will go a long ways in confirming the 
confidence that we in Saskatchewan have in our beef industry. 
 
I want to tell the Assembly about an auction sale, but the fact 
that it took place itself is a story of faith and determination on 
the part of all who were involved. Yesterday and Sunday at the 
exhibition grounds, the Prince Albert 4-H Regional Finished 
Beef Show and Sale was held — held we have to add in the 
face of the current circumstances facing our Canadian beef 
industry — and I’m delighted to say that the sale was a roaring 
success, not just for these times but for any time. 
 
Over 1,000 people attended. Kids from the seven 4-H clubs in 
the northeast region had 102 steers auctioned to the highest 
bidder and every animal was sold. The grand champion steer 
owned by Lauren Cromartie of the Wild Rose 4-H Club sold for 
$3.10 a pound. 
 
A feature of the sale always is the charity steer sale. The charity 
steer also sold for $3.10 a pound raising an amazing $3,878 for 
this year’s charity, the Professional Fire Fighters burn unit. 
 
Overall 102 cattle were sold; the average was $1.57 a pound. 
 
I want to congratulate all of those who were involved and I 
know all members will join with me in expressing our 
congratulations and admiration for each person who were 
involved. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Indian Head Rural Sports Hall of Fame Induction Dinner 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Friday evening I had the privilege of attending the Indian Head 
Rural Sports Hall of Fame eighth annual induction dinner. Over 
the past eight years numerous individuals and teams from the 
surrounding area have been recognized for their commitment to 
their local community through their achievement in sport. 
 
This year 10 recipients were recognized for their achievements 
including the Nancy Kerr rink, 2003 world seniors curling 
champions; John Lynch, Mitch Blair, and Rod Pedersen for 
their involvement in broadcasting. And of special note, Rod 
Pedersen will be calling the play-by-play of this year’s Grey 
Cup. 
 
Russel Parker was recognized for his achievements in the 

promotion of baseball in Western Canada, while Matt Hengen 
was recognized for his promotion of both baseball and hockey 
in the community of Windthorst and surrounding area. 
 
Sonny Reinhardt was recognized for his contribution to 
wrestling, and the team sport category recognition was given to 
the ’72-73, ’73-74 Balcarres Broncs. 
 
In softball, Harvey Curtis received recognition while Adelard 
Douan was recognized for his many years of coaching in the 
Montmartre area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to this year’s inductees and hats 
off to Mr. Ken (Scoop) McCabe of Indian Head and his 
committee for their promotion of the Rural Sports Hall of Fame 
and the hard work they put in to making this year’s induction 
dinner such a great event. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Holy Cross Collegiate Wall of Honour 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we approach 
our centennial year and as our schools and other institutions put 
more years of service behind them, it’s both obvious and 
appropriate that they give formal recognition to those who have 
passed through their doors. Simply put, it is appropriate that we 
observe and record our various histories. 
 
An example of this is at Holy Cross Collegiate in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. As a millennium project 
Holy Cross created a Wall of Honour which permanently 
recognizes alumni who have distinguished themselves in areas 
such as academics, athletics, fine arts, and religion. 
 
Recently Holy Cross added six new faces to its Wall of Honour 
at a ceremony held in the school. Some will already be familiar 
to most of us; the rest soon will be. The six new faces to the 
wall are: Julia Cunningham, a harpist who has performed with 
B.B. King, Tom Jones, the Rolling Stones, and some guy 
named Pavarotti; Mark Hammel, a computer animator with 
Disney; Janet Klobel, a dancer and singer in productions such 
as Cats; Marcus Oleniuk, a freelance photographer nominated 
for the World Press Photo Award; Earl Pereira, of the band 
Wide Mouth Mason; and Timothy Steeves, nationally renowned 
concert pianist. 
 
I congratulate these six, and I applaud Holy Cross for this 
worthwhile project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Finished Beef Show and Sale 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the member from Prince Albert Northcote in 
bringing news today of the event held in Prince Albert last night 
in regards to the 73rd annual Prince Albert Finished Beef Show 
and Sale put on by the local 4-H. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a great deal of concern of course to the 
show that because of the issues raised around BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy), the mad cow disease, that these 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

young 4-H’ers were being left to wonder if they would be able 
to even hold this prestigious event. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the agribusiness community came to the 
plate, so to speak, with their cheque books wide open. Bidding 
all evening was brisk and enthusiastic as prices remained strong 
from beginning to end to show that Saskatchewan agribusiness 
is very confident in our livestock industry. 
 
The grand champion and reserve grand champion continued to 
bring top dollar for the young owners, while the third annual 
charity steer brought in the same value as the two top steers. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the charity steer is raised by a contributing club 
who then choose a recipient for the monies raised this year. 
This money was donated to the Professional Fire Fighters burn 
unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as one of the buyers of a steer, I along with scores 
of other buyers was proud to be given an opportunity to support 
4-H and Saskatchewan’s beef industry. Mr. Speaker, I ask that 
all members join me in congratulating the future beef producers 
in the Prince Albert region on another successful 4-H season 
and finale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kidzone Child Care 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This year marks the 25th anniversary of Dr. A.E. Perry School 
in Regina’s New Albert Park. As part of the celebrations, I was 
very pleased to join the family of the late Dr. Perry and others 
in helping mark the occasion. 
 
In 1977, Dr. Perry elementary school was an architectural 
innovation. Today, 25 years later, the staff, parents, and 
students of the Dr. Perry School are continuing to promote 
innovative uses for this wonderful facility. In part, they’re doing 
this through the integration of the Kidzone Child Care centre 
with the school and the use of additional space for after-class 
programs for school-age children in the Panther Pit, named of 
course for their mascot, the Prairie Panther. 
 
These innovative programs are designed by parents and teachers 
and they help demonstrate why our NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government is interested in and committed to promoting 
and building our communities around the life of families and 
schools through innovative programs like our newly announced 
SchoolPLUS initiative. It’s also why I was very pleased to 
announce that Kidzone Child Care centre will receive ongoing 
funding for 20 child care spaces starting this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this funding is made possible as part of our 
government’s $1.8 million expansion in child care funding this 
year and it’s creating 500 new licensed child care spaces and 
further funding an additional 200 spaces for children throughout 
our provincial community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the spirit and innovation of the Dr. Perry School 
association, parents, and teachers are part of the reason why 25 

years after the school first opened that we’re continuing to see a 
strong role for this facility in our vibrant local community. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

No. 23 Elementary Flight Training School 
Dedication Service 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to talk about an 
important event held at Davidson town hall on May 24. I had 
the honour to attend a plaque unveiling service at No. 23 
Elementary Flight Training School, a large air force training 
base built a few miles east of Davidson during World War II. 
This important air crew training centre was part of the British 
Commonwealth Air Training Plan. The centre trained over 
1,300 student pilots from 1941 to ’45, seven of which give the 
ultimate sacrifice — their lives. 
 
The plaque dedication service was organized by members of the 
Air Force Association of Canada and was attended by local 
members of the Sherlock Squadron Air Cadet Corps and local 
veterans of the Royal Canadian Legion. Following the full 
march and parade in front of the cenotaph, dignitaries 
representing the various levels of government, including 
Davidson mayor, Jim Cross, paid tribute to the 
accomplishments of this air training base and its historical 
contribution towards our ultimate victory in Europe. 
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor, Lynda Haverstock, spoke 
to those assembled on behalf of Her Majesty, and then 
presented the memorial plaque to the town of Davidson. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the local air cadet 
leader, Gordon McRae, for the invitation to attend and address 
this important event. I salute the veterans of the 600 and 602 
Wing, and 15 Wing in Moose Jaw who were there on Saturday 
on behalf of the Royal Canadian Air Force. 
 
I would like to ask all members to join me in honouring the 
veterans, the cadets, and the people of Davidson for this 
well-planned dedication service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future Links Prairie Championship in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unlike nearly all my 
colleagues in the Assembly, I’m not a good golfer. However, 
Mr. Speaker, I am an enthusiastic booster of my constituency 
and my town. And I know that when visitors come they are 
invariably struck by Saskatoon’s beauty, its variety of 
entertainment, its excellent food and lodging, and the 
hospitality of Saskatoon people. 
 
The connection between these two statements is 
straightforward, Mr. Speaker. Beginning on Sunday and 
finishing tomorrow, the Riverside Country Club in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Southeast is host to the BMO 
Financial Group Future Links Prairie Championship. 
Eighty-four of the country’s best junior male and female golfers 
are here for a 54-hole competition. The young golfers are 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

 

competing in two age categories for each gender. 
 
This is the fourth year for the BMO junior championships. And 
they have established themselves as the premier junior golf 
circuit in Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when 84 kids come, they bring with them 
parents, coaches, officials, friends, and fans — you know, the 
multiplier effect. They spend time in Saskatoon and they have 
the opportunity to sample the many delights we offer tourists. 
They will come back and they will bring others. 
 
So I congratulate the Riverside Country Club and the BMO 
Financial Group for bringing this tournament to Saskatoon. I 
welcome the golfers and wish them all a subpar game. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform 
Encephalopathy 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, it was hoped that with the DNA 
(deoxyribonucleic acid) test results, the CFIA’s (Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency) investigation into the BSE case would be 
concluded this week and the international bans on Canadian 
beef would be lifted in short order. 
 
However the news that the tests were inconclusive means more 
animals will have to be destroyed and tested, and in all 
likelihood the earliest the CFIA can conclude their investigation 
will be the beginning of next week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the minister’s conference call with the 
federal minister and his provincial counterparts this morning, 
what is the earliest indication that the CFIA will be able to 
announce conclusion of their investigation and that their science 
related to this case is ready for presentation to our international 
trading partners? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member is correct when 
she states that it will be yet now a few more days before the test 
results are had from the sort of second line of investigation 
that’s happening on now the five Alberta farms where there was 
some thought that maybe the host actually came from. 
 
Those animals are now en route for slaughter. The 
investigation, or the testing, will begin in the next day or so and 
those results won’t come back until probably Friday. Now that 
might mean that before Monday, we’ll have all of the results on 
the final group of animals from that initial net of 17 farms that 
were quarantined. And so we’ll be into the new week before 
we’ll have any sense of being able to conclude the work that 
we’ve done to date. And we’ll be guided by the CFIA on that 
direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister met 
with the BSE industry advisory committee to discuss the issue 
of industry compensation. As it is widely known, the impact on 
the beef industry as a result of the three-week BSE investigation 
is significant and growing by each and every passing day. 
 
In the feedlot industry in particular, the pressure to see some 
movement in the cattle is at a boiling point. And now that it 
appears that the investigation will take several more days to 
conclude while several other animals related to the case are put 
down and tested, the situation is becoming even a more 
tremendous concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister update the Assembly on what 
specific compensation options the industry committee is 
recommending for feedlots and rendering plants and by what 
date they want to see a compensation package in place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of players 
or teams that are working on this very issue that the member 
asks about. 
 
In Saskatchewan, we have our industry advisory committee. 
Last evening, the industry advisory committee was chaired by 
Mr. Bob Ivey, who is a feedlot operator himself, and a decision 
was made by the committee that we would have Mr. Brad 
Wildeman sitting on the national table representing 
Saskatchewan as it relates to this issue and specifically to 
compensation. Mr. Wildeman is on his way, I understand, 
already to Ottawa to meet with a team of people who are 
working on this particular issue. 
 
The question that the member asks is, you know, how soon will 
we know how much the compensation package should be and to 
what value should it be? The reality is, is that they’re still 
examining when the clock should start ticking in terms of the 
compensation package. Initially the view of the industry, and 
not only in Saskatchewan but across Canada, is that it’s the 
feedlots and the rendering plants that need to be dealt with 
firstly and it’s from that perspective that they’re working, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday it was announced 
that an international panel of three scientists is coming to 
Canada to review how the CFIA has handled the BSE 
investigation and to review Canada’s food safety and animal 
health and movement regulations. The CFIA expects panel 
members from New Zealand, Switzerland, and the United 
States to arrive in Canada by the end of the week. 
 
Yesterday Saskatchewan Agriculture officials indicated that this 
would be a peer review of CFIA operations in relation to this 
case and should not preclude the lifting of any international 
bans of Canadian beef. 
 
However Dr. Brian Evans with the CFIA said it is hoped that 
the panel will encourage countries, including the United States, 
to, and I quote: 
 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

. . . reconsider the interim measures that they have adopted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the United States planning to wait for the 
international panel’s review before they decide whether or not 
to lift the ban on Canadian beef? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I don’t know the answer to that 
question from the point of view of what the United States might 
do, Mr. Speaker, but the member is correct as has been reported 
widely now, that it is in fact a peer review of the process and of 
the scientists who are conducting the work. And we’re 
confident that our scientific team in Canada not only meets but 
will exceed any standards that are established now 
internationally. 
 
But the reality is, is that we have already put forward to the US 
(United States) government the notion of them opening up their 
borders to animals that are under 25 months of age because it is 
the international scientific community can assure the consuming 
public that in fact animals under 25 months of age would not 
have BSE. 
 
And so if we’re successful through Mr. Vanclief, the Minister 
of Agriculture for Canada, to convince the US government that 
in fact we could start to see some of our feedlot animals, 
primarily under the age of 25 months, that would certainly 
relieve a lot of pressures that we have immediately in the 
industry. And that’s what we’re putting forward to the US 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the federal-provincial Labour 
ministers are meeting in Halifax this week. The Alberta 
government has put out a press release stating that Minister 
Clint Dunford will be meeting with Jane Stewart to discuss 
what can be done to assist workers laid off due to the BSE 
investigation and the slowdown in the cattle industry. 
 
My question is to the labour of . . . to the Minister of Labour. 
Will she be attending these meetings to attempt to help lobby, 
along with the Alberta government, to change the mind of the 
federal minister, Jane Stewart, to help assist people laid off due 
to the BSE outbreak in both Alberta and in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To inform 
the minister opposite, it’s the ministers responsible for the 
social services area that are meeting in Halifax this week. 
 
Mr. Dunford from Alberta, his portfolio covers . . . Resources 
and Employment, I believe his portfolio is called, and it covers 
the social services area plus the labour area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Supply of Health Care Workers 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Health care 
providers all over the province are concerned about the serious 

shortage of health care workers. 
 
Today the Provincial Auditor is raising the same concern in his 
Spring Report. The Provincial Auditor says that health care 
workers suffer one of the highest rates of workplace injury in 
Saskatchewan. Between 10 and 20 per cent of health care 
workers are injured annually in health care facilities. It’s an 
astonishing rate; in fact, it’s higher than the construction 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a big reason why this high injury rate is a shortage 
of health care workers, which leads to excessive overtime, 
which leads to excessive fatigue, and one worker trying to do 
what two or three workers should be accomplishment . . . 
accomplishing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is this NDP government going to realize that 
there’s a serious shortage of health care workers in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We appreciate 
receiving the attention from the Provincial Auditor around a 
number of things that we’re doing in the health sector. And I 
think the important part is that, listening to the advice that he’s 
given and people throughout the system, we’ve been able to 
make improvements. 
 
This year’s report has some comments around workplace 
injuries and this affirms the commitment that we’ve had to 
address this issue. And we’ve dealt with many, many different 
things. And one of the issues relates to numbers of employees, 
but there are also many other issues that relate to workplace 
injuries. We’ll continue to work with the regional health 
authorities, with all of the employers across the province in the 
health field, and we’ll work with the Provincial Auditor because 
that’s how we find solutions that make our system better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s exactly because this 
government has neglected this issue over the years that the 
Provincial Auditor has finally found it important to bring it to 
the attention of government so that something may be done 
about this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rather than being something that the government 
should feel happy about, they should be embarrassed that the 
Provincial Auditor has to bring to the attention of this 
government something that has been obvious to the health care 
system for years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this excessive injury rate in health care workers is 
leading to a costing of millions of dollars of health care money 
that’s used to cover sick time and injury time. Mr. Speaker, 
health care workers in this province need to know and count on 
the fact that they’re going to work in safe workplaces and 
there’s going to be adequate measures taken, including enough 
health care workers, so that health care can be provided in a 
safe and proper way. 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that he’s neglected the 
supply of health care workers in this province? And when is he 
going to draw attention to it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working 
diligently with all of our colleagues across the country around 
the shortage of health care workers in various areas. We’ll 
continue to do that. But I think that one of the things that we 
should point out is that our regional health authorities, the main 
employers of health care workers in the province, have been 
working very hard around issues related to workplace injuries. 
 
In 2001 for example, the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority 
was accredited by the Canadian Council on Health Services 
Accreditation as it related to improvement of processes related 
to workplace injuries. And they came out in that accreditation 
as above average in all areas related to workplace injuries. 
 
And part of what the challenge is is to continue to identify those 
areas where we need to improve, and work at them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Law Enforcement 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Last week the NDP 
government announced phase 2 of an auto theft strategy 
implemented in Regina last year. The general strategy has had 
some impact as auto thefts in Regina so far have dropped about 
10 per cent over the last year. 
 
But the rate of car thefts is still very high for a city of this size. 
And in fact in April the number of cases of stolen cars jumped 
over the earlier months of the year. The number of car thefts is 
still on pace to top 2,000 this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Part of phase 2, Mr. Speaker, includes two more police officers 
to be added to the seven currently working in the Regina Police 
Service’s stolen auto unit. However my understanding is that 
those two additional officers will not be assigned until next 
January. Mr. Speaker, why will it take so long to give the stolen 
auto unit an increase in manpower? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want the member to know 
that I was very pleased, along with the Minister of Corrections 
and Public Safety, to tour the place where this kind of strategy 
is being carried out in Regina. And presently there’s some 
construction going on at Dewdney Avenue, where workers who 
will intensively work with young people who are involved in 
car theft are going to be housed. There is some planning to be 
done. That planning is underway, and when the team is in place 
the police officers will be there to join the team. 
 
And I want to say for the benefit of the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, that contrary to the implication of his question, a 
representative of the Regina Police Service, Mr. Clive Weighill, 
was at the press conference, and he was very praiseworthy, Mr. 
Speaker, about the . . . I believe he said up to 20 additional 

police officers that had been allocated for strategic habitual 
offender work in Regina and other centres. He was very pleased 
with the activities of the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the real answer is that the 
Regina police services has limited manpower, and any 
assignment of people to a stolen auto unit reduces manpower to 
other areas such as street patrol. It is simply a shuffling of the 
deck, Mr. Speaker. There were 11 officers assigned to the auto 
unit at the start of this year and it is due to their hard work that 
the numbers were kept in check. But now there are only seven 
officers left in the unit dealing with more offenders released to 
the street, and the summer is a time when this is most critical, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those seven officers in the unit are now being asked, with 
phase 2, to provide more monitoring, more curfew checks, and 
to keep the number of stolen autos in Regina as down as far as 
they can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why isn’t the NDP providing more resources on a 
timely basis to the Regina Police Service to help them do the 
job that they are being asked to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to report to 
this House and to the people of the province that since 1999 the 
Government of Saskatchewan has funded 142, Mr. Speaker, 
142 additional police positions. 
 
And I want the member to know, Mr. Speaker, that in addition 
to that, certain rules with respect to the reporting of accidents, 
Mr. Speaker, have been revised, saving the time which has, 
according to the police, the effect of increasing the number of 
police officers by an additional 12, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want the member to know that policing is being made 
more effective through the provision of a new radio system, Mr. 
Speaker, which will make police resources go further. 
 
I also want the member to know that The Pawned Property 
(Recording) Act which is going through this House will further 
enhance the tools available to police. Because we believe in 
safe communities, Mr. Speaker, and we invite that party to join 
us in those efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister hops, steps, and jumps around the question. He tries to 
take pride, as a typical socialist would, for a promise of 142 that 
he says that they’ve put in when they promised 200. He hasn’t 
even taken into account those people who have retired and 
moved elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That commitment certainly doesn’t help the numbers of police 
manpower when retirements in the police service so far outpace 
that. When officers must be reassigned from the front lines of 
the patrol to special units like the one we’re just discussing 
now, it takes away from the number of people on the street to 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

deal with the calls that the police get on a regular day. 
 
If the province is going to demand results from the police like 
they have through this auto theft strategy, they had better 
provide adequate resources so the police service can meet those 
expectations. It has been proven, Mr. Speaker, that, given the 
resources, the police do get the job done and make a huge 
difference in reducing crime rates. 
 
So why has the NDP not kept their promise of delivering 200 
new police officers to the forces? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to report to 
the House and to the people of the province that this year the 
province will be contributing $91 million toward policing costs 
in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that is an increase of $21 million 
over four years ago and that is a record — a record, Mr. 
Speaker — contribution towards the cost of policing in this 
province. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member’s 
question about the city of Regina Police Service, the 
representative of the city of Regina police department at the 
news conference the other day, Mr. Speaker, was very 
praiseworthy of the additional resources that have come to the 
city of Regina for policing — very praiseworthy was the deputy 
chief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if I have to take the word of the deputy chief of police of 
the city of Regina or the member from Rosthern, I’ll be content 
to take the word of the police in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Children in the Sex Trade 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Minister of Justice. The car theft 
numbers in Saskatchewan clearly demonstrate that if police and 
justice and social services personnel have the resources, they 
can implement effective programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the same should be true of the effort to reduce the 
number of children being abused in the sex trade. 
Unfortunately, according to a report in last Friday’s paper, the 
number of children involved in the sex trade is growing. Social 
agencies estimate there are as many as 300 children being 
abused in the sex trade on Regina streets today. And they also 
warn that hundreds of other Regina children are at risk of being 
forced into the sex trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has clearly failed children on Regina’s 
inner city streets. What specific actions is the NDP government 
intending to take now to fix its failing approach to the child sex 
trade in Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 
the question. I think she would also be interested to know that 
the presenter who was speaking at the occasion she’s referring 

to was referring to a number that the committee in fact had 
estimated, but in fact is of the view that the number of children 
who are being sexually exploited in Regina these days is 
probably more accurate somewhere in the range of 40 to 50. 
However, Mr. Speaker, the important issue here is not the 
numbers because the fact of the matter is that one is too many. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, since the issue was addressed through this 
House in the last session, a number of things have happened. As 
we discussed in estimates for the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment last week, there have been 
intervention committees put in place in around the province. 
There are 26 privatized services, Mr. Speaker, that are 
addressing the needs of kids when, for their own protection . . . 
that they are provided them as victims, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the report 
in the paper clearly indicated that the social agencies were 
referring to the number of children in the sex trade in Regina. 
So whether or not that was a mistaken number by that social 
agency I guess is for the minister to question. In time, in the 
days ahead, I hope that he does that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s also important for this government to 
recognize that other recommendations from the Child Sex 
Trade Committee are very important and need to be 
implemented to make sure that the children out on the streets 
are getting the services they need and that pimps and johns are 
deterred. 
 
And that’s why the Saskatchewan Party has proposed 
legislation giving police and social workers the authority to 
remove abused children from the sex trade and put them in 
protective, secure care for assessment. And that is why the 
Saskatchewan Party also supports tough laws that severely 
punish men who abuse those children, with automatic jail 
sentences or a minimum mandatory fine of $25,000 on their 
first offence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister agree today to draft tough new 
legislation as proposed by the Saskatchewan Party that protects 
children from abuse in the sex trade and hands out harsh, 
meaningful punishment to the sexual predators who are abusing 
children on our streets every day? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think in many ways the presenter at the workshop last week 
talked about what is necessary to address the issue in a 
responsible and effective way. 
 
I quote from the article that: 
 

Cavers predicted it will take a tremendous effort to cripple 
the child sex trade but if groups work together, progress 
can be made. 

 
And it goes on to say that: 
 

. . . there are many efforts at both the grassroots level and at 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

 

the government level to try and keep children off the street. 
 
Acknowledges that. Mr. Speaker, it is a . . . I recognize it is the 
proposal by the Saskatchewan Party that what should be done in 
effect is to, in effect is to cause children to feel like criminals by 
locking them, by removing them and locking them away. Mr. 
Speaker, in my consultations very clearly the road to recovery 
and rehabilitation for these kids, who we must remember are 
victims — who are victims — is not to lock them up. 
 
The road to recovery, to rehabilitation, is to begin a relationship 
that is based on trust. And, Mr. Speaker, you don’t start a 
relationship built on trust by locking kids up. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that the . . . although we will continue to review to make 
sure we’re doing the best possible, that the best approach is the 
one that’s being taken responsibly in the province of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the minister will know that it was 
members on both sides of this House that agreed to 
recommendation no. 23 from the committee that made 
recommendations to protect children. 
 
Recommendation no. 23 clearly indicates that on a pilot project 
basis, there should be protective secure care and it was 
recommended that be in the city of Regina. Now what that 
would do, Mr. Speaker, I think the minister knows, is to put the 
children in for assessment and help them to access the services 
on the road to recovery. 
 
But another point to be made, Mr. Speaker, is that according to 
Saskatchewan Justice, police have seized 95 cars from men 
arrested for attempting to pick up prostitutes. Clearly the police 
are trying hard to get the job done. But of those 95 vehicle 
seizures, at least 88 were returned to the offender after 
completion of johns school. And those 95 vehicle seizures 
resulted in just two convictions where children were involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why only two johns were 
convicted over the past 12 months for attempting to solicit a 
child for sex when social agencies are warning that the number 
of children being abused in the sex trade is growing at an 
alarming rate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the number of people that 
will be apprehended and charged with an offence will be 
dependent, Mr. Speaker, upon the work of the police. And I 
want the member to know, Mr. Speaker, that the police do their 
utmost under difficult circumstances, with respect to a crime 
which is difficult to establish, to ensure that people are not 
engaged in this kind of activity. 
 
But I want to say for the benefit of the member, Mr. Speaker, 
that many of the measures that have been undertaken by this 
government with respect to vehicle apprehension, the anti-john 
laws, and so on have reduced the number of sexual predators 
who are driving around looking for children to abuse on the 

streets. It has had a positive effect. 
 
So the effect, Mr. Speaker, goes beyond the arrest and charging 
of individuals. It also relates to prevention. It also relates to 
education of people through johns school. This horrendous 
crime, Mr. Speaker, is taken seriously by everyone. The police 
are doing the very best they can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I would 
like to advise all members that I did lay on the Table, the 
Volume 1 of the 2003 Report of the Provincial Auditor to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and convert for 
debates returnable questions 610 through 648 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 610 to 648 have been converted to 
orders for return (debatable). 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Promotion of Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to enter into debate, and at the conclusion of my remarks 
I’ll be making the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly enthusiastically support the ongoing 
positive campaign by Saskatchewan business and the 
Saskatchewan government to publicize and promote 
Saskatchewan and its many opportunities, a campaign that 
is exhibiting strong leadership, inclusive participation, and 
the belief that Saskatchewan’s future is wide open (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a debate about two visions. On one side, 
Mr. Speaker, you have the government and our business leaders 
of the province that recognize that only through a positive 
attitude and a positive outlook for our province that our 
province will grow, prosper, and be a place that is envied by 
others in Canada and sought after by our youth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that’s a vision 
of a strong Saskatchewan that the business people in our 
province support, that the leaders in our business community 
want to see in our future, and that this government, led by the 
Premier, want to see for our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s a vision that’s being recognized by those 
leaders outside our province as well. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
talk for a minute about what an Alberta CEO (chief executive 
officer) sees in our province. Mr. Speaker, Nancy Southern is a 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

prominent member of Alberta’s business elite according to this 
article, Mr. Speaker. She was unabashed Wednesday in 
endorsing the Saskatchewan government’s Wide Open Future 
marketing program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, leaders from outside Saskatchewan recognize that 
in order to build and to grow, that our province needs to allow 
others to understand the many attributes and the many qualities 
our province has so that others outside our province can come 
and seek opportunity within Saskatchewan. And in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, so those within Saskatchewan understand that others 
see our province as a province of opportunity, a province that 
has a bright future for our children, and a province that, Mr. 
Speaker, people want to move to, to build new businesses and 
to contribute to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now Nancy Southern, a prominent Alberta CEO and 
businesswoman, she believes in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
and she believes in our Wide Open Future campaign, and she 
believes there’s a strong future for Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why can’t the members opposite also 
believe in our province? Because only through a bright and 
optimistic attitude can we have that bright, optimistic future. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would hope the members opposite are 
listening and can share with us our views of a very optimistic 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Nancy Southern goes on to say: 
 

“It is good commerce yes, but it is something more 
important,” she said. “We’ve encountered open, 
hard-working, straightforward visionary people with the 
highest integrity, dedicated to excellence for whom we 
have the highest regard.” 

 
That’s what Nancy Southern says about our province, our 
business leaders, our Premier, and our government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And, Mr. Speaker, I wish the members opposite 
could share that vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Paul Martin, a very well-known local media voice, 
shares the view of this government that our future in 
Saskatchewan is wide open, and that in fact that we only can 
move to our potential in the future by sharing with the rest of 
the country and with the people of the province our view of a 
positive future in which we all can prosper, which includes all 
people, which is inclusive of all of the people in our province, 
Mr. Speaker, and that creates opportunity for small-business 
people, for corporations, for Aboriginal First Nations people, 
Mr. Speaker, and for most of all, for our youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the vision this government has for the 
future. But I want to contrast that a little bit with the vision that 
the opposition has put forward, Mr. Speaker. They portray a 
province that’s in a mess, a province that’s in a death spiral, a 
province that has no future. Mr. Speaker, they talk about . . . 
negatively always about our province. They don’t talk about 
anything optimistically, Mr. Speaker. They talk about our 

province as if it’s something that has no future. 
 
So if they want to talk about the province in a negative way, 
Mr. Speaker, how do we expect people to view our province 
optimistically? How do we expect business people to come to 
our province? How do we expect them to view our 
opportunities enthusiastically when members of the legislature 
from the Saskatchewan Party talk about our province with 
nothing but a negative vision? Mr. Speaker, they do more to 
hurt the future of our province than they do to help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but that doesn’t surprise me. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite don’t believe in the positive 
opportunities of our province. Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about 
a party that views things from a negative perspective. We’re 
talking about a party whose members will elect a candidate, and 
whose party executive and party leader will overturn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most Saskatchewan residents understand that in a 
baseball game the team that gets the most runs wins; that in the 
local hockey rink when you go watch the hockey game, that the 
team who gets the most goals wins. It’s a pretty simple concept, 
Mr. Speaker. It happened last night, Mr. Speaker. In the NHL 
(National Hockey League) Stanley Cup playoffs, Anaheim got 
one goal, New Jersey got no goals, Anaheim wins — pretty 
simple concept, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that applies, Mr. Speaker, to all sports. But, Mr. Speaker, 
in the constituency of Melville-Saltcoats, the new constituency 
of Melville-Saltcoats, a long-standing party member, 
long-standing party member with the Saskatchewan Party . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I’d like to bring to the 
member’s attention the subject of the debate which deals with 
the ongoing positive campaign of Saskatchewan business and 
government to publicize Saskatchewan. I’d ask him to stick to 
the topic. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just getting 
around to connecting all these items, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In looking at an optimistic province where business leaders and 
businesses want to come to our province, Mr. Speaker, they 
have to have confidence. And they have to have confidence not 
just in the government, but they also have to have confidence in 
the opposition parties, Mr. Speaker. So in having that 
confidence, Mr. Speaker, they have to look to the future. And 
when they’re looking at the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker — or 
Mr. Speaker, pardon me — they must look at what the 
possibilities might be. 
 
So I just think that the business leaders and the people of our 
country who are looking at Saskatchewan have to understand 
that if they were to elect the Saskatchewan Party — a party who 
will let one of its members stand to be their candidate; a 
member who was their constituency president, Mr. Speaker, and 
who will go out and will win that constituency candidacy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker; and then the party will overturn the will of the 
people. Now, Mr. Speaker, if the party will overturn the will of 
the people then, Mr. Speaker, can that party be trusted to govern 
the province, Mr. Speaker? I say not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our country is founded on democracy, and our 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

 

business leaders look to our democracy to be the foundation of 
the future in order to build a strong province. In order for our 
business leaders to build new businesses in Saskatchewan, they 
have to have confidence, Mr. Speaker. They have to have 
confidence that the government at any point in time, Mr. 
Speaker, is going to listen to the people. And, Mr. Speaker, in 
listening to the people can you move forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how can you move forward and how 
can a political party that will overturn the will of the people, 
that will overturn the will of the people in an elected . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I find it 
rather strange that the member’s not sticking to the topic of his 
very own motion. And I would ask the member to quickly 
reread the motion and get himself on the topic. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I think talking about the legislature 
and the government and its political parties, Mr. Speaker, talks 
about building our future. And we are dealing with, Mr. 
Speaker, the fact that we need to build an ongoing, positive 
future for our province, for our children, for our youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in building that positive attitude, business people 
need to understand that those essential services that they believe 
and have come to know in our province are going to continue to 
exist — Mr. Speaker, publicly funded health care; Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, that deliver if not the lowest rates in 
Canada, among the lowest rates in Canada; Mr. Speaker, an 
education system that’s publicly funded, where our children get 
a quality of education and have equity of education at a level 
not attained anywhere else in the G-8, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those things businesses need to understand, if we’re going to 
build a prosperous future, if they’re going to come to this 
province, they’re going to move their families here, and they’re 
going to look to the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they need to know that if in fact those things 
are there, that they’re going to be there in the future. They need 
to know what the future for health care is. They need to know 
what the future for education is, and they need to know what the 
future of our Crown corporations are, Mr. Speaker. They need 
to understand that if they build in our province today that the 
foundation in which they move to is going to be there 
tomorrow. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have in the opposition a party that has 
hidden agendas. It doesn’t lay out its platform. They talk about 
privatizing, Mr. Speaker. They talk about privatizing elements 
of health care. They talk about privatizing liquor stores. They 
talk about privatizing Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, we can’t have a wide-open future. We can’t build the 
foundation if that foundation’s going to continue to change in a 
way that’s negative to the public. It’s got to be about what’s 
good for the business people of our province. It’s got to be 
about what’s good for the working people of our province. It’s 
got to be about what’s good for the First Nations people of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. It can’t be about what’s good for a 
political ideology, Mr. Speaker. 

Now we have a campaign that we’re going out and telling the 
people of Canada about our opportunities of the future. We’re 
going out and trying to build the future for our children. And 
what do the opposition opposite say, Mr. Speaker? They talk 
about negativity. They stand and they talk about privatizing 
things. They talk about taking away things. They’re promising 
all things to all people, Mr. Speaker, and they can’t afford it. 
They can’t deliver it, Mr. Speaker. They should worry about . . . 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition should worry about being positive 
about our future instead of negative. They should worry about 
building our future for our children. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they should look at the foundations of our 
province — our Crown corporations, our education system, our 
health care system — and not talk about privatizing them, Mr. 
Speaker, but to continue to deliver those base services for the 
people of Saskatchewan; those services which the people of 
Saskatchewan have come to expect, have come to believe in, 
and have come to rely upon for their families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in a wide-open, bright future, it’ll be a future 
that the government will respect all people. It’ll be inclusive in 
its decisions, Mr. Speaker. It won’t reject ideas, Mr. Speaker. It 
will look to the future with optimism. It’ll provide the basic 
services that our communities need and our businesses need to 
continue to grow. But it’ll always look, Mr. Speaker, to a future 
that’s bright, wide open, and accountable for all our people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our government, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, believes in a wide-open future, and I wish the 
members opposite took the time to understand that only through 
a positive attitude can change be achieved. Mr. Speaker, the 
negative attitude that the members opposite bring forward on a 
daily basis does nothing to grow Saskatchewan. What’s the 
goal, Mr. Speaker? It’s simply a goal to obtain power for 
power’s sake. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want more from 
their elected representatives. The members . . . The people of 
Saskatchewan want a future. They want a wide open future 
that’s inclusive of all people, that’s optimistic — a future that 
creates opportunities for our youth, for business, for 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, for our farm families and, most of 
all, for our children. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin: 
 

That this Assembly enthusiastically support the ongoing 
positive campaign by Saskatchewan business and the 
Saskatchewan government to publicize and promote 
Saskatchewan and its many opportunities, a campaign that 
is exhibiting strong leadership, inclusive participation, and 
the belief that Saskatchewan’s future is wide open. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased to second the motion, the rather excellent motion I 
believe, made by the member from Regina Dewdney. 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

Now there is absolutely no doubt in my mind and there’s no 
doubt in most of the public’s mind and certainly not in the 
members of government’s mind that Saskatchewan is poised to 
enter its second century in great shape with a growing economy, 
its many, many opportunities that present themselves. And a 
newly elected New Democratic Party government, Mr. Speaker, 
will secure its future as it has guided its past. And I’m very 
much looking forward to our celebration and I believe that our 
campaign that we’ve launched in partnership with the business 
community is going to secure that future even further. 
 
The Wide Open Future campaign by Saskatchewan business 
leaders and our government to publicize and to promote 
Saskatchewan is just what the doctor ordered, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s working. We’ve been quiet for far too long, Mr. Speaker, 
and now it’s time — it’s time to toot our own horn. It’s time to 
let others in on the big, big secret that we’ve been very silent 
about, Mr. Speaker, and that is that Saskatchewan is a great 
place to live, a great place to work and to do business, and a 
wonderful place to raise families. 
 
But the Sask Party doesn’t think so, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
very noisily, very noisily speaking out in this Assembly and in 
the media and in the public, telling anyone who will listen that 
Saskatchewan has nothing to offer, and everything would be 
solved if only the Saskatchewan people would let them govern. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not going to happen. It’s not going to 
happen, and I’ll tell you why. It’s not going to happen because 
it’s a simple matter of trust. The people he would govern don’t 
trust him. They don’t trust the Leader of the Sask Party, and 
they don’t trust his party members. 
 
And why would they? We’ve seen in this session where they 
issue a press release in the morning and have to retract it later in 
the day. We’ve seen in this session a Sask Party member taking 
two quotes from Hansard and running them together to 
fabricate a different quote, and released that off to the media 
and then have to apologize. 
 
We’ve seen them trying in vain to explain away their real plan 
for the Crown corporations — and that plan, as we all know, is 
to privatize them. We’ve heard them in this session and last fall 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Would the 
member please relate . . . take effort to relate her remarks to the 
motion on hand. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Indeed I will, Mr. Speaker. And I will do that by 
showing that the Saskatchewan is wide open . . . 
Saskatchewan’s Wide Open Future campaign is about positive, 
positive action. It’s about promoting our province. It’s about all 
of the good things that are happening contrasted with the 
negativity that we see from across the way. And how the future 
of our province is so tied to a positive attitude and so very . . . 
It’s so very important not to have this negativity, and it’s 
important to the people to know what that negativity is. 
 
There are many examples of the platform of the Sask Party that 
are very hurtful to Saskatchewan and how they have gone about 
trying to undermine our public service. They’ve gone about 
saying that they would follow Gordon Campbell’s core services 

review, and we know what that’s done to that province, and we 
know that that province’s future at this particular time in history 
is not wide open. And we don’t want that same kind of thing to 
happen in our province. 
 
They want to ferret out as they say, the skunks and the 
deadwood and then say, oh no, that’s not true, the civil service 
is safe in this province. And then in year-end remarks, they turn 
around and say, well we’re putting them on notice that there 
will be changes and there will be absolutely no question about 
that. And so I don’t want Saskatchewan’s Wide Open Future 
campaign to be over clouded by the negativity that we hear 
coming from the other side of the House. 
 
We know what that negativity has meant in BC (British 
Columbia). It means that there are more people living on the 
streets. There are more people . . . The schools are busting at the 
seams. Their universities are in decline. And ours, Mr. Speaker, 
with the very wise motto and the wise campaign that we’ve 
launched are really . . . We’ve invested greatly in the 
infrastructure. There’s much going on as a science centre. And 
we need to boast about that. We need to talk about it. 
 
There’s much going on in Prince Albert at the moment and 
what we hear across the way is a member who says no, we 
shouldn’t be doing that. It’s not good for the wide open future 
of Saskatchewan to have a forestry centre in P.A. (Prince 
Albert). And then he takes a little trip to P.A. and the 
community there says, yes indeed, it is a good thing to have the 
forestry centre in P.A. and in downtown P.A. at that. And we’re 
very pleased with that. 
 
And so the member comes back and he says, well okay, the 
people up there say it is a good thing so I guess it is a good 
thing. And then he comes back to Regina and his leader says 
well he might have said yes, but I’m here to tell you that he 
really meant no and it’s not a good thing and no, there is no 
difference between what he says and what I say; it’s the same 
thing. 
 
So imagine what kind of a wide open future Saskatchewan 
would have if we had a leader and an opposition that happened 
to be on this side of the House as government making all of 
these confusing messages to the public when our message is 
crystal clear — Saskatchewan’s Future is Wide Open. And 
we’ve very, very proud of that campaign. 
 
So the negativity that goes on and on from that side of the 
House and has absolutely nothing good to say about the 
province, it’s . . . They’re so power hungry, so power hungry 
that they will stop at nothing including painting a very bad 
picture of our province, painting a picture of doom and gloom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our job numbers increase every month for many 
months in a row. They’re doing so well. What do they say? 
Absolutely nothing. They’re silent on the fact that our job 
numbers are doing very well. When more and more families 
leave social assistance to find new opportunities in jobs and in 
training, what do they say? They don’t say anything. So you 
see, Mr. Speaker, they can’t seem to say anything nice so 
perhaps it’s that old adage — if you can’t say anything nice, 
don’t say anything at all. 
 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

 

But on the other hand they do see things. When business and 
government leaders across this nation praise the efforts of our 
Wide Open Future campaign, the member from Lloydminster 
says we have nothing here to attract investors. Now what kind 
of a thing to say is that when our future is so good and other 
people across this nation recognize our efforts, and he says we 
have nothing here. The member from Cannington, he says that 
we’re selling snake oil. Well what a thing to say when our 
future is wide open and people are coming here, and people are 
proud of this government. 
 
I would like to end my remarks, Mr. Speaker. There’s so much 
that I wanted to have an opportunity to say but I’d like to end 
my remarks with some more positive news, and this came, this 
little snippet came from the Premier’s address to the Regina 
business luncheon that was held — a very, very successful 
luncheon I must say — building on the number of participants 
year after year, anxious, anxious to hear the positive message 
from our government. And what the Premier said to that group 
was: 
 

What we have accomplished in just the past two or three 
years tells me, it guarantees me, that there is little we 
cannot do if we put our minds to it — if we dream big, plan 
well and work hard. And it tells me that those who say it 
can’t be done should just stop interrupting those of us who 
are doing it. It tells me that the 21st Century . . . (is ours, is) 
our time to shine. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to end on that note, that the 
21st century is our time to shine, that the government and the 
business community’s Wide Open Future campaign is a very 
positive step in making that shine, and just to repeat one more 
time that those who say it can’t be done should just stop 
interrupting those who are doing it. 
 
So thank you very much, I’m very pleased to second the motion 
for the member from Regina Dewdney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m glad to 
stand in the House today and enter into this debate. And before 
I read the motion, I’d just like to compliment the Deputy 
Speaker on his superhero tie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly enthusiastically support the ongoing 
positive campaign by Saskatchewan business and the 
Saskatchewan government to publicize and promote 
Saskatchewan and its many opportunities, a campaign that 
is exhibiting strong leadership, inclusive participation, and 
the belief that Saskatchewan’s future is wide open. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I haven’t observed as much dribble 
since my two-year-old son Blake moved from a sippy cup to a 
big-boy cup. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot speak in favour of this motion, and I’m 
going to go through it and give the reasons why. 

To begin with, our first sentence — that this Assembly 
enthusiastically support the ongoing positive campaign. It 
would seem to me that in 1999, the election of this Assembly, 
that the popular vote did not fall with the government. As a 
matter of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it fell with the side of the 
House that is now the opposition and the 
government-in-waiting. Which begs the question, is . . . from 
that point, how does that allow for the ability for great 
enthusiasm to be demonstrated throughout the motion in this 
Assembly when the majority of the populace of this province 
never elected this government? 
 
Further to that, we have a Premier that came on partway 
through, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who has yet to face the electorate 
in a general election. There has been ample opportunity. And 
that again begs the question relative to the first sentence in this 
motion whether enthusiasm would be capable within this 
Assembly of supporting an ongoing positive campaign. 
 
The question regarding the positive nature of the campaign 
causes some questions to be raised about can a positive 
campaign and propaganda be differentiated one from the other, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? And it would seem to me that there’s a 
good possibility that it could be. 
 
But when we see the Our Future is Wide Open campaign 
entered into by this government and the idea of promoting 
Saskatchewan, it begs the question whether it can be positive 
when 60 per cent of the budget for that campaign has to be 
spent within the province to tell our own citizenry how good 
things are. It would seem to me — because I’ve known a 
number of people in Saskatchewan, having lived here and been 
born here — that most people are able to make their own 
decisions and wouldn’t have to be fed propaganda. 
 
So when we get to the second part of the sentence, it’s difficult, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that an ongoing positive campaign is even 
part of the question. 
 
Further to that, it goes on to say that this campaign is supported 
by Saskatchewan business. And it would seem to me that there 
would be dollar figures related to anything that business tends 
to support. They tend to do their own promotions, their own 
advertising, and we don’t really see this in our Future is Wide 
Open campaign. The business community hasn’t seen fit to 
making contributions towards this kind of propaganda. 
 
What we have seen fit is the business community making great 
contributions towards the party in opposition. And I can assure 
the Deputy Speaker that that’s going to aid very much in having 
a change in government as . . . (inaudible) . . . As we continue 
to go on through the motion and we talk about publicize and 
promote Saskatchewan and its many opportunities, and this 
begs the questions on the question of those opportunities in and 
of itself. 
 
There’s no doubt to any member of this Assembly that we have 
a province that is blessed with a great abundance of natural and 
human resources, yet we have a government that sees fit to 
squander these on an ongoing and systematic basis. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opportunities speak for themselves — 
16 consecutive quarters of population loss. And why is this, Mr. 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

Deputy Speaker? 
 
Well it’s because we have a present government that is unable 
to ensue confidence in the citizenry so that more of them, every 
year for the last 16 consecutive quarters, have left the province 
than have come in. And this is largely in part, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because of the way that the government has first of all 
handled our economy and second of all has handled the 
opportunities therein. The have tried to have a centrally planned 
economy where Crown corporations and the government needs 
to run everything, as well as having a high taxation jurisdiction. 
 
We can see that historically the royalties for oil in 
Saskatchewan — and they’ve come down and we’ve had some 
new drilling which should be commended — but historically 
they were the highest tax jurisdiction in North America. This is 
a complete contradiction to this motion, Mr. Speaker, 
specifically with regards to the point on opportunities. 
 
The next point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I see that I’m a little 
more than halfway through, we’d get, following the comma, 
that this is exhibiting strong leadership. Strong leadership 
would entail that it would come from a leader, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker; and the attributes demonstrated by a superhero such as 
Batman, as demonstrated on your tie, have not been 
demonstrated by our current Premier where we’ve had a 
situation where he has come in, he’s been elected by a tiny 
majority of individuals within the New Democratic Party, and 
he has been the longest serving Premier that’s never faced a 
general election. 
 
These are not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the attributes of strong 
leadership. They’re the attributes of a wee Premier, and I 
believe those are his words, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. A couple of points just 
to have the din be removed a little bit from the Assembly. Also 
to remind the member that he’s not to involve the Chair in 
debate and draw the Chair into debate. And thirdly, also to use 
parliamentary language. Whether a member uses a term to 
describe themselves or not, if the term is unparliamentary, then 
other members are not permitted to use that term as well. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, may I say right away that if I have said 
something that’s offensive, I withdraw that and I’d beg the 
members opposite their pardon. 
 
I was, as a returning to the motion, commenting on the aspect, 
behind the first comma, of a campaign that is exhibiting strong 
leadership and making comment to that in that I believe the 
demonstration of leadership has been sorely lacking. 
 
We’ve seen the current government, following the SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) fiasco, 
promise open and accountable government at a precedent 
unseen before and yet we have the member, I believe from 
Dewdney, who is converting questions left, right, and centre at 
a very rapid rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following that to the next point in the motion, we 
have that it is to be inclusive in participation. And again that is 
very difficult to comprehend when we have more than half of 

the population did not vote for this current government in 1999. 
 
We have a coalition of sorts — and from that there seem to be a 
large number of persons excluded. You can ask the members of 
my riding, by and large, or the members from the riding of Cut 
Knife, which just recently both gone through by-elections. And 
you could see from the voter returns that there are many people 
that feel that there is not a participation in this government. 
 
So to end all that in the belief that the future of Saskatchewan is 
wide open, unfortunately in and of itself and the history has 
proven that that is not the point. And to those ends then, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I will be moving an amendment to the motion. 
And the amendment would contain . . . It’ll be moved by 
myself, seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 
And the amendment would read as follows, that we move: 
 

That all words after “enthusiastically” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
congratulate the people, workers, and businesses of 
Saskatchewan for their talent, initiative, and determination 
to create economic growth in Saskatchewan despite being 
constantly hampered by a provincial government that 
seems to be determined to drive away much needed private 
investment which has only served to hold back our 
province and keep us from achieving our great economic 
potential. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that all we need to do is look at the 
history of our province. From 1905 up to 1929 we had a rapid 
growth in population and economic boom — and the large 
factor there was we were not inhibited by an ideology of 
socialism which crept up on us after the 1930s — and we 
haven’t seen a return. 
 
And to that end, Mr. Speaker, I would have our . . . I would end 
debate and allow other, my seconder to speak on the 
amendment as presented. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
an important motion that we’re discussing today, and the 
amendment follows very well upon it. The reason for its 
importance is that it lays out very clearly and succinctly for the 
people of this province the difference in the philosophies. 
 
But before we get into that aspect, I think we need to underline 
how great this province is, Mr. Speaker, and how great the 
people are in this particular province for the initiative that they 
have had, for the perseverance they’ve had — whether we talk 
about grasshoppers, we talk about weather, we talk about 
snowstorms, we talk about hospital lineups, or we talk about the 
NDP. 
 
There is no end of obstacles that this particular province and the 
people of this province have had to put up with and yet they 
have persevered, Mr. Speaker. They have persevered decade 
after decade after decade. 
 
And it’s an amazing people that can go ahead and survive as 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

 

long as the people of this province had, with a government, an 
NDP social government that only twice, Mr. Speaker, twice in 
the history of this province, have ever had more than 50 per 
cent, more than 50 per cent of the votes — more than 50 per 
cent. The other 15 times that they’ve been in charge of this 
province they’ve had less than that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the most unelected government we have ever had in 
province. This is probably the most unelected government 
we’ve ever had in the history of North America, and it’s a 
shame. But it’s a great credit, it’s a great credit to the people of 
this province that they have stuck it out. 
 
Unfortunately during the time that we’ve managed to maintain 
1 million people, we’ve lost millions that have gone out of this 
province and built Alberta and Manitoba and North Dakota and 
British Columbia and Ontario. Virtually every part of this 
world, Mr. Speaker, has benefited from the people of 
Saskatchewan. Unfortunately their gain has been our loss. Their 
gain has been our loss. 
 
And it comes back to that philosophical aspect that I mentioned 
just recently. The philosophical aspect comes out of something 
you will find if you check on your handy dandy little computer 
and you want to find out, and you go on the Web site of the 
NDP, you want to find out what they stand for. 
 
They have an archaic bit of literature there, Mr. Speaker, called 
the Regina Manifesto. It even sounds stuffy. It sounds stuffy 
and it sounds dusty. Unfortunately it hasn’t been put to rest by 
the socialists. They actually voted for it at one of their 
conventions within the last decade and said, we still believe 
this, we still believe this. 
 
And what does it say? And here’s where the credit needs to go 
to the people of Saskatchewan. A key part of that says . . . And 
we have a lot of labour critics, but the interesting thing is when 
you look at the labour people elected by the NDP, where are 
they sitting, Mr. Speaker? They’re all sitting in a back row; 
they’re all sitting in a back row. You would think after being 
leaders of their own little empires they’d be able to move right 
to the front. But no. 
 
Sitting in the front they have RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) people, they have ministers, they have insurance 
salesmen, and their union leadership sits at the back. 
 
Anyways, back to my point and back to what we’re discussing 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They have in that Regina Manifesto 
the key item, the key item that brings so much credit to the 
people of Saskatchewan — not that they voted for it. They 
voted against it most of the time, almost always. Even in this 
last election, Mr. Speaker, we need to bring to the attention of 
the NDP, they got less votes than the Saskatchewan Party. Not 
only did they get less than 50 per cent, they got less than the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
There’s only one party of the three in this House — well three 
and a third because there’s a few there that are part of the 
coalition, we’re not quite sure where they belong — that they 
beat and that is the Liberals with one member. They did beat 
that, Mr. Speaker. We’ll give them credit. They got more votes 
than the Liberal. But that’s all. 

(15:00) 
 
Back to the Regina Manifesto and the credit the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve. There’s a key part in that that says 
government should own all aspects of production. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, now, Mr. Speaker, it’s taken a little while. 
Tommy Douglas is gone. He managed to snow a few people in 
this province and they didn’t quite see through him. 
 
The people in rural Saskatchewan have seen through that 
because they know when it says the government should own all 
means of production, it means the NDP if they had their way — 
and most particularly those labour people in the back rows over 
there — if they had their way, Mr. Speaker, they would own 
every single acre in this province. 
 
They’ve tried it before. They’ve tried it before and they were 
kicked out. And if they thought there was a hope of doing it 
again, they would do it again. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, 
have not just persevered against cold and drought and 
grasshoppers but they’ve had to persevere against a government 
that has actively said, and put it on their television screens when 
they check their Web site, that they want to own the means of 
production which is the very farms they live on. They’d like to 
turn every single farmer in this country into peons. Turn them 
into serfs. That’s what they want, Mr. Speaker. Their own 
documents indicate that. 
 
Now there’s a few of them, who now say they’re NDP, would 
like to say, well we stand up for labour. Let’s see how they 
stand up for labour. We’ve just had the mad cow crisis, Mr. 
Speaker. And one of the key things, key groups that have been 
injured because of that is the labour community — the labour 
community — those people who’ve been working hard in our 
slaughterhouses. Jobs that very often aren’t even the best jobs in 
the world, difficult jobs, hard jobs. Jobs this government should 
be protecting. 
 
And when, Mr. Speaker, throughout the rest of Canada, when 
the people in the fishing industry need some help, the federal 
government is right there and gives them some breaks in 
Unemployment Insurance. When it happens in SARS (severe 
acute respiratory syndrome) in Ontario, they give them a break. 
 
But when it happens in Saskatchewan to our people, what kind 
of a noise do we hear from these people? Next to nothing. Next 
to nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to give you a quote from the 
Premier. The Premier called himself a wee Premier. That . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member for 
Rosthern was here when I called the member for Kindersley to 
order, referring to people’s physical attributes and I cautioned 
him not to do that. So I would direct the member for Rosthern 
to stand in his place, apologize, and withdraw his remark. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I apologize for calling the Premier a little 
man. 
 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, if we look at part . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask him to 
withdraw the remark as well, and apologize and continue on 
with his remarks. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that remark and 
apologize to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the original, part of the original motion that 
we’re . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you required the hon. 
member to withdraw his remarks and apologize to the House. In 
violating the debate rules of the House, he has in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, brought into disrepute the House. The apology is not 
to an individual member, it’s to the House. And I would ask 
that you would require the hon. member to withdraw his remark 
and apologize to the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I appreciate the member’s point of 
order. I will offer the member for Rosthern the opportunity to 
clarify his apology. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I apologize to 
the House for that remark. 
 
As we said earlier on, the original motion, the original motion 
talked about strong leadership, Mr. Speaker. And what I was 
just talking about, when we talked about the workers in the 
meat industry, this government did not supply strong 
leadership. 
 
It’s the people of Saskatchewan that deserve credit for being 
able to withstand the ravages of this government. What should 
we have expected, Mr. Speaker? When those employees get 
sent home because there are no cattle to slaughter, this 
government should have stood up and screamed and hollered at 
the federal labour people and saying we deserve, we demand 
something. 
 
What did we hear? We had to beg and ask: have you made a 
phone call? Well the kind of thing we heard on a different issue, 
but still on the mad cow disease — it’s Thursday, I’ll pick up 
the phone on Monday, I’ll pick up the phone on Monday. That’s 
the attitude we’ve had from this NDP government. That’s the 
attitude. And that’s where the credit comes . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. As difficult as it is to 
believe, I’m having a hard time listening to the member for 
Rosthern. The sound is obviously beyond what it should be. I 
know everyone wants to be part of the debate and you will have 
the opportunity, but please allow the member from Rosthern to 
make his remarks uninterrupted. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Leadership is what 
we’re discussing here. Leadership is what it’s all about. We 
haven’t had it from this NDP government. 
 
We’ve seen it twice in spades in the last week: one on the issue 
of standing up for the people who are raising the beef; the other 

one, standing up for the people who are involved in the 
slaughter system. And it wasn’t there, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t 
there. 
 
Our amendment said that the credit needs to go to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And it’s amazing that any of those people would 
hang around this province when they see what this NDP 
government has done to them. There is no leadership. The 
credit goes to the people of Saskatchewan who time and again, 
and time and again would have it put to them by this 
government. And they say, well we’ll keep on trying. We’ll 
keep on trying. 
 
We’ll go to the polls again, time after time. Fifteen out of 
seventeen times they voted for other parties more than they 
voted for the NDP and not had their way. But time after time 
they will come back and they will vote again. Last election, Mr. 
Speaker, the Sask Party got more votes than the NDP did by far. 
This time, Mr. Speaker, we’ll not only get more votes, we will 
get more seats. We will get many more seats, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And had I but time, Mr. Speaker, had I but 
time, I would go down the front and the middle and the back 
rows of that NDP group and indicate which ones of those would 
not be back in this House, because their names are legion, Mr. 
Speaker. There are many of those that will never be back in 
here again. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan will persevere. They’ve 
persevered, as I’ve said, against drought and grasshoppers and 
the NDP. They will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I strongly support the amendment made. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am not sure who said it but someone in this House once said 
that strong and bitter words indicate a weak cause. And never, 
Mr. Speaker, is that truer than the statements that we’ve been 
seeing from the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion. I do not agree 
with the amendment in this particular case. 
 
I want to just briefly speak about three aspects of the debate that 
has been occurring: one is about the economy; one is about the 
Crown corporations, their role in Saskatchewan; and thirdly, 
about leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to the economy, one of the opposition speakers — 
and this is a current refrain from the members opposite — they 
portray a picture of Saskatchewan’s economy of they, the 
opposition, say that it’s a mess. Well that’s what they say, and 
that’s the impression that they like to create for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You would think that if the economy as such were such a major, 
critical issue and that it’s doing so badly, that this is something 
that they would raise on a daily basis in question period and 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

 

whatever other forums they have in this Legislative Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. They do not do that. They don’t raise those 
questions. 
 
Why is that, Mr. Speaker? Because contrary to the impression 
that they seek to create, and that is the impression that . . . is the 
nature of opposition they have to create, that things are never as 
good as they are. They seek to create the impression that things 
are bad. 
 
In fact the economy is doing quite well, Mr. Speaker, 
notwithstanding the fact that Saskatchewan has suffered two 
years, two years of the worst drought since the 1930s. In fact 
some say that the drought was worse than anything that we 
experienced in the 1930s. Saskatchewan’s economy is doing 
well and is projected to continue to do well. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Those, those, Mr. Speaker, are the facts 
of the matter, Mr. Speaker. Not our facts, but those are the facts 
that are confirmed by all those who have any role to play in 
commenting on economies in Canada. They say the 
Saskatchewan economy is doing very well and will continue to 
do very well in the months ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we have also seen now for 
12 consecutive months more jobs in Saskatchewan than the 
same month of the previous year — not by our measurement, 
Mr. Speaker, not by our measurement, but by measurement of 
some impartial federal agency, Mr. Speaker. Another indication 
that the economy in Saskatchewan is doing well and is 
projected to continue to do well, Mr. Speaker. And those are the 
facts of the matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also — and I’ve said this before in the House 
— it’s a reflection of the strengths of economies in Canada as to 
the extent of equalization payments they get from Ottawa. 
Weak economies in Canada receive great equalization payments 
from Ottawa. Strong economies in Canada do not get large 
equalization payments, if any, from Ottawa. 
 
The strongest economies in Canada are the Ontario economy 
and the Alberta economy. It used to be that the third-strongest 
economy in Canada was the British Columbia economy. Well 
now based on equalizations, it might be said fairly that the 
third-strongest economy in Canada is the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Contrary to the point of view that they 
would seek to portray, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy 
is doing well and will continue to do well. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And those are the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, and I can’t fault them for that, Mr. Speaker. This 

is something that they have to do in an election year. No one 
would elect an opposition to be the government if there is some 
sense that the economy was doing reasonably well, people were 
employed, businesses were doing businesses, people were 
making profits, people were making good wages, the tax 
revenues for the governments were increasing as a result in this 
strong economy. They couldn’t hope to get elected if that were 
the case. That is the case and that’s why they won’t be elected, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issue I just want to briefly touch on is the 
question of Crowns and why it is that we can be optimistic 
about our future in Saskatchewan, why it is that people are 
looking to Saskatchewan as an example of a strong economy in 
this country and part of it has to do with the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. Those Crown corporations deliver 
good services at reasonable rates to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Everybody knows that — good services at reasonable rates to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yet Crown corporations is one area that they consistently — 
that is the opposition — consistently criticize. And I think that 
reflects a fundamental belief on their part that they don’t 
support public enterprise. Fair enough, they don’t have to 
believe in Crown corporations. 
 
And if you examine the comments that they make, directly, 
indirectly, you get some sense that if they were ever to form the 
government that the attitude and position of the government of 
the day would change dramatically when it comes to Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the facts of the matter are one, that Crowns deliver good 
services at very reasonable rates to the people of Saskatchewan. 
There’s no denying that. In fact, what was it, Mr. Speaker, just 
the other day? There was an article in The Globe and Mail 
where an organization from the United States went out to 
survey all of the major cities in North America, all of the major 
cities in North America, and tried to ascertain which cities it 
was that were getting the best deal in terms of telephone 
services. 
 
And they concluded that not only were Canadian cities getting 
the best deal in terms of telephone services, but you know, Mr. 
Speaker, the very best deal, the very best deal of all the major 
cities in North America, of all the major cities in North 
America, the very best deal for basic telephone service was 
where, Mr. Speaker? Right here in Saskatchewan, in Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s where you got the very best deal. 
 
And I say that by way of example, Mr. Speaker, that we can be 
optimistic about our future because we do have those Crown 
corporations to provide very good services at reasonable rates, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s one of the conclusions I draw about Crown 
corporations, unlike the members opposite. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they like to point out the areas where 
Crowns have not been successful in investments, and I 
recognize that not all Crown investments are successful ones. 
And if anyone over there has a secret, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
that all investments are successful, I encourage those people to 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

go out of this Chamber and make the 10, 20, $100 million a 
year that they can make for having that kind of prescience, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But not all Crown investments are successful, but at the end of 
the day Crown corporations generate significant revenues for 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and lower the taxes that they 
would otherwise pay, Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, is no 
small thing for the taxpayers of this province. And that’s one of 
the conclusions I draw about Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also I think that one of the conclusions that people 
are drawing is that Saskatchewan people are fearful that if the 
opposition were ever, ever to form government, they would, in 
short, Mr. Speaker, mess with success, Mr. Speaker. And those 
Crown corporations are successful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, finally a word about 
leadership. Mr. Speaker, I listened to the members opposite and 
I, you know, when the member opposite was criticizing the 
government, and the Leader of the Opposition has done this, 
that every time, every time that there’s some potential source of 
conflict between the province and the federal government or 
other jurisdictions, they act in a fashion, Mr. Speaker, that 
reminds me of nothing but the stewardship of the province of 
Quebec by that separatist party, the Parti Québécois, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s what it reminds me of — a singular focus, a singular 
focus to the province regardless of the extent that you need to 
work with others to further your own case in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. They lose sight of that. It’s because they are a 
provincial party only and they have that narrow, narrow focus, 
Mr. Speaker, an inability to see a bigger picture, to work with 
others to further our own ends, and to ensure that we do have a 
wide open future in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is their 
great failing; that is our great strength, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 
pleasure that I take part in this debate today. And looking at this 
motion presented by members on the government side, it’s quite 
interesting when you read right in there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they talk about exhibiting strong leadership. Well in my time in 
this legislature we have seen strong leadership, but it certainly 
hasn’t been in the last few years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think what we saw from the leadership from this government 
in the last two or three years that we can really highlight, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that we now are running deficits, we are 
now increasing the debt in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
we are actually running this province into the ground, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
They talk about in this motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, inclusive 
participation. Well you know what that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
It’s this government going out and spending taxpayers’ money 
to compete against private business and in turn driving private 

business out of the province of Saskatchewan. How on earth, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that going to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
The one thing in this motion that I would agree with, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that Saskatchewan’s future is wide open. 
And do you know why? Because as soon as the Premier gets the 
intestinal fortitude to call an election, the people on this side of 
the House will make Saskatchewan wide open to the world. We 
will lower taxes, we will show business that they can make a 
profit by moving to Saskatchewan, and then we will see what is 
meant by, Saskatchewan is wide open for business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I only have a few 
minutes left but I’d like to touch on a few of the reasons I feel 
this province is falling behind. Our young people are leaving for 
Alberta and greener pastures. Look at our tax system. The past 
Finance minister and even the present Finance minister say, oh 
we’ve lowered taxes. We’re lowest in the country. 
 
Well that’s not exactly the truth, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re 
probably one of the highest taxed provinces in this country, 
when you add in income tax, the PST (provincial sales tax), gas 
tax. 
 
Look at the property tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, between 
municipal and education tax. And we all know that 
municipalities have been downloaded on and are at wit’s end on 
how to keep their tax base down. But what about education tax 
that this government has downloaded onto the property tax 
payer? 
 
Then you go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you add such things 
as licensing, permits, charges for ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan ), that land titles now that have 
skyrocketed because of the mismanagement of that government 
blowing $107 million on a land titles system that is now slower 
and more expensive than it was when they started. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is many reasons why this province is 
going behind, but there are many reasons coming shortly why 
we’re about to turn the corner and take off. And that 
government may never be in power again after the people on 
this side have had a chance to display what we can do with this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I honestly believe that the province of 
Saskatchewan is like a little time bomb that is about to take off 
but for one reason: we have a socialist government in power 
more often than not that thinks that you have to own everything 
in this province, the government has to own everything to 
prosper. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is totally contrary to where we 
go to the west to Alberta who have seen their population grow 
three times compared to ours. Even in Manitoba, who is very 
similar to Saskatchewan, is starting to rise a wee bit. 
 
We say well, we can never compare ourselves to Alberta, and 
that’s because we have a socialist government. That’s about to 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

 

change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We bring some optimism. We talk about the province being 
wide open. The party on this side of the House is actually the 
one with optimism for this province and actually are the ones 
that are going to grow this province. And very soon, with the 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having difficulty 
hearing the member’s comments. I would ask members just to 
tone it down a bit for the last couple of minutes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, one of the other reasons I believe that this 
province is falling behind is because that government believes 
that the Crowns are the way to grow this province, and have 
them invest in private business. How would you like to have to 
move to Saskatchewan, start a business, and compete with your 
own money? It doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker. It hasn’t worked in 
the past and it will not work in the future — just another of the 
many reasons. 
 
We look at the ethanol projects that they’re talking about. 
Ethanol is great for the province. But it would be far better off 
if the government would keep its nose out of it and let private 
business run this business. 
 
The hog industry, we saw this government decide they had to 
put $15 million into the hog industry. What do we see? Smaller 
hog ventures out there; family ventures that are competing with 
their own tax dollar because this government thinks that’s the 
way you grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, go back to The Farm Land Security Act. 
You know well that we took four years of private members’ 
Bills to convince this government that we don’t need 
restrictions in this province. It will grow if we just open it up. 
Remove the regulations and away this province goes. And 
we’ve already started to see land prices increase and I think 
that’s partly due to the opening and loosening of the 
restrictions. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is known across the 
world. It’s known in the US. It’s known all . . . in Europe, all 
over the place. But right now it’s known for restrictions, 
regulations, and a socialist government. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will go out and sell the province 
of Saskatchewan, but we will create an atmosphere in this 
province where Saskatchewan will be able to sell Saskatchewan 
to investors and businesses all over this world. So the minute 
we have a general election in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and elect a Sask Party government, Saskatchewan will 
sell itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There will now be a 10-minute 
question and comment period. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, speaking on selling out 
Saskatchewan, my question is directed to the member for 
Kindersley. 

One of the very first things that the Devine administration did 
— without any prior discussion in the campaign leading up to it 
and that’s why I’m asking the question — is that they sold out 
the coal mines which supplied coal to SaskPower. Those coal 
mines generate a steady return for their owners and therefore 
they were able to get a price for that based on that. 
 
So my question is: can the member assure us that given the 
300-plus million dollars a year that’s generated by the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, can the member 
assure the people of Saskatchewan that his party, if they were to 
form the government, will not sell off or privatize any aspect of 
the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
answer the member opposite’s question. 
 
And first of all I’d like to state and reiterate our party’s position 
that we will not be selling off SaskPower. We will not be 
selling off SaskEnergy. We will not be selling off SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and we will not be 
selling off SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’ve said is that we would do a review of 
the services for the other 85 Crown corporations that have 
existed. And what we would do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would 
definitely, definitely I can assure the member opposite, not be 
taking taxpayers’ money and investing them into businesses 
that compete with private enterprise. We won’t be doing that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
That drives business out of the province. It’s driven it out for 
the last 60 years and it’s prevented us from reaching the 
potential that this province deserves. And it will get that 
potential, Mr. Speaker, after the next election with a new 
Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
interesting to listen to the member from Regina Dewdney’s 
debate. Because he went on and on and on about the negative 
attitude of the Saskatchewan Party and he dangerously linked 
that to our always talking about private business. 
 
That was very telling I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to what the 
NDP attitude is towards private business in our province. Now 
the Saskatchewan Party does believe that private business is 
essential to a strong economy. What is the member of Regina 
Dewdney’s real agenda since he obviously believes that private 
business is a negative sector of society? 
 
If he had a choice of establishing a Crown corporation to 
develop an industry or allowing private sector to establish the 
business on its own, which would he choose? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the member 
opposite asks a very interesting question and she makes a 
number of innuendoes in her question. 
 
First off I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I stand for, as 
do the members of government, we stand in strong support with 
private business and with public enterprise, Mr. Speaker. The 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

engines of our economy: one engine works well in some areas, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker; another engine works well in other areas. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my comments were about the 
members opposite standing for privatizing our public 
enterprises, not about against private business, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Private business has done a tremendous job in our 
province. They’ve built this economy, they’ve helped deliver 
12,000 new hundred jobs year over year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and they’ve done a great deal. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the question of whether or not a 
new enterprise should be in private business or as part of a 
Crown corporation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would depend on 
what we’re talking about, what specific initiative we are 
looking at, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now, if the private sector can 
deliver that initiative, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine. We believe in 
that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it’s building an existing or expanding an 
existing Crown corporation then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 
to look at that in each and every situation. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I was very troubled to hear the most recent answer by 
the member for Kindersley, so I want to ask a second question 
to him. 
 
I want to know, given the list that the member for Kindersley 
has outlined of only four of the utility Crowns, of only four of 
our main Crowns in terms of not privatizing them, will he and 
his party keep their election promise to not privatize Crown 
corporations without first going to a referendum? I want to 
know whether he is prepared to keep his election promise not to 
privatize the Crowns without a referendum. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m happy 
to rise and answer the question for the member opposite. As 
soon as the government sees fit to go to the polls I’m sure 
they’re going to get a complete outline in our election platform. 
 
But further to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said before, one of 
the things we have promised outright with regards to the Crown 
corporations in the economy of Saskatchewan is under a 
Saskatchewan Party government we will not be taking 
taxpayers’ money again to be put into ventures where private 
industry is already existing and trying to put good, 
hard-working, private entrepreneurs out of business. That won’t 
be happening under a Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to ask the member for Regina Victoria, in view of his earlier 
question expressing horror at the possibility that casinos might 
not be government operated, I’d like to ask him since when was 
government operation of casinos a core NDP philosophy? 
When did that happen? I’m not clear when that became core 
NDP belief, that the reason we have government is so they can 
run casinos. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And also in view of the catcalls from various ministers of the 
cabinet over there, the casinos must be owned by the 

government. Is that to be taken then as the NDP saying that it is 
opposed to the SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) 
ownership and operation of casinos in the province? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t even 
addressing the question of casinos; I addressed, very 
particularly, the question of the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, not the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation. 
I think in that, with respect to casinos, we as a provincial 
government would want to ensure that all aspects of the 
Criminal Code are observed and that the conduct of gaming will 
be properly observed. 
 
I just assume, Mr. Speaker, that the first opportunity that the 
Sask Party would have, if they ever were to form government, 
that they would unload the casinos in no time flat. That’s my 
sense of what they would do, Mr. Speaker, because those . . . 
there’s no doubt in my mind that that’s they would do, Mr. 
Speaker. And the people of Regina will be very concerned 
about the fact that this enterprise in their city which generates 
revenues, generates jobs, will be sold off by them to who knows 
what sort of . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
My question again is to the member for Kindersley, although he 
dodged answering the last question about holding to their 
election promises. 
 
What I want to know, Mr. Speaker, is will that member . . . 
What is it the Saskatchewan Party is going to say to the 
thousands of people who today are working in the Crown 
corporations that they are going to privatize and fire? How will 
they deal with employees, given the intent to fire the unionized 
employees in the Liquor and Gaming Authority, in Crop 
Insurance, in every single one of the other Crowns except for 
those four that they have mentioned? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m glad to 
have the member opposite ask these questions again. I would 
assure the member opposite, if he has heard, what the 
Saskatchewan Party is talking about is growth. We’re going to 
grow this province, Mr. Speaker, by 100,000 people in 10 years, 
and every decision that a Saskatchewan Party government is 
going to make is going to be premised on whether it is going to 
achieve that goal or not. 
 
And that is going to mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re 
going to have a healthy sector of Crown corporations. And 
following, following the Crown review, we are going to see, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is going to be no taxpayer 
money invested against private enterprise. And we’re also going 
to see a complete stop to the fiasco of foreign investments — 
$85 million lost last year outside of Saskatchewan. That will 
end, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And that’s why we will be forming the next government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and the province is going to grow by 100,000 
people over the next 10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the member from Regina Victoria. 
 
Back in the 1970s or early 1980s, the then NDP government 
under Allan Blakeney spent taxpayers’ money advertising then 
the family Crown corporations. And we see that this 
government is also using taxpayer money to advertise 
themselves through this Future is Wide Open campaign. It’s a 
blatant use of taxpayer money to promote the NDP 
government’s election plans coming up. 
 
As we know, the NDP went down to a humiliating defeat then 
and I predict that the NDP will go down to another humiliating 
defeat this time. 
 
I’d like to ask the member, why is the government spending 
taxpayer money — I understand up to 60 per cent of the Future 
is Wide Open money — why are they spending taxpayer money 
in Saskatchewan rather than trying to promote the province to 
businesses outside the province? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a good question. 
And my question would be, why is it the Sask Party caucus is 
also spending money to trash the province, Mr. Speaker, and the 
government, in their ads? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the future is wide open in this province. Things 
are going very well in Saskatchewan. The economy is doing 
well in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. People know it. People are 
employed; help wanted ads in the stores wherever you go, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province. Saskatchewan is working again and it 
is because of the leadership provided by this government, Mr. 
Speaker, that is the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll just leave it at that, Mr. Speaker, by saying 
that the Saskatchewan economy is doing very well. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The 75-minute debate has expired. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Western Christian College 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
serve as the sponsor of this Bill, and I will be moving second 
reading momentarily. 
 
I just wanted to take this opportunity to note that this Bill will 
facilitate the return to Saskatchewan of the Western Christian 
College, once known as the Radville Christian College. This 
institution of learning and spiritual development has been doing its 
good work since 1931. 
 
The college moved to Dauphin in the late ’80s but they are now 
coming back home to Saskatchewan. I know from speaking with 
the college’s president, John McMillan, that WCC (Western 
Christian College) staff, students, and supporters are very excited 

about the return to Saskatchewan. And I know that the people of 
Regina and of Saskatchewan are just as excited as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to thank all members of the Assembly for their co-operation 
in expediting the legislative process for this Bill to date, and I look 
forward to continuing on in that spirit of co-operation as we work 
together to ensure the successful consideration of this Bill and 
to ensure the successful homecoming of the Western Christian 
College. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 301, The Western 
Christian College (Amendment) Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 7 — Government Environmental Initiatives 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise this 
afternoon to move a motion that addresses the important issue 
of climate change and greenhouse gas emissions globally and 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And at the end of my 
remarks, I’ll be moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize and praise the many 
initiatives of the government and its Crown corporations, 
and particularly SaskPower, to create and maintain a 
cleaner environment and to ameliorate the environmentally 
harmful effects of global warming, and urge a continued 
expansion of actions designed to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and meet Kyoto Protocol national reduction 
targets. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, by way of introductory comments to this 
motion, I want to say a few words this afternoon about the 
implications of global warming for the Saskatchewan economy 
and Saskatchewan’s environment and for the global 
environment and the global economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me say that I think that the consequences of global 
warming are very substantial, Mr. Speaker, and the 
environmental impacts are such that we truly need to look at 
changing the way in which we conduct our affairs, particularly 
in the energy sector of our worldwide economy, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think this is increasingly being recognized at a global 
level, Mr. Speaker, and more and more countries in the 
industrialized world are expressing their support for an 
international agreement that is designed to at least be a starting 
point for curbing greenhouse gas emissions, and that of course 
is the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately when we were debating the Kyoto 
Protocol in this Assembly, it became clear that members of the 
official opposition from the Saskatchewan Party are adamantly 
opposed to Kyoto and don’t believe that the issue of greenhouse 
gas emission reduction needs to be taken seriously here in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is, 
that is, Mr. Speaker, very, very unfortunate. 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the member for 
Humboldt is disagreeing with my characterization of the 
Saskatchewan Party position. So I’m going to divert from my 
remarks for a minute and just read into the record a couple of 
things that the member for Humboldt had to say when we 
debated this issue in the Assembly in December 2002. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what did the member for Humboldt say, Mr. 
Speaker? And I have to say that I have a lot of respect for the 
member for Humboldt on some issues, which I’ve enjoyed 
working with her on, particularly around the child sex trade. 
But I don’t agree, Mr. Speaker, with her position on Kyoto. And 
here’s what she said. She said, and I quote: 
 

It is not unlike the 1999-2000 . . . computer scare that 
turned out to be the biggest fraud in the history of mankind. 
This misguided Kyoto accord could easily outdo that sham. 

 
That’s what she said, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would 
characterize that as a comment that is not supportive of Kyoto. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what else did she say, Mr. Speaker? She 
said, and I quote: 
 

So what then is the Kyoto Protocol? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
not about science. It is (about) . . . old-fashioned politics — 
socialist politics — intent on redistributing income led by 
overzealous Environment department bureaucrats. 

 
That’s what the member for Humboldt said in December, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think, despite her protest, it’s fair enough to 
characterize her position and the position of all members 
opposite as being unsupportive of the Kyoto Protocol, Mr. 
Speaker, and unwilling to address the critical need to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions in this province and globally, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me return to my remarks after that 
intervention from the member for Humboldt and say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I believe that the consequences of global warming 
are very, very serious and need to be taken very seriously by all 
people in this province and by all members of this Assembly. 
And, Mr. Speaker, those consequences are becoming more 
apparent as we see severe drought, not just in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, but in many parts of the world, as a result of 
increasing greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see with that in this province and in many 
parts of the world, declining crop production, Mr. Speaker. We 
see, Mr. Speaker, in this province and in many, many other 
parts of North America, sharply increased forest fire fighting 
expenditures. We see declining surface water levels in many 
parts of the world, and we’ve experienced that in our own 
provinces over the last few years, until we had better moisture 
conditions this year, Mr. Speaker. For the last few years we saw 
our surface water levels declining. And that’s not just the 
pattern in this province but it’s a pattern right across the world, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re also seeing the threat of more and more tropical diseases 
like West Nile virus that’s now come into the United States and 
into Canada, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately we’re going to be 
facing cases of West Nile virus in this province this year, Mr. 
Speaker. 

So those are just a few examples, Mr. Speaker, of the 
consequences of global warming. And I believe that the future 
of our farm economy, our northern forest, our surface water 
bodies, and our recreational and tourism industry could be 
significantly jeopardized if global warming is not checked. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s so unfortunate that 
members of the official opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, are 
just not prepared to take this issue seriously, Mr. Speaker. And 
they continue to heckle across the House, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
clear example, the fact they just don’t take this issue seriously. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these, these consequences that I mention — 
these consequences of global warming — are just the 
beginning. We also risk the escalation of other tropical diseases 
in Western Canada beyond West Nile virus. We risk unbearably 
hot summers and the premature deaths that will result, a 
significant loss of aquatic species, Mr. Speaker, serious damage 
to our sports fishing industry, more tornadoes and other extreme 
weather events, and the melting of glaciers in the Canadian 
Rockies upon which Saskatchewan rivers ultimately rely, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Those are a few of the other consequences of global warming. 
And I want to continue talking about these consequences, Mr. 
Speaker, because we just don’t seem to be able to get members 
of the official opposition to take the issue seriously. And they 
continue to heckle from their seats. 
 
So I want to inform members of some of the other 
consequences of global warming, Mr. Speaker, consequences 
that are recognized by the United Nations; recognized, Mr. 
Speaker, by countries around the world but are not recognized 
by members of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:45) 
 
So what are some of these other consequences? Well one is the 
prospect of more typhoons and more hurricanes, Mr. Speaker, 
which meteorologists across the world, Mr. Speaker, are 
recognizing and warning the global community are a 
consequence of global warming. 
 
We face the prospect of the loss of habitat for thousands of 
species as temperatures rise, Mr. Speaker. We face the melting 
of permafrost in Canada and other northern regions with its 
negative impacts on buildings and other infrastructure. We risk, 
Mr Speaker, and we’re . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Oh, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With 
leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with 
thanks to the member from Saskatoon Greystone whose speech 
I was enjoying immensely so I was very sorry to interrupt it. 
 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

 

But I do want to introduce to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
through you to other members of the Legislative Assembly, two 
guests who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. And they are 
Mr. Don Hanson, who is the president and CEO of Northrock 
Resources Ltd., which is an oil and gas company operating . . . 
headquartered in Calgary but actually doing an awful lot of 
work in Saskatchewan. And also, Mr. Eamon J.B. Hurley, who 
is the associate general counsel and secretary of Northrock 
Resources Ltd., and also a graduate of the College of Law. 
 
Now both of these gentlemen are originally from Saskatchewan 
and retain very close ties to Saskatchewan. In fact Mr. Hurley 
advised me that he’s marrying a young woman whose parents 
reside in my riding in Saskatoon. And undoubtedly now that he 
realizes that I am the member of the legislature, he’ll be moving 
back to Saskatoon very soon. 
 
And these gentlemen tell me that they are very pleased with the 
business prospects in Saskatchewan, doing a lot of work here. 
And we also appreciate the work that they’re doing here, the 
jobs they’re providing. And I’d like all members of the 
Assembly to join with me in welcoming these gentlemen here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Stewart: — To introduce guests, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would also 
like to introduce Mr. Hanson and Mr. Hurley from Northrock 
Resources. I know that we had a nice meeting this morning, and 
I know that they are interested in investing many more millions 
of dollars in Saskatchewan under the right circumstances. 
 
And I welcome them here. I introduce them to the Assembly 
and hope that we’ll see much more of them in the future. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 7 — Government Environmental Initiatives 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker. I want to add my words of welcome to our guests in 
the gallery, and I hope they enjoy the proceedings this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying the consequences of Kyoto for the 
global community and for our own province are serious indeed. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was mentioning before our introduction of 
guests that some of the impacts include more typhoons and 
hurricanes, the loss of habitat for thousands of species, melting 
permafrost in Canada and other northern regions, rising sea 
levels, and coastal flooding that threatens island states and 
many of the world cities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are some of the major consequences of global warming 

and I think, Mr. Speaker, that what we’re seeing in 
Saskatchewan, especially with respect to the position of the 
official opposition is that they’re out of step, Mr. Speaker, with 
the global community in the developed nations of the world in 
terms of recognizing this problem and committing themselves 
to working together with members on this side of the House in 
addressing the problem. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in my judgment the negative economic 
consequences of global warming are enormous and far 
outweigh costs that will be associated with mitigating it. The 
negative economic impacts of global warming are the primary 
reason the insurance industry worldwide has been solidly on the 
side of backing the Kyoto Protocol, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But while the economic issues are very important, the essence 
of the Kyoto debate is around ethical choices that impact 
enormously on human health and the health of our planet. At 
the heart of the matter is whether we are prepared to take truly 
substantial steps in a cost-effective and creative way to lighten 
our ecological footprint on the planet. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that most Saskatchewan people will 
answer yes to that question, Mr. Speaker, and our government, 
Mr. Speaker, has also started to very clearly say yes to that 
question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in a moment I want to highlight a number of the important 
steps that we have taken over the last three years during this 
term of government to address the need to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions in the province of Saskatchewan. And I want to 
particularly highlight the initiatives that Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation has taken in this regard. 
 
But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, let me just say with respect to 
my general comments on Kyoto, that I think we are going to 
find that Kyoto is just a beginning in terms of the journey that 
we need to take to reduce greenhouse gas emissions on our 
planet. I’m noticing that more and more scientists in the world 
— in fact I think it’s fair to say that the vast majority of 
scientific opinion in the world, Mr. Speaker — is that we’re 
going to have to go significantly beyond Kyoto in terms of 
emission reductions. 
 
But Kyoto, Mr. Speaker, is at least a starting point. And it calls 
upon — in the Canadian context — it calls upon the Canadian 
government, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Canada and the 
provincial governments of Canada to reduce emissions to 6 per 
cent below 1990 levels. And at present, Mr. Speaker, in Canada 
we’re 19 per cent above 1990 levels. So in effect we’re talking 
about a 25 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions being 
required on a national basis. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, one of the fundamental principles that 
needs to be addressed in the ongoing debate about how we 
tackle the challenge of reducing greenhouse gas emissions is 
ensuring that that burden of reduction is equitably shared across 
the country and that no one region bears an unfair share of the 
responsibility for reducing emissions. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that our government 
has emphasized this as an important condition of supporting the 
Kyoto Protocol, and of course we had the debate in the House 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

just a few short months ago, in December of 2002. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn to the question of actions that 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation and other departments of 
government have taken to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
here in our own province. And I want to outline some of the 
initiatives that SaskPower has taken. 
 
I’m going to start, Mr. Speaker, with one of the initiatives that 
I’m the most excited about, which is an announcement, Mr. 
Speaker, that we had in the Throne Speech of a GreenPower 
portfolio that Saskatchewan Power has committed itself to on 
behalf of our government over the next four to five years, Mr. 
Speaker. As a government we have looked at various options 
for meeting our future electrical needs, Mr. Speaker, as our 
demand for electricity continues to grow in the province. And 
of course one of the responsibilities that we ultimately have, 
Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to substantially curb greenhouse 
gas emissions, is actually attempting to do more with less; in 
other words, curbing our total energy consumption in the 
province, Mr. Speaker, while continuing to expand our 
economy. 
 
But as we move towards that objective, Mr. Speaker, as a 
transition, one of the objectives of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and one of the objectives of our government is to 
ensure that our additional generating capacity that’s brought 
on-line does not add to our greenhouse gas emissions in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I’m pleased to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that through Saskatchewan Power Corporation, our 
government is taking some very innovative steps to achieve this 
objective. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the last two years, members of the 
Assembly and members of the public will know that we have 
started to invest significantly in wind power. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve got the third-largest wind power capacity in all 
of Canada. And I venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that very soon, 
very soon, we’ll have the largest per capita wind power capacity 
in all of Canada; we’ll rank first on a per capita basis, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because in addition to the two 
wind power facilities that have been opened in southwest 
Saskatchewan in the last year that in total now, Mr. Speaker, are 
generating some 17 megawatts of electricity with 26 wind 
turbines in operation, in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, our plan 
is to introduce another 150 megawatts of wind power onto the 
Saskatchewan grid over the next four years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By 2007, Mr. Speaker, we won’t just have 17 megawatts of 
wind power in this province, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have 
167 megawatts of wind power in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And we won’t just have, Mr. Speaker, 26 wind turbines in this 
province, I venture to say we’ll have in the range of 200 wind 
turbines in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
going to be very exciting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member for Rosthern is saying, well he’s 
waiting for the quiet day after the provincial election, Mr. 
Speaker. And there will be a calm on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker; there’ll be a calm associated with the re-election of an 
NDP government. And one of the things that’s going to lead to 

that re-election, Mr. Speaker, is the plan for 200 wind turbines 
in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And 150 megawatts of new wind power 
capacity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s not all, Mr. Speaker. Wind power is a 
very important part of our green equation, but that’s not all. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we are also committed, as a government 
through Saskatchewan Power Corporation, to soliciting on an 
annual basis 15 megawatts of environmentally preferred power, 
Mr. Speaker. And much of this, Mr. Speaker, will come with 
initiatives from the private sector. 
 
And I am looking forward, Mr. Speaker, to those proposals 
rolling in. And I’m expecting that we’ll see proposals in the 
area of biomass development and biogas development and wind 
power proposals, Mr. Speaker; more wind power proposals 
beyond the ones that I just mentioned that Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation is committed to. And I think, Mr. Speaker, we may 
see some plans for environmentally friendly, small-scale hydro 
production coming out of these proposals that are planned, 
solicitations for 15 megawatts of new, environmentally 
preferred electrical capacity each year in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s not all, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation is also planning to install 25 megawatts of 
low-impact hydro capacity at Elizabeth Falls, Mr. Speaker. So 
we’re going to, we’re going to see another opportunity for green 
power through an environmentally friendly hydro power 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see the member for Cypress Hills is on his feet 
and I’ll take my seat for a minute in case he’s planning to 
introduce guests. I see he’s not going to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker, so I’ll continue. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in addition to these initiatives that I’ve 
mentioned, Saskatchewan Power Corporation has announced 
that it will be investing more, Mr. Speaker, in demand side 
management, particularly with a focus on not only its industrial 
customers, but also its residential customers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So these are truly exciting initiatives. And of course in addition 
to all of these, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
is inviting members of the public to make a little investment 
themselves in GreenPower, and is making GreenPower 
available for sale in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the response from the 
public has been excellent. And the wind power for instance, that 
we’ve brought on line to date, is now fully subscribed for, Mr. 
Speaker — with some assistance from the federal government, 
with some direct purchases for . . . by the Saskatchewan 
government for 15 per cent of our government departments, but 
also, Mr. Speaker, with a very significant uptake from private 
members, members of the public right across this province, Mr. 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

 

Speaker, who’ve expressed their support for these initiatives by 
actually going out and purchasing GreenPower on their 
electricity bill, Mr. Speaker. And we just want to say, on this 
side of the House, thank you to all members of the 
Saskatchewan public who’ve taken that initiative and expressed 
their support for these green initiatives through that action, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to another 
important element of our strategy, and that is the area of energy 
conservation, Mr. Speaker, because this government is 
beginning to crank up our energy conservation initiatives. And 
I’m very pleased to see this happening, Mr. Speaker. And again, 
I think this enjoys broad public support across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of the exciting things that’s happened in the last few 
months, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve put plans in place to open an 
Office of Energy Conservation in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want to in this regard, Mr. Speaker, I want to recall what 
one of the first steps of the Devine Conservative government 
was when they were elected in 1982 — the forerunners of the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of their first acts when they were elected, Mr. Speaker, was 
to abolish the office of energy conservation that existed at the 
time. That was one of their very first acts, Mr. Speaker, and it 
seems to be in keeping with their position on Kyoto today, Mr. 
Speaker. Twenty years ago we were . . . when we were in 
government, we were building up the province’s energy 
conservation programs. When they got elected to government, 
Mr. Speaker, they demolished the province’s energy 
conservation programs. 
 
It’s one reason, Mr. Speaker, why I hope the people of 
Saskatchewan won’t allow them to return to office, Mr. 
Speaker. But I can promise you on this side of the House . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — But they will. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I have to chuckle because the member for 
Rosthern says that he believes the public will. And they may in 
his riding, Mr. Speaker, but they won’t in the province of 
Saskatchewan, I can assure him that. 
 
I have to say, Mr. Speaker, members of the NDP don’t have a 
strong record of being elected in the member for Rosthern’s 
riding, but we have a very strong record for being elected in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that record will 
continue later this year or early next year, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
confident of that. 
 
But let me say, Mr. Speaker, that we have initiated a number of 
important conservation programs in the last few months and I 
just want to outline some of them for members of the Assembly 
and members of the public who are listening this afternoon. 
 
And one of the first things we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is to 
practise what we are preaching in terms of government 
buildings and trying to reduce the amount that taxpayers have to 
pay in energy bills on government buildings, Mr. Speaker. So, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re undertaking extensive energy conservation 
retrofit work in 70 provincial government buildings across the 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, the indications are that this work 
will pay for itself just through the energy savings, Mr. Speaker. 
So it’s good news for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And when 
the projects are paid off, of course we’re looking at significant 
reductions of energy bills, both on the natural gas and the 
electricity side. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to practise what 
we preach in terms of our seniors’ housing portfolio. And in the 
last year we’ve made a decision to do an energy efficiency 
upgrade in the 11,000 seniors’ housing units in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the results again are looking 
very promising. We’re investing $1 million a year over a 
five-year period, Mr. Speaker. We’re in the second year of this 
project now and we’re on track to achieve, Mr. Speaker, energy 
savings of $1 million a year after five years of investment. 
 
And we expect, Mr. Speaker, that the savings are starting this 
year. They’re a little less than 300,000, and they’ll continue to 
grow every year as we invest more. And once, by year seven, 
Mr. Speaker, we anticipate that this project will have 
completely paid for itself, that the $5 million that’s been 
invested will have been recaptured in energy savings, and 
everything after that will be savings to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan because it’s the taxpayers of Saskatchewan who 
pay the utility bills on the 11,000 seniors’ housing units in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report to the Assembly that 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation has continued to step up its 
energy performance contracting service, and this has helped 
many institutional customers and commercial customers in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. A total so far, Mr. 
Speaker, of $21 million has been invested. 
 
And the member for Rosthern was heckling me a few moments 
ago, Mr. Speaker, and I want to report to the member for 
Rosthern that in fact, despite his opposition to these . . . to some 
of the work that SaskPower is doing, we’re investing in his 
constituency as a government. And I want to give an example 
of what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have retrofitted the 18 schools in the Saskatchewan Valley 
School Division which is the Osler, Martensville, Rosthern area 
that the member for Rosthern represents, Mr. Speaker. And as a 
result of the investment that’s been made, those schools have 
reduced their energy bill by $161,000 a year, Mr. Speaker — 
$161,000 a year. And there’s been local employment 
opportunities created in the member for Rosthern’s constituency 
as a result of that initiative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve also retrofitted eight schools in the North Battleford 
Catholic school division. And there we’re achieving energy 
savings as a result of those investments, of $63,000 a year. Mr. 
Speaker, we have . . . SaskPower is helping the city of Regina 
to do an energy efficiency upgrade on seven of their facilities 
and the projected energy savings are $277,500 a year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So these are just three little examples, Mr. Speaker, of the 
energy savings that are being achieved for the operators of local 
buildings, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation’s performance contracting service, Mr. Speaker. 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

And all of these projects are being fully paid for, Mr. Speaker, 
through the energy savings, including the interest charges on 
the capital investment, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s good, 
common sense for the people of Saskatchewan — a wise use of 
tax dollars for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, on every one of these projects at the same time 
that we’re saving energy, we’re reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions. So it’s good news for the environment as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another example of one of the initiatives that our Crowns have 
taken is an investment that Saskatchewan . . . that SaskEnergy 
has made in terms of facilitating residents of this province 
replacing their natural gas furnace with a more energy efficient 
furnace, Mr. Speaker. And there again has been a lot of interest 
in this program. And 6,400 people in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, have taken advantage of a prime rate loan to invest in 
a new, more energy efficient natural gas furnace. And more 
than $20 million of loans have now been approved, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’m pleased to say that on average customers are 
experiencing a reduction in their annual energy bills in the 
range of about $300 a year. So again, that is very good news. 
And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, they are reducing on 
average the emissions, the greenhouse gas emissions, from their 
own home by 25 to 30 per cent. 
 
So this is a very concrete, practical way of reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions. It just shows how it could be done, Mr. Speaker. 
Just through the installation of a high energy efficient furnace, 
the average resident of this province who’s got a furnace that’s, 
say 30 years old, can reduce their greenhouse gas emissions 
from their own home by about 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Just 
that one act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And through this prime rate loan program, they can recapture 
their investment in their furnace, Mr. Speaker, in a period of 
six, seven, eight years, just depending on the individual 
situation. So I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very concrete 
example of how the national targets that we’re going to need to 
achieve to meet our obligations under the Kyoto Protocol, a 25 
per cent reduction on average across the country, can be 
achieved by the average homeowner just like they could be 
achieved by governments, Mr. Speaker, when they invest in 
helping to upgrade the energy efficiency of schools or when 
they help to upgrade the energy efficiency of city facilities, Mr. 
Speaker. The principles apply at the macro level and at the 
micro level. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I was mentioning, another of the 
initiatives that we’re undertaking is the opening of an Office of 
Energy Conservation. And one of the practical things that that 
office is going to be doing, Mr. Speaker, in addition to 
obviously providing members of the public with information 
about how they can upgrade the energy efficiency of their own 
commercial buildings and farm operations and their own 
homes, one of the practical things that that office is going to be 
doing is giving support to local municipalities in the province of 
Saskatchewan to apply for federal dollars that will assist them 
in upgrading municipal infrastructure and particularly 
municipal buildings in their home communities, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m looking forward to that initiative getting launched in 

the very near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on a couple of other initiatives that 
are being undertaken in the energy conservation area, and one 
of them is that SaskEnergy and the Office of Energy 
Conservation are assisting with the implementation of what’s 
called the federal EnerGuide for homes program, Mr. Speaker. 
And this is a program that provides an energy audit service for 
Saskatchewan homeowners. 
 
A very highly qualified person is available to come into a 
Saskatchewan resident’s home, assess their energy use, assess 
where their home is losing energy, Mr. Speaker, look at . . . 
estimate their greenhouse gas emissions from their own home, 
and provide them with advice about where they can best invest 
their money in a cost-effective way to reduce their energy 
consumption, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this EnerGuide for 
home service is all about. 
 
And SaskEnergy is actively promoting that program, Mr. 
Speaker. And the Office of Energy Conservation is providing 
assistance to the program to offset rural travel costs so that 
residents of rural Saskatchewan as well as our cities can access 
the service, Mr. Speaker. Because I think it’s a very worthwhile 
service. And, Mr. Speaker, this initiative by the Office of 
Energy Conservation is going to, in a very practical way, be 
helping the constituents of members opposite who are 
representing rural Saskatchewan ridings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on some of our other energy 
conservation initiatives. One is that Saskatchewan Agriculture 
is operating a conservation cover program. And of course the 
primary objective of that program, Mr. Speaker, is not energy 
conservation; it’s to attempt to transfer marginal cropland, Mr. 
Speaker, into perennial forage cover. But it has the additional 
advantage, Mr. Speaker, of reducing energy consumption on the 
acreage that is converted, Mr. Speaker. And so in a 
not-so-indirect way it also has a positive impact in terms of 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
I’m also pleased, Mr. Speaker, to point out that SaskPower 
contracts with Destination Conservation, a project of the 
Saskatchewan Environmental Society, to undertake educational 
work in Saskatchewan schools on energy conservation. And this 
work is heavily focused, Mr. Speaker, on schools where energy 
conservation retrofit work is being undertaken. 
 
Both SaskEnergy and SaskPower in the last 15 months, Mr. 
Speaker, have established Web sites where consumers can come 
and get advice on energy conservation measures that they can 
undertake in their own homes and can also do an audit on their 
own home on the Web, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve had a lot of 
interest expressed in this, with over 7,000 people utilizing the 
service. 
 
SaskEnergy is also offering furnace maintenance services 
through its network of service providers to help furnaces run 
safely and efficiently, Mr. Speaker. And the Saskatchewan 
Research Council is providing advice to ice rinks in managing 
their energy costs. 
 
(16:15) 
 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation is working, Mr. Speaker, at 
identifying a community that would be interested in taking a 
fairly major initiative around energy conservation in municipal 
facilities. And we’re now actively looking for a community 
between 1,200 and 3,500 in population that wants to undertake 
energy conservation retrofit work simultaneously on an array of 
buildings in its community, Mr. Speaker. And a number of 
communities have been expressing interest across the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on the energy conservation front, those are 
some examples of initiatives that are being undertaken. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to move off energy conservation and 
look at some of the other steps that the province of 
Saskatchewan is doing to . . . with a view to both building our 
economy and at the same time reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
 
Because one of the fundamental messages that I want to get 
across this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and one of the areas where 
we differ most from the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, is 
that members on this side of the House believe that there are 
many opportunities for cost-effective investment in areas like 
energy conservation that in a very practical way will reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions and at the same time make our 
economy more competitive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we need to stop viewing the 
obligations that we have under Kyoto, Mr. Speaker, as a burden 
for our economy and start viewing them, Mr. Speaker, as an 
opportunity for creative economic development in this province 
that will also better the environment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that we’re looking at now, 
in addition to the ones that I’ve already mentioned around green 
power and energy conservation, with a view to achieving this 
objective is the area of ethanol and the development of 
ethanol-blended fuels. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you will know that this legislature, at the 
initiative of the NDP-Liberal coalition government, has 
established a provincial mandate requiring the sale of 
ethanol-blended fuels in Saskatchewan and we’re anticipating, 
Mr. Speaker, to create a demand for approximately 135 million 
litres of ethanol-produced fuel in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s well recognized across the 
country that ethanol-blended fuel will offer some gains, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of reduced greenhouse gas emissions from the 
transportation sector of our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have to be careful in how we develop 
this industry because one of the things that also is being looked 
at as a significant employment opportunity is the development 
of an intensive livestock operation . . . operations around the 
ethanol plants. And that, Mr. Speaker, that has significant 
promise. 
 
But it also brings with it a caution, Mr. Speaker, and that is that 
we have to be careful that when we develop those livestock 
facilities that we recapture the methane from the livestock 
waste. Because if we don’t, Mr. Speaker, the gains that we’re 

making in introducing ethanol in the province will be offset by 
the increased methane emissions from the intensive livestock 
operations. 
 
So we have to be careful, Mr. Speaker, that we develop this 
package in a way that is environmentally friendly. And I hope 
the member for Rosthern, who’s enjoying heckling me, again 
will agree with this comment. I don’t know whether he does or 
not. We’ll have to wait and see, Mr. Speaker. We’ll give him an 
opportunity to get up in this debate in a few moments if he 
would like to. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that the ethanol initiative holds 
considerable promise for the province of . . . for not just the 
province of Saskatchewan but for all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that we are the first 
government in Canada to pass legislation in the Assembly 
giving cabinet the authority to mandate the use of 
ethanol-blended gasoline here in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
And I hope there will be many other provinces in Canada that 
will follow suit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to touch on another area 
where we’re moving forward in terms of reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, and that is through the use of the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program which is 
providing funding for a number of creative municipal projects, 
Mr. Speaker, that include . . . And many of these I’m pleased to 
say, Mr. Speaker, are green projects. 
 
And some of them involve reducing energy consumption in 
local communities, Mr. Speaker. Some of them involve 
recycling initiatives. Some of them involve upgrading our water 
quality and water management systems in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not all of these projects will involve a reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions, but many of them will, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
pleased to see our provincial government co-operating with the 
federal government and municipalities across our province in 
launching these initiatives. So it’s another area, Mr. Speaker, 
where we’re making progress. 
 
And the key is the collective effort, Mr. Speaker, that’s being 
made across many departments of government to begin the 
process of curbing our greenhouse gas emissions in this 
province. And we have a long way to go, Mr. Speaker, but 
we’re making a start. 
 
I want to touch on three or four other initiatives that we’re 
undertaking, Mr. Speaker, before I formally put the motion that 
I’m debating this afternoon before you and formally move it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But one of the items that I want to touch on is some of the pilot 
projects that we’re undertaking through SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy that I think will hold promise for reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions in the future. 
 
One of them is that SaskPower and SaskEnergy are proceeding 
with a pilot project to research the feasibility of using flare gas 
from oilfields to power a microturbine to produce electricity. 
And that project, Mr. Speaker, is now underway in the Weyburn 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

area and I think I’m really looking forward to seeing the results 
of that pilot initiative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another, Mr. Speaker, is one that I had the pleasure of attending 
with the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, at Regina General 
Hospital where we’re experimenting, Mr. Speaker, with 
generating electricity. And the steam, Mr. Speaker, is being 
used by the laundry system in the hospital. And the 
microturbines in the hospital that have been installed, Mr. 
Speaker, are feeding surplus electricity into the grid. It’s like a 
miniature cogeneration project, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased to 
see SaskPower undertaking it. 
 
We are also experimenting in this province, Mr. Speaker, with a 
number of sequestration projects that are very exciting. And one 
of them is that SaskPower has worked very, very hard with 
Saskatchewan Environment to look at investing in the 
representative areas program in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s the program, Mr. Speaker, that sets up 
. . . essentially provides long-term protection to forest areas of 
the province. 
 
And a good example, Mr. Speaker, is an area that is very 
important to me. It’s one of the really beautiful areas of the 
province. The Dory Lake area of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
has recently been designated as a representative area and it’s 
received protection. And there’s 23,000 acres now, Mr. 
Speaker, in the . . . around Dory Lake, north of Dory Lake and 
around the northern shore of the lake, that have protected status 
under the representative areas program. 
 
And Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Mr. Speaker, is 
investing in those representative areas and in monitoring 
stations in those representative areas. 
 
And in exchange, Mr. Speaker, for investing in a significant 
number of representative areas, it is earning credits that have 
been formally recognized by a North American accreditation 
group that has been pulled together and in effect is testing out 
our ability to achieve a significant reduction in greenhouse gas 
emissions by protecting our old-growth forest, Mr. Speaker, and 
is at the same time certifying those credits so that they can be 
recognized by the Kyoto Protocol when Kyoto comes into 
effect. 
 
And I think that this kind of a pilot, Mr. Speaker, is a very, very 
positive initiative by Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and I 
think will be widely appreciated by the environmental 
movement across the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to provide time for other members to 
enter into this debate. So I’m going to close by saying that I 
hope the Saskatchewan Party will revisit their position on 
Kyoto, Mr. Speaker, on the need to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions in this province, Mr. Speaker, and will rethink their 
position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I just want to say one other word about their position 
before I close. And it’ll give members of the television audience 
who are listening to the debate this afternoon an opportunity to 
assess them, Mr. Speaker, because in November of 2002, here’s 
what their leader, Mr. Speaker, the member for 
Rosetown-Biggar, had to say about the Saskatchewan Party 

government position. 
 
He said, Mr. Speaker, and I quote — and this is from The 
StarPhoenix November 8, 2002 — the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party said that he: 
 

. . . “would use every possible means available to fight the 
ratification of the Kyoto protocol in its current form.” 

 
That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. That’s what he said. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say, Mr. Speaker, that while Kyoto’s not 
perfect and while this government intends to negotiate hard 
with the Government of Canada to make sure that we get a fair 
deal in Saskatchewan in terms of the sharing of responsibility 
for greenhouse gas emission reductions, Mr. Speaker, that the 
need to implement an international protocol that will reduce the 
impact of global warming should be obvious to every citizen on 
the globe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I am proud, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon to move the 
following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize and praise the many 
initiatives of the government and its Crown Corporations, 
and particularly SaskPower, to create and maintain a 
cleaner environment and to ameliorate the environmentally 
harmful effects of global warming, and urge a continued 
expansion of actions designed to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and meet Kyoto Protocol national reduction 
targets. 

 
I so move. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — I am very pleased, and I feel incredibly and 
immensely privileged to enter into this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would just ask the member to wait 
for a moment until I get the motion to put it on the record. 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I said a 
moment ago, and I want to repeat it, it is a privilege for me to 
be able to enter into this debate. And why is it a privilege? It’s a 
privilege, Mr. Speaker, because I am following after the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone who is, I would suggest, 
probably one of the foremost authorities on climate change 
amongst politicians in North America and probably all across 
the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Greystone many, 
many years ago recognized the urgency that we have in this 
planet, of getting it right and making sure that we have a decent, 
clean earth to pass on to our children and grandchildren. He, 
having recognized the urgency of the environmental fouling 
that we as humans have been doing to this planet, set about to 
inform himself of the issues and to ensure that he was making 
his arguments and his debates based on solid facts and solid 
evidence. 
 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

 

(16:30) 
 
It’s a rare politician, Mr. Speaker, that actually takes the time to 
research an important issue such as this in such detail as has the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone. It is a rare and a talented 
politician, Mr. Speaker, who is so consistent and so passionate 
about this major issue. 
 
And I think that all of us in this House, on both sides of the 
House, owe an immense debt of gratitude to the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone for his passionate, compelling, and 
consistent arguments that he has put to convince all of us that 
climate change is an important issue that affects us now, that 
will affect us tomorrow, and that will continue to affect us 
unless we get the right solutions implemented. So I do want to 
thank him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I spoke about the sense of urgency. 
It’s a sense of urgency that has been created by members such 
as the member from Saskatoon Greystone and many, many 
individuals all over the world, understanding that things are 
changing. 
 
There’s mounting evidence that the earth’s climate is changing 
and that this change in climate is linked to an increasing 
concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. That carbon 
dioxide in the atmosphere traps heat and creates the greenhouse 
effect. The greenhouse effect in turn affects rainfall patterns, 
prevailing winds, ocean currents, temperatures, plants on this 
earth, animals, people, and especially those people dependent 
on agriculture and forestry. 
 
Many people go around and they say, oh climate change, that 
means global warming. That means that we’re going to have 
longer summers and everything is going to be wonderful. And it 
means we’re going to have warmer winters and so we won’t 
have to wear such heavy parkas and so forth. They see . . . They 
make a joke of it and they see climate change as a positive 
thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is increasing and compelling scientific 
evidence that this is not a positive thing. We already are seeing 
warming of temperatures — average temperatures — from one 
to one and a half degrees centigrade in northern Saskatchewan 
in the last 100 years. 
 
You know, if the current trends continue, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is going to experience earlier springs and later 
falls. We’re going to have more and wetter snow falling during 
a shorter winter. The nighttime winter temperatures may be up 
to 10 degrees higher due to increased cloud cover. Now that 
sounds like a balmy Palm Springs winter perhaps, but what it is 
actually going to be is something that will be incredibly 
disastrous for our Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And I want to just, as one evidence of that and a recent bit of 
evidence, I want to quote from the springtime 2003 edition of 
The Third Degree. Mr. Speaker, The Third Degree is a 
magazine put out by the University of Regina alumni, and it 
talks about good and contributing alumni from the U of R 
(University of Regina), and it also talks about new people who 

are at the University of Regina. 
 
And one of those new people is Joe Piwowar from the 
department of geography. He got his Ph.D. (Doctor of 
Philosophy) in 1996, and ever since then has been using remote 
sensing and geographic information systems to look for ways 
that our planet is affected by global warming. 
 
And someone asked him the question, why aren’t there any big 
trees on the prairies? Well he says, and it’s fairly obvious 
common sense, that there’s no big trees on the prairies because 
growing big trees is primarily a function of adequate rainfall. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he says that the mean summer and winter 
temperatures over the central prairies are expected to rise by 2.5 
degrees centigrade within the next 45 years and by 5 degrees 
centigrade by the next century. At the same time, because the 
temperatures are going up, the summer precipitation amounts 
are expected to probably drop slightly. And if this happens 
there’s going to be a net loss of available moisture due to 
enhanced evapotranspiration rates. 
 
Now what does a drop in moisture mean, Mr. Speaker? Less 
moisture means trees — even the smaller trees that we have 
here now — trees will not be growing here any time soon if we 
don’t do something about climate change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a major, major issue that will affect all of 
us. And I share the sense of urgency that the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone has already communicated to this House. I 
also am very proud that I am part of a government that has 
recognized the urgency of the situation and has been doing 
various initiatives to deal with that situation. 
 
The Legislative Secretary on energy conservation, the member 
for Saskatoon Greystone, talked about many of those initiatives. 
The one thing — and I won’t repeat all the things that he said 
— but the one thing he did not mention was the fact that the 
schools themselves are doing various initiatives. He talked 
about the retrofitting in the schools in the member from 
Rosthern’s riding, but I think he could have also mentioned the 
fact that the schoolchildren, the pupils themselves, have 
realized how important this issue is. And how important, Mr. 
Speaker? Well last week when the St. Luke School came to this 
legislature from my constituency to tour the legislature, I 
challenged them to talk about the importance of maintaining a 
cleaner environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I received essays from some two dozen students 
talking about the importance of this issue. Now this issue is 
important, Mr. Speaker, and the students recognize it and we as 
politicians would be serving the people of Saskatchewan very 
poorly if we did not recognize their passion and their sense of 
the importance of coming to grips adequately with the 
environmental problems that we have created through pollution 
and environmental fouling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read into the record some of the 
comments from the students. Desiree Wagner said: 
 

In our society I’ve recognize the amounts of waste and 
garbage we create. It is very unhealthy for us. Unhealthy 
for humans, animals and plants. 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

She goes on to say: 
 

Most people don’t even realize what they are doing to the 
environment and the ozone layer. Most of all they are 
creating a hazardous environment for themselves. If they 
could understand and care, they could make a difference in 
the community by caring and nurturing their environment. 

 
By caring and nurturing their environment, Mr. Speaker. We as 
politicians would be well served to listen to the wisdom of those 
grade 7 students. 
 
Morgan Hedman, also a grade 7 student at St. Luke School, 
goes on to say: 
 

We have to stop pollution and littering. It can make a 
difference. If we don’t, our ozone layer will break and we 
will all die. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these students recognize that it is imperative that 
we get it right, that we have the ability to pass on a relatively 
clean planet to the generations of the future. They recognize the 
seriousness of the situation as reflected in the words of Brad 
Huber who says, quote: 
 

I think that the environment will get worse if we don’t do 
anything about cleaning this valuable land that God gave to 
us. If we don’t do anything about it there could possibly be 
diseases going around. The world will all be dirty and it 
needs cleaning just like anything else (just like) a room, a 
house (he says). The point is, is that if we don’t do anything 
about it the environment will affect who we are. 

 
This young man is very much attuned to understanding that 
who we are as human beings is directly reflected by the kind of 
environment we live in. If we don’t live in a clean environment, 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to be much more unhealthy. 
 
St. Luke School, I should say here, Mr. Speaker, is a green 
school. It’s one of those schools that have done all the 
environmental projects that a foundation, the SEEDS (Schools 
for Educational Evolution and Development) Foundation, asks 
that students do in order to become an environmental green 
school. 
 
The SEEDS Foundation promotes student literacy and active 
personal and social responsibility for energy, sustainability, and 
the environment. And schools are very proud to attain their 
status as a green school. 
 
St. Luke School is a green school. And so Kaitlynn Sarauer, 
bragging a little bit about her school, says: 
 

One of mine and my school’s bigger concerns are that of 
the environment, and how we must try to keep our area 
clean. This concern is also high in our city and province, 
and we should lower the amount of waste we create. For 
example, you could recycle newspapers, cans, bottles, etc. 
We have to think of our trees, and we must recycle, reuse, 
reduce. 

 
This young woman already knows the three R’s (reduce, reuse, 
recycle), Mr. Speaker. 

Scott Bowell, also a student at St. Luke, goes on to say: 
 

At our school (he’s bragging about) St. Luke Elementary, 
once a year (we) takes some of the day to clean all of the 
school yard. (He says) I think that we need to have a day 
once a year that everyone cleans up the area around there 
house or comunity. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what he’s doing is challenging all of us to have a 
sense of responsibility to maintain a clean environment. 
 
And one of his classmates, Darran Fusick, also agrees with that 
challenge, and says: 
 

To prevent from making the envirnment dirty you can not 
throw (out) garbage and dont plollut things and (he says 
above all else) be careful. 

 
Danielle Spilchen, also bragging about her school, says, and 
this one I find quite, quite funny, but she says: 
 

I find that kids these days spend (way) too much time on 
their computers and T.V.’s (and) . . . they don’t realize that 
they are hurting the environment. 

 
I think she’s probably referring to the fast food and so forth that 
people tend to consume when they get on the . . . start watching 
TV. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students recognize that maintaining a cleaner 
environment is everyone’s responsibility. 
 
Danielle Guinan writes to me. She says: 
 

To maintain a clean environment, everyone should try 
harder to recycle as much as possible so (that) we can all 
work together . . . 

 
She says: 
 

I believe if we all work hard together we can make a 
greater difference. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are making a greater difference, as the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone clearly demonstrated in 
indicating all the many things that the Government of 
Saskatchewan is doing in co-operation with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Sarah McCrea writes to me and says: 
 

I think most people in the world don’t realize just how 
serious (is) . . . littering, (and) pollution, & (the) other 
things that aren’t environmentally friendly . . . 

 
Again she emphasizes the theme of working together to provide 
a safer world and safer communities. 
 
Alex Tall also talks about this and says: 
 

Some ways (that) I have maintained a clean environment 
would be recycling at home . . . 

 



June 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

 

I’m sure that his mother would be very pleased to know that 
he’s doing that. He recycles at home and at school, and above 
all else he says he makes sure that he doesn’t “throw garbage on 
the ground.” 
 
A simple measure, Mr. Speaker, but a measure that all of us 
would do well to imitate. 
 
And Matthew Wingerak says — these students are getting very 
prescriptive in the things that we need to do — he says: 
 

To have a cleaner environment you must not litter and you 
have to watch what you do to the living plants and (to the) 
animals. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those are very wise words coming today as we 
look at the disaster in our agricultural economy that has been 
created by the BSE crisis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Reanne Derksen picks up that same theme 
and says: 
 

The community and our local school have to create a 
cleaner environment by taking part in recycling, and it’s 
our duty to pick up any garbage that we see laying around. 

 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students in . . . I challenged them in just . . . 
I gave them about half an hour to write out suggestions. And 
they not only wrote out suggestions, they wrote out causes that 
they thought . . . what they thought had caused the problem, 
what they thought were solutions. 
 
Time does not permit me to read all of their essays, but I do 
publicly want to acknowledge and thank Melissa Dash, Jordon 
Piecowye, Mitchell Stretch, Joel McClarty, Danielle Coates, 
Janelle Lambert, Kelsey Graff, Brayden Odishaw, Kelsey 
Schmit, Kara Engele for helping me to clarify my thoughts on 
the importance of sound environmental issues that will enable 
us to have a clean planet today and a clean planet to pass on to 
our children and grandchildren tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion so that other speakers can also speak 
on this, I want to just read into the record two final essays from 
the students. First of all from Roanne Toovey, who writes to 
me. She says: 
 

Our society, and community need to ensure the cleanliness 
of our environment. Our environment is a gift from God, 
and it is our job . . . and responsibility to look after it. We 
are provided with so many opportunities, such as recycling 
. . . and we need to make use of it. We need to plan for the 
future. We can’t leave our environment unclean and we 
need to ensure a healthy lifestyle for all the citizens in our 
community. Everyone needs to work together, to make our 
world a safer, healthier and . . . more enjoyable place. 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, Courtney Sperling writes this, and I 
hope that all members of this legislature will take these words 
to heart and will act on them. Courtney writes: 
 

Keeping a clean environment is a major concern in today’s 

society. Pollution and littering are just a few of (the) many 
hazards that are harmful to our environment. 
 
When we work together, we are helping (to) make the 
world a safer place. It’s a good habit to be 
environment-conscious, because we are aware of the 
damages to the environment. 
 

Courtney finishes off by saying: 
 

Maintain a clean environment, have a healthier future. 
 

And to that, Mr. Speaker, I must say I totally and heartily agree 
with those thoughts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take my place now so that other 
members may speak on this very important issue. And I just 
want to finish by seconding the motion from the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone: 

 
That this Assembly recognize and praise the many 
initiatives of the government and its Crown corporations, in 
particular SaskPower, to create and maintain a cleaner 
environment and to ameliorate the environmentally harmful 
effects of global warming, and urge a continued expansion 
of actions designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
meet Kyoto Protocol national reduction targets. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s a pleasure 
to be able to speak. I see that the government has tried to stifle 
debate by nearly talking out the clock and it’s unfortunate 
because we have many things to discuss on this issue. And it’s 
unfortunate we’re not able to continue the debate. 
 
Generally what the member from Saskatoon Greystone has said 
— and he took what, 40 minutes to an hour to say it — but what 
basically he has said concerning this issue is he’s going to have 
the taxpayer and the government fund everything. The taxpayer 
of this province is going to look after all the problems in the 
world and everything will be fine. 
 
But the member misses out on some very critical points, Mr. 
Speaker, that the taxpayer has only so much money but this 
government seems willing to just throw that money out the 
window every chance it gets. 
 
What we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is to encourage personal 
initiative, to have the individual and society, the individual, the 
families of society in Saskatchewan, also the small businesses 
and big businesses in this province take the initiative to look at 
the concerns around climate change, environmental problems 
because at the end of the day if we don’t have individuals and 
families and small businesses on board, all the money in the 
world, all the regulation in the world, Mr. Speaker, isn’t going 
to help, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s not a matter of just throwing money, hard-earned 
taxpayer money, at an issue. It’s a matter of doing the right 
things in co-operation with families, with individuals, with 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2003 

 

small and large business in the province, in the country, to deal 
with these issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day what we need is a 
province to grow economically. We need more taxpayers in this 
province. We need thriving businesses. We need individuals 
with money in their pocket so that we can deal with issues like 
the environmental issue. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party of course has a plan to grow 
Saskatchewan, unlike this province which just runs around the 
province and the country spending taxpayer money on their 
advertising program. And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, all 
they’re doing is using most of the money to advertise in the 
province, and as we know that’s just a pre-election gimmick to 
try to get some support for the NDP Party in the upcoming 
election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there isn’t much time and there’s another member would 
like to say a few words on this very important issue. But I think 
what we have to emphasize is that we need to grow the 
economy. We need to have a sustainable economy with a 
sustainable environment for the future of our family, for the 
future of our province, and for our grandchildren in this 
province. 
 
And one glaring omission from the member is any mention of 
any . . . any mention of nuclear power and the potential nuclear 
power has to our economy. We need to at least discuss the issue 
on a level-headed basis; we need to sit down with all the 
stakeholders in the province to discuss the issue around nuclear 
power. At the end of the day if the people of Saskatchewan do 
not want nuclear power generated in this province, so be it. But, 
Mr. Speaker, at least we have to discuss the issue and come to a 
consensus on it. 
 
In many other areas we need to get the government out of the 
face of business and other areas where SARCAN and the waste 
management . . . regional waste management areas, where there 
are private people that want to take the initiative and look after 
those areas on a private basis and will do it much economically 
than government can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to move an amendment to 
the motion. Moved by myself, and seconded by the member 
from Cypress Hills: 
 

That all the words after “initiatives” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
of the people, employers, and the workers in Saskatchewan 
and recognizes their commitment to growing our economy 
and to sound environmental stewardship. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s late 
in the day and I won’t take a lot of time to elaborate on the 
many comments of this particular motion that I had prepared. 
But I do want to say right off the top that this motion is so 
blatantly self-congratulatory that the writer must have sustained 
serious injury from patting himself on the back. 
 

Mr. Speaker, you know, while I looked at this particular motion 
as being non-provocative at first, I listened to the words of the 
mover of this motion and the seconder and I can’t help but say 
that what I heard really was a Chicken Little speech — the sky 
is falling in. And, Mr. Speaker, while I laud some of the ideas 
that the government is proposing in terms of conservation and 
environmental impact, I do think that it’s a little bit much to go 
to the point where we say that if we don’t do something today, 
we’re all going to burn in a few years. 
 
You know, we’re at a point where environmental education is 
an important part of our curriculum — it’s an important part of 
moving our society forward. But to get to a situation where we 
would inculcate youngsters in school with ideas that their lives 
are at stake this very day by not making the kinds of 
environmental changes that are being proposed is a little much. 
 
I think we need to ameliorate that message somewhat. We need 
to make youngsters cognizant and fully aware of the importance 
of environmental activity and sustainability, but not threaten 
them with certain death if they don’t comply. I think the case 
was dramatically overstated. 
 
I was quite interested to see that we had a lot of talk about the 
Kyoto accord in the presentation by the mover of this motion 
and the seconder. But my concern, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
Kyoto accord, while it might be well intentioned, will have 
disastrous consequences potentially for this province. And I 
think what we needed was a made-in-Saskatchewan solution to 
a problem that does exist. 
 
And I think that we as a official opposition have asked the 
government to look more carefully at the deliverance of a 
program that would meet the specific needs of the people of this 
province, the businesses of this province, and the environmental 
challenges that face this province. So, Mr. Speaker, to 
characterize our opposition to the Kyoto accord as completely 
uncaring about the environment is simply inaccurate and it 
misrepresents the true intent of our position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kyoto accord is not much more — in the 
instance of Canada as a nation — is not much more than an 
attempt by a desperate Prime Minister to find a legacy for 
himself. And this province bought into that effort. I think that’s 
seriously misintentioned. I think it’s unfortunate that that 
happened and I really regret that Saskatchewan is now going to 
be faced with the consequences of this particular piece of 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is so much more that I would like to say. 
There is little time to do it today. So I would just like to 
conclude the comments that the official opposition has in regard 
to this particular motion by saying that I am here to second the 
amendment and I would like to move that we adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1394 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Stewart...........................................................................................................................................................................1394, 1415 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1414 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Prince Albert Regional 4-H Finished Beef Show and Sale 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1395 
 Indian Head Rural Sports Hall of Fame Induction Dinner 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
 Holy Cross Collegiate Wall of Honour 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
 Prince Albert Finished Beef Show and Sale 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
 Kidzone Child Care 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
 No. 23 Elementary Flight Training School Dedication Service 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
 Future Links Prairie Championship in Saskatoon 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1398 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1398 
 Supply of Health Care Workers 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1398 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1398 
 Support for Law Enforcement 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
 Children in the Sex Trade 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1401 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1401 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1401 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1401 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Promotion of Saskatchewan 
  Yates...............................................................................................................................................................................1401, 1411 
  Jones.........................................................................................................................................................................................1403 
  Dearborn........................................................................................................................................................................1405, 1411 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1406 



 

 

  Hagel (point of order) .............................................................................................................................................................1408 
  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................1408 
  Van Mulligen.................................................................................................................................................................1408, 1411 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1410 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1412 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1412 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1413 
PRIVATE BILLS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Western Christian College (Amendment) Act, 2003 
  McCall ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 1413 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 7 — Government Environmental Initiatives 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1413 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1420 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1423 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1424 
 


