















































Hansard: May 07, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 935 
 May 7, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again this afternoon I rise on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw 
and district concerned about the lack of dialysis services. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Again this afternoon, signatures on this petition are mostly from 
the community of Moose Jaw but also from Regina. 
 
And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
stand to present a petition on behalf of constituents in the 
Cypress Hills area on another matter. This one is related to crop 
insurance and the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very important petition to the people of 
Cypress Hills. It’s been signed by numerous individuals from 
the communities of Leader, Sceptre, and Mendham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
regarding the historical bridges of the Battlefords. The prayer of 
relief which reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister 
of Highways preserve the old bridges on the North 
Saskatchewan River between Battleford and North 
Battleford. 

 
Your petitioners come from North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the downright 
deplorable lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose Jaw. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens in the 
Estevan constituency with grave concerns over the condition of 
Highway 47. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Estevan, Bienfait, 
and Lampman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise again with a petition from citizens of 
southern Saskatchewan who are very concerned about having 
access to adequate health care. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents who are concerned with rural 
school closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be influenced to stay the closure of isolated 
schools such as Major, preferring instead to supply quality 
educations to students in a community close to their 
residence. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kerrobert, Saskatoon, Compeer, Cactus Lake, Luseland, and by 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

the looks of it, the entire town of Major. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition dealing with 
drug costs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Davidson and Cudworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have yet 
another petition to present on behalf of constituents concerned 
with a section of Highway 22. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from new 
residents of Dysart and the community of Govan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of northern Saskatchewan that are also concerned about 
the government’s handling of the crop insurance. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Meadow 
Lake, Loon Lake, Frenchman Butte, and St. Walburg. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 36, 41, 90, and no. 100. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 

on day no. 39 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the CIC minister: has SaskTel expanded its cellphone 
coverage for 2002; and if so, where? 

 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 39 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: in light of the latest import 
duties put on Canadian grain by United States, what 
concrete plans of action has the Minister of Agriculture and 
his officials developed in conjunction with the federal 
government to end these latest American tariffs; secondly, 
what specific action has the minister and his officials taken 
in fair light to these latest duties; and third question, what 
specific action is the Minister of Agriculture and his 
officials taking in the near future to deal with these issues? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a very pleasant task to perform on behalf of my colleague, 
the member from Saskatoon Southeast. And I’ve been asked to 
introduce in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, a group of 49 
students from what I’m told is a very fine school in Saskatoon 
called Lakeview School, Mr. Speaker. And they are 
accompanied by Mrs. J. Block and Mrs. S. Widenmaier, and the 
chaperones are Alice Welsh and Wendy Janzen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 
me in welcoming this fine group of young-looking people to the 
legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

SaskPower Poster Contest 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
are increasing concerns that human activities such as the 
burning of fossil fuels to generate electricity is resulting in 
climate change. And so for the second year in a row the 
SaskPower Shand Greenhouse, to increase awareness and 
encourage positive solutions to the challenge of climate change, 
has sponsored a poster contest for elementary school students in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this second annual Energy & Our Environment 
Poster Contest was open to grade 5 and 6 students across the 
province and they were enthusiastic participants. Over 500 
entries were received from 46 schools, and the variety and 
ingenuity of the ideas captured in the posters show us how all 
. . . show how all of us can learn from our youth. 
 
The four contest winners were — the envelope please, thank 
you — Lisa Ochs of Landis, Elise Frechette of Plenty, John 
Crawford of Estevan, and Kimberley Pasieka of Melfort, Mr. 
Speaker. Each of the winners will receive a bicycle. Their 
school will receive a $250 credit for the purchase of larger trees 
from a local nursery to be planted on school grounds, and each 
school will also receive $250 worth of climate change books 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

 

and reference materials for their libraries. As well, Mr. Speaker, 
a winning poster was selected from each of the 46 schools and 
will be dry-mounted, making it suitable for display in each 
school. 
 
I ask the members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
not only the winners, but all the students who took part in this 
contest. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tenth Annual Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
evening was the 10th annual Battlefords Business Excellence 
Awards in North Battleford. Awards were given out in seven 
categories. 
 
G & C Asphalt was honoured both as Business of the Year and 
for Community Involvement. In his acceptance speech, owner 
Paul Gervais said he measured the success of his business by 
looking at his staff. If they were buying homes and cars, 
investing in their families and in their community, then his 
business was a success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this test his business is indeed a success. For 25 
years it has provided employment for hundreds of persons in 
the Battlefords area. Most recently he received the tender to 
complete the new bridge crossing on the North Saskatchewan 
River at the Battlefords. 
 
Other honoured businesses included BCU Financial for 
Marketing, Robin Peterson for Entrepreneur of the Year for the 
Venice House, Customer Service winner was Pleasant View 
Grooming & Pet Vacations, and New Business of the Year was 
Pleasant Garden & Gift Centre. Also this year the Heritage 
Award was given to Battlefords and District Co-op for an 
82-year commitment to the Battlefords. 
 
The evening was again a sellout and master craftsman, Stanley 
Wychopen, again created magnificent antique replica desks as 
the awards. For the first time the ceremony was carried live. 
 
Congratulations to all the winners and businesses of the 
Battlefords. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Skate Canada — Saskatchewan Annual Meeting 
And Awards Banquet 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend I had the good 
fortune to attend Skate Canada-Saskatchewan annual meeting 
and awards banquet in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we sometimes forget that behind every successful 
skater there is a whole team of talented people. And so I was 
pleased to have the opportunity to recognize not only those 
exceptional skaters whose skill and drive has taken them to the 
national level, but also the coaches, volunteers, officials, and 
sponsors for their commitment to the sport. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was an opportunity to recognize Skate 
Canada-Saskatchewan organization for all the good work they 
have done to promote and develop skating in the province; 
providing training opportunities, financial assistance, 
recreational programs, and development programs for skaters, 
coaches, and officials. 
 
It is worth pointing out that in the promoting of their sport, 
Skate Canada-Saskatchewan is also doing its bit to promote 
lifelong fun, physical fitness, and personal achievement in the 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating Skate Canada-Saskatchewan for fulfilling their 
mission to promote skating within the community; all the 
skaters for their accomplishments; and all the coaches, 
volunteers, and sponsors for helping to ensure that for the 
young people in this province the future is wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Member from Lloydminster Receives St. John 
Ambulance Award 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to inform our honoured Assembly of a prestigious event 
that happened Saturday evening, May 4, 2003. The St. John’s 
Ambulance, Saskatchewan Council, held an award ceremony to 
honour those people who have shown extraordinary courage 
and caring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the St. John’s Ambulance is a part of a large 
organization known as St. John’s of Jerusalem, initially 
established to provide to those in need of health care during the 
Crusades. 
 
I’m especially proud to inform this Assembly of one of the 
recipients of an award, someone all of us know very well and 
are truly proud of for his singular act of unselfish assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us well remember an incident in the 
legislative cafeteria when a legislative staff member began to 
choke and required immediate assistance. The quick actions of 
the member from Lloydminster alleviated what could have been 
a disastrous circumstance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the member’s immediate and 
successful response, the St. John’s Ambulance Society has 
awarded the St. John’s Award of Merit to our colleague from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, none other than the Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan assisted in the presentation of this 
venerable medal in our Queen City. 
 
I ask that all members join me in congratulating the member 
from Lloydminster on being recognized as a Saskatchewan 
hero. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

2003 Kalyna Dance Festival 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
weekend I had the pleasure of attending the 2003 Kalyna Dance 
Festival in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. And the dance festival was 
started last year in Yorkton by the Kalyna School of Ukrainian 
Dance. It is the largest Ukrainian dance competition in 
Saskatchewan and featured dancers performing traditional folk 
dances from many different regions of the Ukraine. This year 
there were some 675 entries from 26 clubs across 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and North Dakota. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of the times that everyone was a 
winner. The dancers got an opportunity to meet and compete 
against individuals from a much larger geographical area than is 
usually the case. And the city of Yorkton gets to show off our 
Ukrainian heritage and receive the accolades due to a gracious 
and a generosity that’s provided by our host city, and not to 
mention to reap the economic benefits of thousands of weekend 
visitors, and of course to see young people from across the 
province and outside of our province first-hand perform some 
of the Ukrainian dance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as a Ukrainian-Canadian it was an honour to 
be part of the weekend. And they asked me if I would 
participate in the dance, Mr. Speaker, and as a staryy tantsiuryst, 
I couldn’t do a very good job. As a staryy tantsiuryst, which is 
an old Ukrainian dancer, I wasn’t able to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I ask all of my colleagues to join me in congratulating the 
event’s Adam Fetsch, Co-Chair, Yvonne Matthies, and all the 
dancers, volunteers, and sponsors who hosted the festival with 
great success, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Broncos in Royal Bank Cup Tournament 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to provide all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, as well as the sports enthusiasts in 
Saskatchewan, an update on the Humboldt Broncos at the Royal 
Bank Cup tournament in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Broncos are at this point 1 for 1. On 
Sunday in their opening game, the Humboldt Broncos defeated 
the Wellington Dukes 4 to 1. And in their second game of the 
tournament on Monday, the Broncos lost to the Lennoxville 
Cougars 5-4 in double time overtime. The lost was really a 
bitter pill to swallow for the Broncos, Mr. Speaker, as it 
appeared that the Humboldt Broncos had scored in double 
overtime. The red light went on, the goaltender came out of the 
net, but the referee disallowed the goal. 
 
Humboldt will meet the Charlottetown Abbies this afternoon at 
4 p.m. in a crucial matchup. The Charlottetown Abbies, Mr. 
Speaker, are 0 for 2 and so they are going to be coming out very 
strong and I’m sure providing quite a challenge for the Broncos. 
But we are confident that the Humboldt Broncos will fight 
harder and end up on top. A win today, Mr. Speaker, will clinch 
a spot for the playoffs for the Broncos. 

And I’m sure that all ears in Humboldt will be tuned in to that 
game this afternoon. From members of this Assembly, we wish 
the Humboldt Broncos all the best of luck. You can do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
University of Saskatchewan Research in Organic Farming 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the College of Agriculture at the University of 
Saskatchewan is now taking a more prominent role in 
coordinating research in organic farming by becoming affiliated 
with the Organic Agriculture Centre of Canada, located in 
Truro, Nova Scotia. 
 
The centre has hired Dr. Brenda Frick, who has been working 
out of the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) organic research 
unit as prairie coordinator. Her role will be to build a network 
of researchers across the Prairie provinces and to help 
coordinate organic agriculture research at Western Canadian 
universities, colleges, and research centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, organic farming techniques are an important area 
of study and research, and it’s especially appropriate that the U 
of S become more involved. Canada is one of the top five 
producers of organic grains and oilseeds in the world and 48 per 
cent of the organic farmers in the Prairie provinces are right 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
At this time, Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
wishing Dr. Frick, the University of Saskatchewan agricultural 
research unit for organic agriculture, and the Organic 
Agriculture Centre of Canada every success in their research 
efforts. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Retention of Physicians 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, once again this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government is at odds with medical 
professionals. This time it’s doctors. 
 
Saskatchewan doctors are now threatening job action, which 
would be the first time that job action was considered in the 
36-year history of the Saskatchewan Medical Association. The 
SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) will review the 
government’s latest offer this weekend, but they’ve already 
made it clear it will be almost certainly be rejected. SMA 
president, Dr. James Fritz, says the NDP government’s offer is 
not enough to keep doctors in the province and it’ll make it 
even harder to recruit and retain physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has already created a severe doctor 
shortage in this province. What is the government doing to 
address this current crisis that they’re creating? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue 
to work with the Saskatchewan Medical Association in trying to 
sort out exactly what the compensation package should be. We 
think that there’s a very fair offer — fair to the doctors, fair to 
the people of Saskatchewan who will have to pay the bill. We 
have to work together with the doctors as we develop the 
medical system, but we also have to work with all of the other 
health providers in the system. 
 
What we will continue to do is have discussions. I will be 
attending the meeting on the weekend and be listening to the 
comments from the doctors directly, and we will continue to 
work at this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan doctors say the 
salary increase they are being offered is coming from money 
that would otherwise be used for retention and recruitment. 
That means the doctor shortage is going to get even worse. And 
what’s the minister’s response? He says, it’s not his problem; 
that’s the doctors’ choice. Talk about abandoning your 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health is responsible. He is 
responsible to ensure that we have an adequate number of 
doctors in this province and it’s not good enough for him to 
simply wash his hands of that responsibility. Mr. Speaker, once 
again, this NDP government is abandoning its responsibility for 
health care in the province. What is the NDP government going 
to do to increase the number of doctors in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately my friend, 
who I respect, does not have very good backroom research, 
because it was very clear in the meeting and the comments that 
I made and very clear in what the doctor said, Dr. Fritz said 
yesterday, that the money that’s available for the rural retention 
program, $9.8 million, that’s not being touched at all. That’s 
going to be there. All of this is on top of that. 
 
There are some new programs that are very innovative and very 
interesting that we have been discussing which would be 
included in some of this extra money. But practically, if they 
choose not to go with some of these newer programs and put it 
all on fees, that is their responsibility. But practically, we have 
retained and will continue to maintain all of the very innovative 
kinds of funds that have been negotiated before and will 
continue to explore some new ones. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, right now 
Saskatchewan has the second worst doctor-to-patient ratio in 
Canada. The only jurisdiction that is worse is Prince Edward 
Island. 
 
In fact, to get to the national average, we would need to have 
300 more doctors practising in this province. And right now, 
Mr. Speaker, only one in three graduates from the College of 
Medicine in Saskatoon are staying in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, the bottom line is, under this NDP government we’re 

not only not retaining our doctors, we’re losing the ones that we 
have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are running out of 
patience with this NDP government. They promise over and 
over and over again with lots of rhetoric that they’re going to 
deal with the human resources problem in the health care field. 
And yet time and time again they come up short in this 
endeavour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is this government going to do to increase 
the number of doctors in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again I would 
ask the member to get some researchers who know what they’re 
doing. If you go and look at the active number of positions over 
the last four years, we have increased slowly but surely each 
year in the number of active doctors. And you can look at 
March 1999, 1,091 doctors — this is active positions; this isn’t 
all the positions on the registry — December ’02, the last 
number I have here is 1,251. 
 
We’ve been working slowly and carefully to retain doctors. We 
also have been working very well with the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association around dealing with a number of these 
issues, and we will continue to do that with some very 
innovative programs that we continue to support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the minister 
chooses to recite rhetoric that is fed to him from the department. 
The Saskatchewan Medical Association, the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association representing the doctors of this province, 
are circulating information in a pamphlet and other means that 
say that only one in three of the graduates from the College of 
Medicine are staying in this province. They say that we have 
the second worst ratio in Canada. They say, and I quote: 
 

. . . one of the most serious challenges facing health care is 
the shortage of health care professionals in our province. 
There are simply not enough doctors, nurses, and others to 
make sure our patients get the care they need . . . As a 
result, waiting lists are too long and getting worse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the doctors of Saskatchewan are 
saying. Nurses are leaving, doctors are leaving, waiting lists are 
growing, and in the meantime this government refuses to accept 
the reality that their human resources policy is resulting in a 
crisis for Saskatchewan health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government wake up to the realities 
and do something about the shortage of doctors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re working very 
diligently at this issue and I want to give the member some 
information, since he has a hard time getting it from the people 
that help him. 
 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

This is a summary of the recruitment and retention programs. A 
new program in 2001, specialist recruitment and retention fund, 
annual budget, 1.5 million. This is for bursaries for people 
studying, specialists. We have a specialist emergency recovery 
program which was new in the year 2002, annual budget, $14 
million. We have a long-service retention program new in the 
2000-2003 contract with the doctors. This is the first fund like 
this in Canada and there’s $4 million a year that goes into this. 
This is about rewarding and affirming those doctors who 
provide long service in Saskatchewan. We’re very pleased and 
excited about that program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to go through more when I have 
another chance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Policy on Firefighting Expenses 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On two occasions last 
summer the town of Outlook fire department was called upon to 
put out field fires, both of which were started by malfunctioning 
SaskPower equipment. One started in a meter box on a 
SaskPower pole and the other was started by a downed power 
line. As always, the Outlook fire department did an excellent 
job responding quickly to these fires and putting them out. 
 
The town then billed SaskPower $1,400 for firefighting services 
since SaskPower equipment was responsible for starting both 
these fires. Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is refusing now to accept 
any responsibility for these costs. Will the minister direct 
SaskPower to reimburse the town of Outlook for the $1,400 it 
spent fighting fires caused by SaskPower? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 
want to join with the member in congratulating the local fire 
department for doing the great job that they did do and 
obviously continue to do in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has a very clearly stated policy, Mr. 
Speaker, but that’s not to say that we can’t work with the 
communities to try and resolve issues like this. On this very 
point though, Mr. Speaker, it appears as if the policy that 
currently exists will not find resolution on this particular issue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not much of an 
answer for the town of Outlook. 
 
When the town of Outlook inquired about this matter, a 
SaskPower official told them that SaskPower is only 
responsible for paying the cost if SaskPower reports the fire. 
And since SaskPower didn’t report the fires, Outlook should 
bill the landowners. Now have you ever heard of anything so 
ridiculous, Mr. Speaker? Why should the landowners pay the 
bill for fires caused by SaskPower’s equipment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, 
SaskPower will work with communities on issues where there 
. . . would assume liability for having caused the fire, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I’ve answered in the letter, as the member indicated 
yesterday by the way, the letter has . . . They’ve received a 
response to this from the president of SaskPower in which 
SaskPower does not, or believes it does not, appropriately 
assume responsibility on this fire. 
 
I would certainly indicate that SaskPower will continue to work 
with communities to try and find resolution on difficult issues 
like this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well my question to 
the minister is, will he be changing the policy? I also asked a 
written question on this, which was converted then, on their 
policy and what their policy actually was with this. And they 
wouldn’t answer it back then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So my question is, will they change the policy right now so that 
any equipment . . . And also he talked about he wasn’t sure if 
SaskPower started it. There is a firefighters’ report that is sent 
in that stated that is where the fire started on the meter box and 
also with the SaskPower pole. 
 
My question is: will they change the policy of this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
makes a good point and I will commit to that member, Mr. 
Speaker, that I’ll have SaskPower review that particular case 
again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskPower always works with the communities, Mr. Speaker, 
and I think more often than not on the cases that I’ve seen, have 
erred on the side of paying when they, when they believe that 
they should, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is a 
responsible corporation that will work with communities, I 
think as it has proven for many, many years in the past, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Coachman Insurance Company 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). Mr. Speaker, in April the NDP told the people of 
the province that SGI lost $11 million on its . . . on yet another 
bad business deal they made in Ontario, investing and 
purchasing 100 per cent of Coachman Insurance of Ontario. 
 
But less than two weeks later the NDP released Coachman’s 
actual annual report for 2002 and on page 5 of that report it says 
that Coachman Insurance actually lost $17.2 million. The larger 
SGI annual report also says Coachman lost $17.2 million. 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

 

So the question to the minister is: why did the NDP government 
say before the annual report that this out-of-province 
investment lost 11 million and then the annual reports indicate 
the actual loss to taxpayers was $17.2 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I would 
think I could ask a parallel question. Why do these members on 
a daily basis, from the Sask Party, get up and cite losses, 
individual losses, and not talk about the overall revenues, Mr. 
Speaker, the overall profits and revenues that those individual 
investments make as a cumulative effect, Mr. Speaker, back for 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The same logic 
applies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, SGI has made 
an investment. Coachman, as a separate subsidiary, Mr. 
Speaker, obviously as he correctly indicates, lost the amount 
that he described, Mr. Speaker. The overall investment, Mr. 
Speaker, was a loss on behalf of SGI of $11.2 million, as he 
indicates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in 2001 the NDP spent $12 million 
to buy 100 per cent of Coachman Insurance Company in 
Ontario. And in 2002, they poured another $2.7 million into 
Coachman Insurance. And earlier this month, on April 8, the 
NDP cabinet decided to pour another $9.4 million into 
Coachman Insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the minister: how much more taxpayers’ 
dollars is he prepared to risk on yet another out-of-province, 
money-losing NDP investment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as I 
indicated in the House on this particular issue some time ago 
and as I’ve indicated publicly, Mr. Speaker, it is not accurate 
for that member to say that we put another $9.4 million into 
this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that there was an investment of $9.4 
million. It was moved, Mr. Speaker, from SGI CANADA over 
to Coachman, over to Coachman. It makes no difference, makes 
no effect on the bottom line of SGI whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
No effect whatsoever. It was simply a transfer of funds from 
SGI CANADA over to Coachman, Mr. Speaker. No effect 
whatsoever. 
 
And it was a requirement of the Ontario regulator, Mr. Speaker, 
a requirement of the Ontario regulator that says that you need to 
have 150 per cent of outstanding claims on the books as of 
December 31, 2002. That was the rationale for the transfer of 
funds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the problem of course is that it 
could get even worse for the taxpayers. On page 7 of 
Coachman’s 2002 annual report, it says that: 

. . . Coachman’s financial position was so bad that it was in 
violation of the Ontario Insurance Act. 

 
And the annual report also says, and I quote: 
 

Management is attempting to obtain capital from the parent 
company . . . to be able to continue as a going concern (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
They need money from the parent company to continue as a 
going concern. The parent company, Mr. Speaker, are the 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. So is this the $9.4 
million the minister is talking about or is there to be more 
taxpayers’ dollars risked on this money-losing NDP venture? 
 
Will the minister indicate to the House today if this NDP 
government is considering putting still more money into this 
Ontario insurance company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, as 
I’ve indicated some time ago, it is projected that this 
investment, Mr. Speaker, will not only be cash flow positive but 
will be in a profit position as of this year, 2003, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me again say, Mr. Speaker, let me again say this attack, 
as I have said 100 times or more in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, 
is nothing more than that Sask Party wanting to discredit every 
single Crown that we have, Mr. Speaker — every single Crown. 
 
They should look at the big picture, Mr. Speaker, where our 
Crowns last year returned to the people of Saskatchewan to 
provide better services an average rate of return, I believe, of 
around 6.4 per cent, when virtually every other portfolio of 
investments in the private sector, Mr. Speaker, saw a reduction, 
Mr. Speaker, a reduction. We should be proud of what our 
Crowns have done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister, the minister asks 
a rhetorical question as to what this is all about — the fact that 
we can go day after day after day and talk about a unique and 
new money-losing venture that the NDP have gotten the 
taxpayers into. All the while they plead poverty to the 
province’s doctors; they say they have no money for nursing 
training seats, Mr. Speaker. They have not any more money for 
highways, Mr. Speaker. Education is suffering. Our taxes are 
still too high in the province. They jack up crop insurance rates 
by 50 per cent. And yet, and yet, through their Crown 
corporations, they lose $85 million overseas. That what these 
questions are about, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to continue 
to ask them until we get some answers. 
 
The question to the minister was this: how much more money is 
this NDP government prepared to put in harm’s way in its 
Coachman Insurance investment that’s already lost 17 million 
taxpayer dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

member asks why it is that on a daily basis we stand in the 
House and talk about money-losing ventures, Mr. Speaker. The 
reason is because that Sask Party never wants to talk about any 
of the money-making ventures, Mr. Speaker — never wants to 
talk about any of the investments that make money. 
 
I listed for him just in SaskTel alone, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel 
International, four investments that made money last year. Do 
they want to talk about that? No, they don’t want to talk about 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year our Crowns returned to the people of 
Saskatchewan some $300 million. Mr. Speaker, they provided 
high-quality service at the lowest rates — amongst the lowest 
rates, if not the lowest rates — in all of Canada and in North 
America, Mr. Speaker. Do they want to talk about that? No, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Do they want to talk about the $1.6 billion that I have talked 
about in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker? Many, many times they 
have provided great services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
No, they want to pick and choose the little losses — the losses, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they want to pick those losses out 
and talk about that rather than talking about the big picture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister just characterized the 
loss of $85 million — which doesn’t include the $28 million 
that the minister for deal making and SPUDCO (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company) lost; it doesn’t include 
the $107 million blown by the Minister of Justice on ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan), Mr. 
Speaker — and he characterizes that as a little loss, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well the only other little loss that could be so underestimated, 
Mr. Speaker, is the loss that that party will suffer in the next 
election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We’ll give the minister another chance to answer 
the question. The question is this: will the minister please tell 
the taxpayers, will he report to the taxpayers, how much more 
of their hard-earned dollars he’ll put at harm’s way this year in 
Coachman Insurance in Ontario, Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, once again, Mr. Speaker, 
we have the Sask Party getting up, providing misinformation 
about the cost of the Information Services Corporation. 
 
And I welcome the opportunity to rise in the House because 
some time ago, Mr. Speaker, the member that just was up 
produced a paper that said, what’s the real cost; saying that ISC 
was saying the real cost was $107 million. But what he failed to 
do, Mr. Speaker, was to produce the very next page of the same 
document which he had, which said, what’s the real cost of 
building that system — where the real cost was revealed on the 
very next page as $60.5 million, Mr. Speaker. And the member 
withheld that information from the House, Mr. Speaker. 

And then the next day he was on the radio. And I just want to 
point out, Mr. Speaker, what did he say about the ISC? He said 
this, and I quote: “The accounting has been done right.” That’s 
what he said. 
 
Then you know what he said, Mr. Speaker? He said that he was 
wrong when he said it wasn’t . . . He said, the management is 
getting a lot of this right. That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if that minister 
of ISC wants to stand up and bail out the minister for Crown 
Investments Corporation on the Coachman Insurance issue, he 
should do a better job. Because you know what, Mr. Speaker? 
You know what the NDP don’t count in the costs for ISC? They 
don’t count the fact that the old, tired, paper system generated 
$12 million a year of dividend to the General Revenue Fund. 
And ever since they’ve created this hare-brained Crown 
corporation it’s lost money, unable to pay a thin dime in 
dividends, bringing the total cost of the system to what, Mr. 
Speaker — $107 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that minister wants to stand up and ask 
questions in this Assembly, or answer them rather, will he 
answer this question: how much more money is he prepared to 
vote for the cabinet table for SGI to blow on Coachman 
Insurance in Ontario? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well it’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker, 
how the member from Swift Current thinks he can cut and paste 
different facts together, and take words out, and get up and 
make an argument. 
 
But I just want to say, because the member from Swift Current 
thinks he can attack ISC in his line of questioning here, that he 
said, he said on the John Gormley show, Mr. Speaker — and 
it’s a matter of public record — the accounting was right. Those 
were his words. Then he said the system worked. Those were 
his words. 
 
So I said well if the accounting’s right and the system worked, 
what is your problem? And this is what he said: oh he had a 
new complaint; it was that we had borrowed money and 
operated the system at a loss by paying a dividend to the GRF 
(General Revenue Fund). And you know what I said, Mr. 
Speaker? I said well we were doing that but we stopped that 
practice, we stopped doing that. 
 
So we have now met every complaint that the member has. And 
when we confront the member in public about these complaints 
he admits they’re all fixed and yet he gets up day after day and 
says there’s still a problem — because there’s no credibility 
over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what we just 
witnessed in this Assembly is probably the reason why this 
minister’s bailout of the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) is failing so badly. Because who 
just ran over there to advise those two ministers over there on 
these questions? The minister of SPUDCO, Mr. Speaker. The 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

 

$28 million man was just over there. 
 
The minister of ISC, the $107 million land titles system, hasn’t 
even come close to answering the question. 
 
Will he defend for the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
the fact that he has voted at the cabinet table to approve $85 
million in out-of-province losses in the Crown corporations 
while they say they have no money for health care, while they 
say they have no money for education, while they jack up crop 
insurance rate, Mr. Speaker, while they refuse to lower taxes on 
productivity. Will he give that explanation to the Legislative 
Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
let me make my point, Mr. Speaker, let me make my point. 
Every single dollar that is lost, every single dollar that has been 
lost, Mr. Speaker, is regretted by the separate Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t enjoy losing that money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me make this point. In many of those cases, in many of 
those cases they were start-up losses that were anticipated. They 
were anticipated. 
 
And let me put this in the big picture. That member from Swift 
Current, from the Sask Party, talks about the $85 million. Let’s 
put this in perspective. It is important . . . Those losses are 
important, I grant them that. But put it in perspective — $300 
million that were returned to the people of Saskatchewan for 
services; $1.6 billion returned to the people of Saskatchewan 
for services, compared to the 85. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and let me make this prediction, on many of those 
investments, on many of those investments they will return for 
the people of Saskatchewan, into the future, huge dividends to 
provide even greater and better services here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Rates for 911 System 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This morning it was my pleasure to have an opportunity to tour 
the Saskatoon public safety answering point for the 911 system 
and to do so particularly during Emergency Preparedness Week. 
 
I also took the opportunity to announce publicly that we have 
restructured the 911 fees in the province. I want to inform the 
legislature that the province has approved new rates for 911 
services that will be charged on the monthly phone bills. I am 
confident that these new rates . . . that as a result of these new 
rates, the 911 system will not only be sustainable but can be 
improved over the next five years. 
 
We have taken advantage of the opportunity provided to us by 

the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission) decision which directs new rates for infrastructure 
on the 911 fee. This portion that is operated by SaskTel, we’ve 
taken advantage of this to ensure that a new, lower fee is 
implemented across the 911 system and that it is harmonized 
between land lines and the cellular services. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, there will be a single rate of 59 cents 
per month for land lines in the province. Additionally a 49 cent 
per month charge will be placed on cellphone numbers. Mr. 
Speaker, this accounts for a reduction of 41 cents a month for 
residential numbers. 
 
As I’ve mentioned, the new rates also include a charge on 
cellphones for the first time. SaskTel Mobility will be charging 
a standard 49 cents a month. The CRTC has directed that 11 
cents a month be charged on the infrastructure portion of the 
911 services for cellphones. The charge for the operating 
portion is the same on the cellphones as it is on the land lines, 
and that’s been set at 38 cents. Again as a result, we have a 59 
cent charge on land lines; 49 cents on cellphones. 
 
I think that this is an important set of changes as it helps to 
provide a more stable and consistent approach to the 911 
service, and it also provides us with an opportunity to improve 
the services as we look forward over the next five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 911 service exemplifies what Emergency 
Preparedness Week is about, that is namely helping 
Saskatchewan people recognize the risks in their daily lives, 
learning what to do about it, and how to deal in particular with 
an emergency. With the recent expansion of the 911 service, 
Mr. Speaker, about 97 per cent of Saskatchewan residents now 
have access to 911 service. Expansion to additional northern 
communities and Lloydminster is expected to be completed 
later this year. 
 
I want to tell the Assembly and all members that a healthy 911 
system that’s able to change and improve over time is a 
valuable provincial asset, both now and in the future, and it’s an 
important part of this government’s safe community strategy. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to 
thank the minister for providing a copy of his statement. I’m 
sure that this will be viewed with welcome relief by all of the 
customers, whether they be rural or urban. 
 
We also like the idea of having a level playing field for all 
customers, so those with cellphones who were not previously 
charged for 911 will now be charged. Since a lot of the 911 
calls come in via cellphone — and I might add, except for 
Wood River constituency where there’s a very, very small 
portion that even have cell service — this charge on 911 cell 
cost may impact a bit on the downturn of prank calls or calls 
that are less of an emergent nature. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, while this announcement in and of itself is a 
good thing, there’s still a number of problems that face the 911 
system. And the responsibility for addressing these problems 
lies definitely with the government that introduced this, and 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

that’s the NDP government. 
 
As members opposite know, the official opposition represents a 
good majority of rural customers as well as numerous 
businesses that have for the past years been forced to pay for a 
service that was not only consistently behind schedule, but 
when it finally did arrive often proved to be less than effective, 
and on some occasions was completely inaccessible. 
 
In fact while members opposite may boast about the so-called 
97 per cent coverage of 911 in the province, we know that in 
many areas of Saskatchewan it’s still virtually impossible to 
access this service because local service lines simply do not 
allow it. I’m sure that members can imagine the frustration and 
disappointment of residents in those communities who have 
been unable to use the system that, according to members 
opposite, is supposedly state of the art. 
 
Small wonder then that for a number of years people have been 
asking, why are we paying for something that we can’t use? It’s 
a good question, an honest question, and one that really 
deserves an answer. 
 
It’s no secret that those extra surcharges on our phone bills, 
costs that supposedly went to building and maintaining the 
state-of-the-art 911 system, have been a major issue for people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
We also know that there were to be four public service 
answering points and now there are three. On top of that there 
seemed to be very little logic attached when it came to putting 
these public service answering points in place. We’ve heard of 
situations where an ambulance in one part of the province is 
being given directions for someone in a totally different area, 
someone who is not even remotely familiar with the area. 
 
Response time has been and will continue to be a major concern 
for all residents of the province — and well it should be — for 
those first few minutes following an accident or event are the 
most critical and can literally mean the difference between life 
and death. And if the system that’s in place doesn’t work or 
can’t work, then it can hardly be called reliable and it most 
certainly won’t be put in . . . put to use in case of an emergency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also a bit curious as to why the minister just 
a few weeks ago saw fit to give ISC $80,000 to develop an 
on-line addressing and mapping system for use by the 911 
system. Since Saskatchewan is virtually one of the last 
jurisdictions in Canada and maybe in North America to 
implement 911 service, wouldn’t it make sense to use a service 
that’s already been created in some other jurisdiction? 
 
As usual though, the members opposite not only consider it 
necessary to try and reinvent the wheel, but also to needlessly 
spend even more hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars. And we’ve 
certainly heard about that in the last few days and weeks with 
the amount of money that this government has wasted 
needlessly on investments, etc., throughout the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to address just a quick point on some 
concerns that have been expressed by jurisdictions in the 
province about being charged an additional $1.50 per capita for 
911 dispatching levy. And this is something that’s relatively 

new that came up and the question that begs to be asked is, 
what’s the authorization? Is there legislation that has allowed 
this to happen or where is the justification for this $1.50 per 
capita levy for 911 in certain jurisdictions in this province? 
 
So when we consider all of the issues with 911, I think residents 
will be very happy to see the rates decrease. And we applaud 
that, Mr. Speaker. I think this is very good for the customers of 
the province and it’s very deserving. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment and 
Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, kind Speaker. I 
want to ask the members of the Assembly here to recognize two 
friends of mine, one very close friend. I’m not sure if that’s his 
girlfriend or his daughter. 
 
But in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Clarence Tsi Boy Iron and 
with Clarence is his friend, Jocelyn Wuttenee. And Jocelyn is 
with the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), I believe. 
And Clarence is the world-famous Tsi Boy Iron who’s on the 
radio and does a lot of free broadcasting. Tsi Boy is an 
accomplished broadcaster, worked many years with MBC 
(Missinipe Broadcasting Corporation), and is also a fellow 
hockey player. And all of us in hockey-player-land wish that 
Tsi Boy would skate as fast as he speaks Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So I said, Speaker, I said thanks for coming to join me. And 
meet with me one of these days; it might mean a free meal for 
him. 
 
So once again, Speaker, I would ask all members of the 
Assembly to help me in welcoming Jocelyn and world-famous 
Clarence Tsi Boy Iron. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
this afternoon to respond on behalf of the government and table 
a response to written question no. 184. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 184 has been tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’m 
extremely pleased on behalf of the government to stand and 
convert for debates returnable number . . . questions 185 
through 188 inclusive. 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 185, 186, 187, 188 converted to 
orders for returns (debatable). 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
this afternoon once again to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions 189 through 191 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 189, 190, 191 have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 13 — The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take part 
in the debate on Bill No. 13, The Parks Act. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
reviewed this Bill in depth and talked to some of the many 
stakeholders concerning this Bill. 
 
Really, there’s two parts to this Bill and the first part is 
extending leases from one year to five years to livestock 
producers. And as, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
are well aware that in the last few years we’ve had considerable 
drought and the livestock producers of Saskatchewan has asked 
to graze their cattle on Crown land. And we note that wildlife 
associations and Ducks Unlimited did open up their lands to 
grazing and some haying because of the very severe drought 
conditions in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important that a proper 
balance be kept between the environment and the economy. We 
have to have a sustainable environment, but also have to have a 
sustainable economic base in this province. And it’s important 
that that option is left open to use parkland and Crown land for 
grazing. And the extension of the permit from one year to five 
years, I think, is important on many different levels. 
 
(14:30) 
 
First of all, many of these areas need some infrastructure put in, 
anywhere from digging dugouts or fencing, electric fence or 
even more of a permanent fence. And it’s certainly more 
economical and wise to allow a producer to have a long-term 
permit that would recognize this need and give the livestock 
producers greater flexibility in their grazing pasturing plans, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
A number of questions, of course, comes up when we talk about 
extending permits, and naturally it’s the cost of the permits to 
the livestock producer. And this is an area that’s critical, 
naturally, especially in a dry year when all the costs to the 
livestock producers have gone up. But it’s critical at any time of 
the year to have a reasonable rate to be charged for these 
permits to the livestock producer and also be fair to the taxpayer 
and to the province of Saskatchewan so that this money can be 

used properly for the sustainability of parklands and be 
environmentally sustainable for the future of the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of other questions comes up of course is 
the environmental impact on these lands that this Bill speaks to. 
Naturally the proper grazing requirements need to be addressed 
so that these lands aren’t overgrazed and kept for the future of 
this province. 
 
And in the past, as we know in many areas of this province, 
livestock producers are very reliable and very concerned about 
keeping pastures grazed properly, and so that that really natural 
resource can be kept for future of people and for their 
operations as well. They know they don’t want to lose that right 
to be able to use these lands in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the second part to this Bill, really it’s concerning moving 
many different small pieces of land, either selling it or 
purchasing it from various parts around the parks. And on the 
face of it and from the people that we have talked to that have 
been affected by this, it seems to have made sense in most if not 
all cases where because of a highway or a stream or a river, that 
some land would be on one side or the other, that this land 
could be sold to a private operator or to a campground in one 
situation; or also small pieces that are on the side of the park of 
the river could be put into the park and make it much more 
easier to deal with and make a lot more sense as far as the 
boundaries are concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other things that . . . questions 
that arise from this which is not dealt in this Bill, but also does 
this have any affect on TLE (treaty land entitlement) 
settlements in the future? And these are questions that needs to 
be addressed. 
 
One other item that’s interesting with these very small changes 
in land description, it’s going to be interesting to see how the 
ISC is going to handle these. Certainly we have seen in the past 
that on fairly easy transactions and changes of ownership that 
ISC has really failed miserably, besides the tremendous over 
cost. But these small changes, it’s going to be very interesting 
to see if ISC can actually keep up with these changes and be 
able to record the property changes in the future, Mr. Speaker, 
so that people of Saskatchewan know exactly what the changes 
are and what they mean for future development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to let this Bill go to Committee 
of the Whole where we will be answering . . . asking many 
more questions and hoping to get answers on those questions 
that have been brought forward to myself and to my colleagues. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I’m happy to rise today to speak on this Bill 
and the amendments to The Land Surveys Act, 2000. It’s not 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

the amendments so much, Mr. Speaker, that are of the greatest 
concern to our party at this point, but the overall failings of the 
New Democrat’s ISC program. 
 
They are many, Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately the cost doesn’t 
seem to be stopping. We are up to 107 million already and 
rising. Mr. Speaker, this was originally outlined to cost less than 
$20 million — and the basic idea was to take a paper land titles 
system and computerize it — it’s now at $107 million. That’s a 
500 per cent cost increase. 
 
This is completely unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. But what makes 
this even more deplorable is the fact that it just doesn’t work. 
There are many, many instances — it runs a whole gambit — of 
places that this fails miserably. It’s not surprising with the cost 
that the cost overruns are so enormous as well. It’s this same 
minister, the current Justice minister, who oversaw the cost for 
the closure of the Regina Plains hospital, which went about $50 
million over budget. So seeing that ISC is greatly over budget 
now is not surprising. 
 
NDP also said that ISC would be something that would be in 
demand around the world, Mr. Speaker, and people involved in 
globetrotting in a vain attempt to make at least one sale. This 
included going to Albania. This, Mr. Speaker, can only be 
explained as hare-brained. Not only have no sales been made 
but it was questionable whether a computerized system could be 
put in Albania at all with regards to the infrastructure that they 
currently have with regards to having come out of very harsh 
times, phone lines not even being in place and whatnot. 
 
The system, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said the largest tragedy is not 
the $107 million cost, it’s the fact that it doesn’t work, and it 
doesn’t work on a number of levels. One of the big problems 
that this has, Mr. Speaker, is it was unable to identify people 
with the same last name. The old paper system, you had town 
. . . section, town, range, meridian, and it worked very well. 
You could tell exactly which RM (rural municipality) any piece 
of property was in. 
 
Constituents of mine, Mr. Speaker, had a situation: the 
Sawchucks of Coleville, Saskatchewan. They had nothing to do 
with ISC whatsoever but there was a Mr. John Marshall 
Sawchuck on the other side of the province had some liens 
against his property, I believe with Revenue Canada. In the 
transition to the computerized system, John and Verna, who 
were older, older farmers in the Coleville area, were very 
surprised one day to find out that they had writs against their 
land, and fairly distressed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They wrote ISC and asked, you know, why is this there? And 
basically they didn’t get a very satisfactory response. They were 
forced to go to one of the local lawyers in town, Mr. Miller, and 
Mr. Miller worked on their behalf to get the caveats removed. 
 
It’s telling, Mr. Speaker, that ISC actually had a fund set up to 
kind of make amends for the booboos of their system. So this is 
a tragedy in and of itself that they’d be entering into a program 
and then set up a fund to compensate people for the travesty of 
the number of losses because the system doesn’t work. 
 
I made application on behalf of the Sawchucks — due to the 
fact that they were complete innocent bystanders to a 

government system run amok — and wrote the minister a letter. 
And his officials returned a letter that said to John and Verna 
Sawchuck that this was not their problem; it was the problem of 
the federal government having a writ against it. The federal 
government however had . . . their department had written and 
said clearly this was the problem of land titles in Saskatchewan 
going to a computerized system. 
 
I even, Mr. Speaker, raised this in question period in this House, 
and unfortunately John and Verna Sawchuck of Coleville are 
still out their nearly $400. This isn’t fair, it’s wrong, and it’s 
just one of many examples of where ISC has gone completely 
wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is probably the number one issue that I get in 
the Kindersley constituency office, is problems with ISC. The 
oil and gas industry in our area, the surveyors in particular say 
that this program is a nightmare. 
 
One of the aspects that can happen with ISC is numbers are 
assigned . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to the member for Kindersley for allowing the 
interruption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you 
to members of the House, Gerry Huget sitting in the west 
gallery, the president of the Saskatchewan Professional Fire 
Fighters here to watch the proceedings this afternoon. 
 
I’m very pleased he’s here this afternoon, and I would like all 
members to give him a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2003 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
get a number of calls in the Kindersley constituency with 
regards to ISC. I just recently received telephone calls from 
financial institutions, financial institutions that have to deal with 
ISC in an ongoing basis with the way that . . . when they’re 
setting mortgages up and applications for mortgage on property, 
transfer of titles, transferring names on titles. 
 
And a manager of one of these financial institutions spoke to 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

 

me just the other day, ripping his hair out — and unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, as he’s balding he doesn’t have a lot to go, and 
this is very hard esthetically on him as well as emotionally; it 
costs a great deal of money to his institution — but his financial 
institution in one of our smaller communities in the riding, Mr. 
Speaker, has actually been charged and over gone on their 
account at ISC. And this would never happen, but there was a 
change in the rates, and there’s been stuff stuck in there for 
months at a time. So when there’s money in the account to 
cover the cost of the transactions and then the rates change but 
things have been held up for months at a time, it causes a great 
deal of frustration. 
 
It’s problematic as well for anybody getting a mortgage having 
to go through bridge financing. So in essence you can, at points, 
be paying interest on two times the amount that you’re 
borrowing. And often in property, this can be a substantial 
amount. 
 
Well every time that ISC has failed to produce the product that 
it wanted, there seems to be an answer by the NDP and that’s 
simply let’s just put more money into this. We had a perfectly 
good model that existed in Alberta that was the cost of about 
$18 million. The original cost of ISC, as I’ve stated before, was 
supposed to be around $20 million. But now we’re up to $107 
million and it doesn’t seem that the end is in sight. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Speaker, it is problematic in that it still 
doesn’t work. I’ve spoken with lawyers, Mr. Speaker, that say 
there’s even a question within the realm of law whether the 
parcels — which are all by number now — are ever able to be 
determined in a court of law. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, if you have a quarter section that 
happens to have a roadway through it, a second roadway to 
access an oil and gas . . . or a gas well and possibly a railway 
through it, you could have up to six different numbers for one 
quarter section. And each of these as well, for transferring title 
and whatnot, all requires a fee. This is incredibly inefficient and 
it’s incredible that this method would even be contemplated 
unless it’s just a pure tax grab by the back door to try to make 
up for the horrendous losses that the over costs of this project 
have run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other examples in the riding of 
Kindersley alone where farmers have had quarter sections, one 
in, one out, cut up. For whatever reason, they buy a half section 
together and half of it goes through, half of it doesn’t. It just, 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it never seems to stop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people and groups are currently signing this 
Bill because like so many other projects, when you get on the 
phone and say the NDP is doing something with ISC, people 
either break into laughter or break into tears. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Again the financial institution, Mr. Speaker, from the 
Kindersley riding that had to call ISC, contacted the call centre, 
and the individual that has to address their concerns, at the end 
he just says: do you have the power to help me or not? And the 
person said: well, no I don’t. And it really puts into question 
again, what is the whole point of having the call centre when 

the people answering cannot finalize any of the problems that 
are being addressed. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, as this Bill, Bill 17, an amendment to 
The Land Surveys Act continue to be under further study, I 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 
my capacity as Deputy House Leader to, at the conclusion of 
my remarks, move second reading of The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, the Third Report of the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures, which was recently 
adopted by resolution of this Legislative Assembly, provides for 
the reconfiguration of the existing committee process under the 
rules of the Assembly. 
 
While the majority of the changes proposed in that report do not 
require a legislative amendment, some changes are required to 
provide for the payment of an allowance to the chairperson or 
deputy chairperson of a standing or a special committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recognition of the increased duties of the 
chairperson or deputy chair under the new committee process, 
the Act was amended to provide the Board of Internal Economy 
the discretion to provide a sessional allowance to a chairperson 
or a deputy chair of a particular standing or a special committee 
on such terms and conditions as the Board of Internal Economy 
sees fit. 
 
The Bill also defines the phrase, standing or special committee, 
for the purposes of the Act, and then provides that payment of 
such an allowance to a chairperson or a deputy chairperson of a 
standing or special committee will not disqualify that member 
from sitting in the House pursuant to section 10.1, that 
restriction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes are a small but necessary part of the 
major revisions to the committee process as recommended by 
the all-party Special Committee on Rules and Procedures in 
their third report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do invite all members of the House to join the 
government in supporting what we hope will be an important 
step forward in the effectiveness of the operations of this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am therefore pleased to move second reading of 
An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to address this particular Bill. This Bill deals with, as 
the minister said, a report coming down from the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures, the third report, that 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

recommended various rule changes and changes in procedures 
to this Assembly which I believe are going to have a profound 
and lasting impact on how democracy is practised in this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are, as the minister said, a number of 
legislative rules that need to be dealt with to implement these 
procedures, and this is one of those measures. And we support 
the moving ahead of this particular piece of legislation just as 
we support the third report from the special committee, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There are a number of changes here that I think need to be 
understood. The changes that the committee is proposing is that 
the committee work will be much more extensive than it 
currently is, that the four standing committees will be carrying 
out much more functions than have been done in the past. 
Therefore those areas are going to be a lot busier. The people 
involved, and in particular the chairmen and Deputy Chairs of 
those committees, will be doing a lot more work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Public Accounts Committee, it changes very little. It 
already does a significant amount of work in the Assembly both 
during session and outside of session, Mr. Speaker. Crown 
Corporations Committee will be changing significantly. Even 
the name on that particular committee will change and they will 
be taking on added duties. So again, that particular committee, 
the members involved in it, the Chair and the Deputy Chairs, 
will be much more involved in the operations of the legislature 
and the dealings that take place, the accountability before the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are a couple of little items on here that I want to be able 
to talk to the minister about to get some clarifications on, to 
understand just what the impacts are going to be, and what the 
impact on the province will be of these small changes. 
 
Therefore to give us the time, Mr. Speaker, to talk to the 
minister about these, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
It is necessary to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Act to provide options to pension plan members 
who acquire a new spouse after retirement. Mr. Speaker, The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act pertains to the 
following defined benefit pensions plans: the Liquor Board 
Superannuation Plan, the Power Corporation Superannuation 
Plan, the Workers’ Compensation Board Superannuation Plan, 
and the Public Service Superannuation Plan which also includes 
the Anti-TB (tuberculosis) League Superannuation Plan and the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company Superannuation Plan. 
 
Each pension plan has a board that oversees the operations of 
the plan, Mr. Speaker. The defined benefits plans were closed to 
new members in 1977. As at December 31, 2002, there were 

about 2,772 active members participating in the pension plans, 
about 177 inactive members, and about 7,907 pensioners. In 
less than 10 years all members will have likely retired, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
At present, when a pensioner acquires a spouse after retirement, 
the new spouse is not eligible for a pension upon the death of 
the pensioner. It is desirable, Mr. Speaker, to offer pensioners 
the opportunity to restructure their pension to provide a 
surviving spouse benefit for a new spouse. 
 
The pension will be based upon the ages of both the pensioner 
and the spouse at the time the pension is recalculated. The same 
joint annuity options available at the time of retirement will be 
available at the time the pension is recalculated. The cost to 
recalculate a pension after retirement for the purpose of 
providing a surviving spouse benefit to a new spouse will be 
borne by the pensioner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to respond to 
the minister’s statement concerning Bill No. 21. As the minister 
pointed out that the changes would allow a retired member of 
the pension plan to change whom their spouse is and provide a 
survivor’s benefit to the new spouse without any cost to the 
pension plan. It seems to make a lot of sense that this would be 
the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we know, pensions are very important in society. For many 
years people did not keep pensions and, with the Canada 
Pension Plan not in the greatest of shape, one wonders if people 
that when they retire, will have enough money to retire in 
comfort and enjoy their years of retirement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, so it’s of interest that these changes are 
being made to help out with these items that the minister has 
explained. We certainly will take this to the people of 
Saskatchewan and ask for their input and talk to the 
stakeholders concerning this issue. 
 
And I know other MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly), opposition members, will want to speak on this Bill 
and ask some important questions in Committee of the Whole 
when it gets to that stage. 
 
So at this point I’d like to move to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Pharmacy 
Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
This Bill reflects the evolving role of pharmacists in our health 
care system. It also addresses some administrative matters 
involving the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association and 
the Representative Board of Saskatchewan Pharmacists. 
 
Specifically, the proposed Bill will create 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

 

regulatory-bylaw-making authority allowing pharmacists to 
prescribe medications. It will change the name of the 
association from the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association 
to the Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists, in recognition of 
its purely regulatory role, and it will create the legal means for 
transferring funds from the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association to the Representative Board of Saskatchewan 
Pharmacists to reflect a corresponding transfer of some 
responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to address the first amendment 
regarding the bylaw-making authority which provides 
pharmacists with the legal authority to prescribe and dispense 
emergency contraception. 
 
Currently emergency contraception medication is only available 
with a physician’s prescription. This means a woman must visit 
a family doctor, a walk-in clinic, or emergency room, or contact 
their physician for a verbal prescription that may be difficult to 
do after hours. Allowing pharmacists to prescribe and dispense 
this medication will improve access for women, both rural and 
urban. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association approached the 
government with the request that pharmacists in Saskatchewan 
be allowed to dispense these medications without the need for a 
prescription from a physician. By approving access to this form 
of contraception, we hope to reduce the number of unintended 
pregnancies in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not the first province to grant pharmacists 
the authority to prescribe this medication. Both Quebec and 
British Columbia have legislation that enables pharmacists to 
prescribe emergency contraception. 
 
We consulted with a number of groups when contemplating this 
amendment to the Act. The following have shown their support: 
the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association, who requested 
the change; the Representative Board of Saskatchewan 
Pharmacists; the College of Pharmacy and Nutrition at the 
University of Saskatchewan; and both the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons and the Saskatchewan Medical Association were 
supportive of the change, with the clear understanding that the 
corresponding bylaws and amendments to the drug schedules 
regulations will allow the prescribing of emergency 
contraception only. 
 
The college and the Saskatchewan Medical Association have 
been assured that this is our intent and that any other changes 
would require further review and consultation. The Minister of 
Health must approve changes to the bylaws and to the drug 
schedules regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are two other amendments proposed to The 
Pharmacy Act. The Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association 
has requested a name change to reflect its regulatory role. It will 
be called the Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists. 
 
The third amendment to The Pharmacy Act concerns the 
transfer of funds from the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association to the Representative Board of Saskatchewan 
Pharmacists. The Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association is 
the regulatory body. The Representative Board of 

Saskatchewan Pharmacists is a separate legal body that acts on 
behalf of its members in matters such as the negotiation of fees 
and reimbursements. 
 
This change will give the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association the authority to transfer money to the representative 
board. This is money that had been intended for alternative 
reimbursement to pharmacies and pharmacists for innovative 
services. With the transfer of funds, the Representative Board of 
Saskatchewan Pharmacists would now operate that alternative 
reimbursement program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each of these amendments has their own benefits. 
Some will be felt directly by Saskatchewan residents, others by 
our Saskatchewan health care professionals. With that, Mr. 
Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, The 
Pharmacy Act and this Bill to amend it really is mostly a 
housekeeping piece of legislation. It changes the name; it’s a 
name change from the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association to the Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists. That 
is one area that, you know, and I think the consulting has been 
done in that area. 
 
It also removes the word pharmaceutical, avoiding confusion 
with pharmaceutical industry and drug manufacturers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SMA, it’s the SMA’s understanding that they 
will also be included in further consultation for any future 
considerations to allow pharmacists to prescribe drugs other 
than emergency contraceptives. It is noted that, it is noted that 
in the current Act any regulatory bylaws must be provided . . . 
approved by the minister. In other words there are some 
safeguards built in there that, you know, it would stop at the 
emergency contraceptive prescription and the pharmacists 
wouldn’t have any more right on past that until the SMA is 
consulted properly and it receives minister’s approval. 
 
Although, Mr. Speaker, it’s a Bill that is mainly housekeeping 
in nature, I think there are some consultations that we have to 
make to make sure that the Bill does meet with all the players 
— whether it’s the manufacturers, the college of physicians or 
whoever this Bill impacts. So, Mr. Speaker, until we have a 
chance to consult with the players in the . . . that this Bill will 
impact, I would move that we would adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today 
is Michael Jackson, chief of protocol for the province, and 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

Debbie Saum, senior planning and policy adviser. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And Madam 
Minister, thank you to you and thank you to your officials as 
well, and welcome. 
 
I just have a few questions on Bill 19 that I’d like clarified. I 
understand that the Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal 
was brought in partly because of a response to a request from 
the province’s police forces who have been asking for 
provincial recognition of long service by their members for 
some time. 
 
Over the years how many requests have been made for this, and 
why did it take until now to implement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The first request that we received for 
this medal was on May 2002 and then in June the Association 
of Chiefs of Police wrote a letter supporting this proposal. And 
then the government decided in principle to prepare legislation 
during this spring session. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. One of the things 
that I noted about the Protective Services Medal is that it can be 
awarded at any time before the specified 25-year time frame has 
elapsed, especially if it’s believed that service was outstanding 
and someone deserved to be recognized. 
 
While we can certainly recognize the exemplary work that our 
protective services personnel perform on a 24/7 basis, we’re 
also wondering about the criteria here that would separate this 
award from a citation for bravery or a recognition of merit. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The purpose of this medal isn’t 
particular acts of bravery or whatnot. It’s meant to be a 
recognition of long service to the people of the province. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, I note that the Protective 
Services Medal is seen as somewhat distinctive in Canada 
because it includes such a wide range of protective services. 
Could you please indicate the range of protective services 
personnel that would be considered eligible for this award and 
any idea of the specific criteria that has to be met in order to 
receive this award? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The areas that would be covered would 
include all provincial, municipal, and airport firefighting and 
fire prevention organizations, the RCMP, all municipal police 
services, Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, Canada Customs 
and Revenue Agency, Citizenship and Immigration Canada, all 
emergency medical service organizations, Canadian Forces, 
Saskatchewan Environment, Parks Canada, Saskatchewan 
Highways and Transportation — transport compliance, 
Saskatchewan Corrections and Public Safety, the Correctional 
Services of Canada, Canadian Security Intelligence Service. 
 
And I will mention that that would be based on 25 years of 
service, as far as the criteria goes, with good conduct and on the 
recommendation of their senior officer. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Have any other 

jurisdictions been in contact with your department to get more 
information about this award and how it will be administered? 
And if so, can you tell me which jurisdictions those are? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The one that we are particularly 
knowledgeable about is the Alberta Law Enforcement Long 
Service Medal. And we believe that that was where the idea 
came from when we were approached with this same idea. But 
as well they’ve just added a new Emergency Service Medal as 
well. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Since eligibility 
for the Protective Services Medal will be retroactive to January 
2003, we understand that there are to be a number of 
presentations this year, to be followed by one annually. 
Approximately how many presentations will be made? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the estimate at this time is that 
there would be about 1,500. And the idea is that this would 
likely occur in various communities in the province where 
there’s concentrations of people who would be receiving these, 
and that of course the local MLA would be a guest at those 
events as well. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Okay. Since this would be something that all 
the communities across the province would be interested and 
appreciate hosting, would these presentations take place 
throughout the province or in just one or two central locations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, I think the member is familiar 
with the Queen’s Jubilee Medals. It would be very similar to 
that, I think, and would have a number of events with the MLAs 
attending in the different areas of the province. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Do you have a 
limit as to the total number of Protective Services Medals that 
will be given out annually? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There would be no intent on our part to 
limit it. It would depend on the eligibility, given the three 
criteria that I mentioned before — the 25 years, the good 
conduct, and the recommendation by a commanding officer. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you. Turning to the Saskatchewan 
Centennial Medal, I note that this will be awarded to those 
individuals who have made significant contributions, and to 
honour their outstanding achievements. This seems very similar 
to current provincial awards already in place such as the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit or the Volunteer Medal. Other 
than being awarded on the occasion of the province’s 
centennial, how will this award differ from the others and what 
criteria will set it apart? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This award is again similar to, in intent, 
to the Queen’s Jubilee Medal in the fact that it’s a one-time 
award. I think that . . . I’ll just read here. It says to be eligible to 
receive this honour, it would be the intention again to hold 
presentation events as a special way of celebrating the 
centennial. 
 
And I would suspect — although I don’t know because it’ll be 
the actual committee that formulates the details around this — I 
would suspect it would be people of particularly long service 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

 

and recognition, given that it’s a centennial medal. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — You stated it is a one-time-only award in 
honour of the province’s centennial in 2005. And just to clarify, 
do you have any idea as to how it will be administered? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In this particular one it would be the 
Saskatchewan Honours Advisory Council that will recommend 
the number of medals and the selection process. And it is likely 
that we would then consider the council’s recommendation and 
make public the specific criteria. 
 
But again, harkening back to the model used for the Queen’s 
Golden Jubilee medal, there would be a number of citizens who 
are in positions of officially recognized service, that by virtue of 
the work they do in senior leadership positions — people for 
example like judges, the Legislative Assembly — that would be 
included in the recognition and then beyond that there would be 
an allocation of nominees. And I think you’re familiar with how 
the Queen’s Jubilee medal was done, so likely very similar to 
that. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And how will the 
selection take place since this legislation comes into force upon 
assent? Does this mean people can bring forward . . . a name 
forward for consideration following that or will they be required 
to wait until the province’s centennial, or will the names just be 
collected for the next 18 months and the nominees be chosen 
from that group? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because of the cost and the massive 
amount of work involved in a wide public nomination process, 
what usually happens in these cases is allocations of . . . a 
certain number of medals are allocated to different bodies who 
would be in a position to make sound recommendations, again 
as was done for the Queen’s Jubilee. And it would be up to 
those individuals then to decide what process they would use 
for their allocation. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You mentioned 
numbers and that is the next question I had to ask you in fact. 
Do you have any idea what the . . . what number we are looking 
at as far as Centennial Medals to be given out? Will it be 10, 20, 
50, or more? Any idea as to what the limit is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think at this point we’re talking, on 
the low end, 1,500; on the high end, 5,000. I think it’s going to 
depend on deciding who all would really be required to have 
allocations and then I guess do some math and see how that 
works out. 
 
So that’s not completely determined yet. And I think that, 
although we don’t want to be cheap when we’re in a centennial 
year, I think we would also have to look at what the costs would 
be of doing that properly. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Section 5 of the 
Bill allows for the appointment of an advisory committee or any 
technical or professional adviser who may be considering 
necessary . . . considered necessary for the purpose of assisting 
the council in selecting the nominees for a recommendation. 

Isn’t there a council already in place once — one that handles 
the Order of Merit and the Volunteer Medal — and couldn’t 
this council also be given the responsibility of administering the 
two medals that we are dealing with here today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again the honours are normally done 
by the honours advisory committee and they will still be the 
final determination on the centennial medals and as well on the 
other one. The one difference with the Protective Services 
Medal is that there would be an advisory committee formed of 
people from RCMP, municipal police, fire services, corrections, 
Canadian armed forces, the Provincial Secretary to give advice 
on that because it’s a more specialized area. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — You mentioned an honours advisory committee, 
Madam Minister. Is that committee in place now or is that 
something that has to be appointed yet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, the regular council is in place. The 
chairperson is Dr. Terence McKague, and the members are 
Hon. Ed Bayda, Judy Samuelson, Peter MacKinnon, Trevor 
Powell, Cecil King, Glayne Axtell, Sharon Butala, Yvette 
Moore, Gary Shaddock, and Michael Jackson. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Much of the detail 
in this has been left to regulations. And with the other medals, 
award medals that are already in place, it seems that there 
would be a very little need of regulations since the template for 
administering and awarding medals already exists. 
 
Could you clarify that for us today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Our goal would be to have as few new 
regulations as we can possibly maintain while still 
accomplishing the intent of the Act. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And, Madam 
Minister, that is all the questions I have today, and I thank you 
for clarifying some issues for me. And I also thank your 
officials for coming in today to help us answer some. Thank 
you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and I ask the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: —Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
To my right is Christine Tanner, the deputy minister of Labour. 
Directly behind Christine is Peter Federko from the Workers’ 
Compensation Board; he’s the chief executive officer. And 
directly behind myself is Pat Parenteau, a senior policy analyst 
from the Department of Labour. 
 
Clause 1 
 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
officials. I only have a few questions regarding the Bill and 
some of them to start with are regarding other provinces. 
 
It was mentioned in the debate back and forth about the other 
provinces that have passed legislation similar to this. How 
many provinces . . . Does the minister know how many 
provinces have passed legislation? And I guess, further to that, 
is the legislation similar? Does it cover the same types of 
cancers that our legislation is talking about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the other provinces: 
Alberta passed the legislation on April 9 of this year; Manitoba 
passed very similar or pretty similar legislation last year, May 
23 of ’02; Nova Scotia has legislation in second reading debate; 
Prince Edward Island is being strongly lobbied to introduce 
similar legislation, similar to Nova Scotia’s; Newfoundland is 
undertaking an independent review of the existing literature; 
and Ontario deals with this as a policy. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — To the minister again, the WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) review committee rejected this change 
the last time it was brought forward. Could you, I guess, explain 
to me some of the scientific research that has been done since 
that time to warrant the Bill going through? Why does WCB 
now feel that it’s warranted to pass this type of legislation 
whereas the last time it came forward, they didn’t? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To answer your first question, you talked 
about the committee of review. The firefighters had made a 
presentation to the committee of review, but the committee of 
review did not have access to all of the scientific literature so at 
that time they did not make a recommendation for a legislative 
review. 
 
Since that time there has been a number of studies that have 
been done. Basically, the main one that was done in Manitoba, 
or used for the legislation in Manitoba was Guidotti and 
Goldsmith. There is a list of research and studies that has gone 
on. I can provide that to you. But that was the main one that 
was used in Manitoba and was also used here with our 
legislation. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Are there any, currently, any other types of 
professionals that are looking at being covered in this same 
way, in reverse onus method? Are you familiar with any other 
professions that are coming forward? I know this is a little bit of 
a precedent setting for WCB. Are there any other professionals 
that are coming forward that would like the same sort of 
legislation that you’re aware of? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — None that I’m aware of. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Could you give me an 
approximate cost of the changes specifically to WCB? We’re 
certainly sensitized to that after last week’s report, and so will 
there be some added costs to WCB with this legislative change? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — In the opinion of WCB, there are no 
incremental costs associated with the proposed amendments. 
 
The current legislation enables WCB to accept these types of 
claims in their occupational disease policy. What this legislative 

amendment does is establish the rebuttable presumption and it’s 
not a new entitlement. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So I guess from your perspective then, you 
don’t assume that there’ll be any more because now it’s up to 
the WCB to prove otherwise that there will be no more people 
covered through this legislation than what have been previously 
covered? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — What this piece of legislation does is add 
the rebuttable presumption. And previously one of the concerns 
that was raised in Manitoba was that it had been dealt with in 
policy previously which is the same with the Saskatchewan 
WCB. 
 
There is a policy on occupational disease where each case is 
viewed on a case by case basis. This adds the rebuttable 
presumption of . . . and that’s the only change. It’s not a 
different entitlement; it’s just the presumption is there. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I just have one final question. The changes 
that would be made then to the WCB Act, what type of effect 
will it have, will there be any effect, or can you estimate any 
increase in employers’ WCB rates? And those employers for 
the professional firefighters are municipalities. Will they be 
looking at any sort of increase in their rates due to the 
legislation being passed? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — No, this will have no impact on the rates. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill. No. 18 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

 

Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
my immediate right is Dave Phillips, assistant deputy minister 
of operations division. To my immediate left is our brand new 
deputy minister, Lily Stonehouse. I’d like to welcome Ms. 
Stonehouse to the team. 
 
Directly behind me is Donna Johnson, and Donna is the director 
of financial management and planning. Of course next to Donna 
is Bob Ruggles, the assistant deputy minister for the programs 
division. And joining me, directly behind me in a few minutes, 
would be Mr. Ron Zukowsky, who is the executive director of 
policy and assessment division. 
 
And behind the bar, other officials that are in attendance, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, is Wayne Dybvig, the vice-president of 
operations for the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority; Joe 
Muldoon, the director of the environmental branch; Dennis 
Sherratt, the director of fish and wildlife branch; Janine Orban, 
the senior labour relations consultant; and Dave Tulloch, senior 
manager, strategic financial and performance management, fire 
management, and forest protection. 
 
And say that three times, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials, and a special welcome 
to the new deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the minister, I’d like to ask some questions 
concerning his involvement in the Murdoch Carriere affair. 
 
Mr. Chair, as everyone knows, Murdoch Carriere was the 
director of the fire management branch in Prince Albert who 
was harassing female employees for years. And last October, 
six of those female employees filed harassment complaints 
against Murdoch Carriere, Mr. Speaker. And at that time, the 
government hired an independent investigator who concluded in 
December that Mr. Carriere has been sexually harassing and 
intimidating female employees for years. 
 
Mr. Chair, it is interesting to note that there was a memo written 
by the deputy minister on February 12, 2003 that Mr. Murdoch 
Carriere take a senior adviser position to the Environment 
department at $85,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to know, did the minister know of that 
decision at that time when it was taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I’ll point out is that the . . . what normally . . . The normal 
process that applies is that when you have a situation as we did 
in reference to the gentleman in question, normally the process 
is that the minister does not hire or fire or discipline staff. 
Ministers are removed from that process, and it’s clearly the 
deputy minister’s role to undertake the necessary steps that the 
investigation would warrant. 
 

I would point out that that’s one of the reasons why the Public 
Service Commission minister, of course, was the minister that 
answered questions in this Assembly. And the process involved 
with the Public Service Commission as to dealing with the 
staffing issues, I would kindly ask you to direct those questions 
as to the process involved in reference to the individual you’re 
speaking about. 
 
I can tell you today that, as I’ve told the media on numerous 
occasions, that we did not try and intervene. We did not try and 
protect. So we didn’t inject ourselves into any process. Why 
should we then turn around and prescribe penalty? We’ve made 
that statement on numerous occasions. 
 
We were made aware, following the circumstances, that there 
was an investigation going on and there’s a process in place, 
and as minister we refrain from injecting ourselves into that 
matter. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I have to disagree with the minister. 
I believe it’s very relevant. The people of Saskatchewan want to 
know what involvement the Minister of the Environment had in 
this whole affair. 
 
As it turned out, it has cost the deputy minister his job and of 
course, Mr. Murdoch, it cost him his job. I’d like to know a bit 
more information about the minister’s relationship to Murdoch 
Carriere. I’d like to know how long has the minister known 
Murdoch Carriere? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I would point out is that we have had on numerous 
occasions the opportunity to clarify our role in this matter, and I 
believe that the people of Saskatchewan have seen the process 
unfold. But I think it’s important for the Sask Party to continue, 
you know, their notion that, you know, this is a matter that the 
minister knew about and make all the accusations you want. 
Certainly there’s processes in place, and we’ll stand by those 
processes, and we’ll continue standing by those processes. If 
I’ve got to stand up here 20 times today and tell you the same 
thing, I will. 
 
But let me say this clearly, that in the relationship that we had 
with Mr. Carriere, he was obviously the fire manager. And Mr. 
Carriere travelled to a number of northern Aboriginal 
communities, of which Ile-a-la-Crosse was one of them, which 
is my hometown. 
 
I knew Mr. Carriere, no question that we had a professional 
relationship. We’ve had many meetings, evening meetings, 
supper meetings. We’ve had discussions on the fire program, 
and the list goes on. Now he has been . . . of course been part of 
this program for many, many years, and he’s had other . . . 
access to other ministers over previous years. 
 
But I’ll say this as well. While our relationship was good, the 
. . . we had a professional relationship. He clearly understood 
what his role was in terms of developing a fire program, and 
advises some of the, you know, staffing challenges, and we had 
discussions of that sort. 
 
But in terms of the relationship — did I golf with Mr. Carriere, 
did I spend time at his home, did I go out for supper with his 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

family? The answer, as I said to the media, was no. But the 
professional relationship was there, and as a director of the fire 
program obviously he has to have a relationship with the 
minister. So you can continue trying to paint this in the fashion 
that you wish, but be forewarned that, clearly, we stepped aside 
and allowed the process to unfold. And I think it’s very clear 
from this perspective that the process clearly had the minister 
not part of the process, and that clearly was what was 
undertaken. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Just a few minutes 
ago, the minister of Public Service Commission announced that 
she had been sued by your former . . . the minister’s former 
employee, Murdoch Carriere. Could the minister tell us what he 
is being . . . what he is suing for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Once again, Mr. Chairman, I will point 
out that we’re not about to speculate and we’re not about to 
make any hypothesis as what individuals are doing. That’s not 
my role here. I’m here to answer questions on environmental 
. . . the environmental budget for the government of 
Saskatchewan. I’m not here to respond to any lawsuits that may 
have been . . . that may have been delivered or developed. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Well we know the 
minister of Public Service Commission is being sued by 
Murdoch Carriere. Could the minister tell us if he is being sued 
or any other members of the government is being sued by Mr. 
Carriere? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Once again, Mr. Chairman, I’m here to 
answer questions on the SERM’s (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management) budget. And, clearly, as I 
mentioned before, there’s processes out there that are not 
related to the SERM budget and I’m not aware of them, and I’m 
not about to speculate or make any comments of any sort in 
reference to this matter. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, on February 12, as I mentioned, the 
then deputy minister of Environment wrote a memo to all six 
women who complained about Murdoch Carriere. And in that 
memo the deputy minister said he had concluded that Murdoch 
Carriere had harassed these women, and the deputy minister 
indicated that Mr. Carriere would be assigned . . . reassigned 
with the Environment department. 
 
Mr. Chair, on that same day, Mr. Chair, the deputy minister 
wrote to all the fire management and protection branch 
employees. And in that memo he announced Murdoch Carriere 
was being appointed senior adviser to the assistant deputy 
minister, beginning in May, and then he went on to praise Mr. 
Carriere for his leadership and valuable contribution to the 
branch. 
 
It seems, Mr. Chair, that the handling of the minister and the 
handling of his department through this whole unfortunate 
circumstance has led to Mr. Murdoch being allowed to sue the 
department. The minister and the department mishandled it 
terribly and now we see that the minister of Public Service 
Commission is being sued the way it was handled. 
 

So unfortunately this doesn’t speak anything to the six women 
who were sexually harassed. Actually it was a slap in the face 
that this man was basically given a — well if not a promotion, 
certainly wasn’t reprimanded in any way — and was given a 
senior advisory role to the deputy minister of the time. 
 
And I’d just like to ask the minister again, was he not aware of 
what was going on in his department to know that this man was 
made the senior adviser to the assistant deputy minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Again I’ll stand in my place and indicate that we did not 
intervene in the process. Obviously there’s a number of Acts 
that preclude a minister from being engaged into matters of this 
sort. Everything from the confidentiality Act and of course the 
Public Service Commission, as well as The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act clearly states that in the event that this 
were to occur, the deputy minister is the man or is the 
individual that is to determine the course of action on this . . . 
on any other complaint. 
 
As I mentioned before, we did not intervene to try and prevent 
or protect. So at the end of the day, in reference to the memo 
that you alluded to, why would we then prescribe penalty or try 
and intervene at that time? We’re not privy to the details, so 
why should we make judgment? And that’s one of the 
important rules here, is that the ministers are excluded from that 
process. We were excluded and this is clearly the role of the 
deputy minister to hand out, to hand out penalties and to follow 
the process that has been described through this whole 
challenge. 
 
I think it important to note that we will continue following that 
process in the future. It is a fair process and clearly I think it is 
intended to point out that there be no political interference 
whatsoever. And there was none. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
I’ll try to keep this fairly brief; we just want some clarification. 
Apparently on Tuesday, April 29, Mr. Minister, there was a 
farewell reception, an informal reception for the former deputy 
minister. Could you be able to inform us if that farewell 
reception took place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Once again that member from Saskatchewan Rivers is 
misinforming the House. There was no function held for a 
farewell for the former deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister, that’s quite 
a bit of . . . That’s quite a response being as that I never did ask 
that the . . . say to the minister that the reception had been held. 
I asked him if it was held. And I just wanted to point out to the 
minister, Mr. Chair, that this reception had been organized. 
Whether it was held or not is certainly I guess . . . and maybe 
not as much part of the discussion. But the fact is this reception 
was being organized and an invitation was sent out to all staff 
members for Environment and Resource Management, 
including the six females who had been vindicated at being 
harassed by Murdoch Carriere. 
 
You can imagine, Mr. Minister, the feelings that must have 
went through their hearts and through their minds knowing that 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

 

they were being invited to a reception to . . . for a man who was 
not willing to step forward and make a powerful decision in 
regards to this very tragic situation. 
 
So I just want to inform you, Mr. Minister, that this e-mail had 
gone out to every member of the staff and I wish that you would 
at this time, Mr. Minister, make a comment as to why any sort 
of a reception may have been . . . could have been held, was 
contemplating being held. And why in the world would you 
invite those women that had been sexually harassed, and not 
feel as though they were vindicated by the former deputy 
minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — There’s no question that, Mr. 
Chairman, that as we all know, it is customary to hold a 
farewell get-together for staff that have seen other staff leave. 
And in this instance, I think, that custom was basically followed 
to a certain extent. Once we realized the sensitive nature of the 
farewell get-together, we decided that it would be not proper to 
proceed and it was immediately cancelled. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Another issue I would 
like to . . . that concerns Mr. Murdoch in his former job, but 
concerning the forest fire towers. I’d like to ask the minister the 
status of the forest fire towers in the North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Right now, for the member opposite, we built six new towers 
last year, and we had one pre-existing tower that was deemed 
safe from a structural point of view. So in total we have seven 
existing towers that we use. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, it’s 
come to light that there’s been an ongoing turmoil or problems 
in the department. And this is, I believe, when Mr. Murdoch 
was involved with the forest fire towers. My information says 
that Mr. Murdoch wanted to change the whole process of 
detecting forest fires and wanted to do away with the towers. 
 
And we were told that the department had a study completed 
that said that the towers that exist today were adequate. He then 
commissioned another study just to get the answer that he 
wanted, and the answer he wanted was to knock down all the 
old towers and change the way of forest fire detecting from an 
aerial point of view. 
 
And now we understand, Mr. Chair, to the minister, that some 
new towers have been built and the employees feel that they are 
unsafe and will not, I believe, will not go up into the towers. 
Could the minister please comment on that situation. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Thanks very 
much for the question. What I would point out, that we did have 
a challenge with the fire towers as the member may or may not 
know. We’ve had about maybe 50 towers throughout 
Saskatchewan and last time they were built was in the ’50s and 
the ’60s. And there was a fire tower that was actually blown 
down in the P.A. (Prince Albert) area, and I believe it is P.A. 
 
And what we done was we done a thorough assessment on all 
the towers as a result of that activity. And what we found out 

that many of the towers didn’t meet the modern requirements 
necessary for tower construction. So what we undertook was a 
thorough assessment and got an engineering company to do 
some of the work. 
 
And we haven’t had any indication yet as to the staff members 
who are just returning back to work now as to the concerns you 
raise about them not wanting to go into the tower. Obviously if 
there’s some concerns, we will talk with them and we will 
check with them. But the staff are just getting back to work now 
and naturally if there is some concerns, we’ll certainly work 
with them to try and address those concerns. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister, how 
soon will a new director of forest protection be announced? 
How soon before you will appoint a new forest protection 
person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would point out that we anticipate by this fall we will have the 
fire program director in place. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, through to the minister, I’m just wanting to talk a little 
bit about the waste regions that have been created in the 
province and as well as the system that’s out there, as well as 
the beverage collection system which is SARCAN, in the sense 
of how that whole process is working. 
 
We’ve gone through some time. We’ve tried to create a waste 
collection system in the province and we’ve used the REACT 
(Regional Authority of Carlton Trail) system to determine if it’s 
a viable system that we could put together. 
 
REACT was given some provincial dollars to work with. They 
were 50 cent dollars for capital infrastructure that was put into 
place. And that money was given to them over a period of time 
to try and help offset some of the capital cost. 
 
And REACT has experienced over that period of time that those 
capital, set-aside dollars have needed to be spent in the 
operating of that system; that the actual capital dollars aren’t 
there to be used to replace capital that is needing to be replaced 
at this time as well. 
 
We also have other regional systems that are trying to get up 
and get going, and they’re finding some real difficulties in the 
sense of sourcing their dollars. And one of the real problems is 
the revenue that comes back in from the recyclable product, and 
the paper product is a real problem with the fluctuation of 
revenue values that come into that stream. 
 
But I guess the question that I would like to ask is that whole 
area of SARCAN. When SARCAN was developed for the 
beverage containers, it was developed in the sense of collecting 
that product alone. And that whole industry has really grown 
and it’s developed and it’s generating some real revenues that 
come back into the general coffers of the government. There is 
some 6 to $7 million that comes in as general dollars as well as 
— which are surplus dollars — as well as there’s about 2 to $3 
million worth of value that comes in as unclaimed product that 
goes back into the general accounts as well. 
 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

And when you’re looking at trying to create a recycling system 
in the province and you have those dollars that are being 
generated by one aspect of the recycling program, and you’ve 
got other parts of the program that are having trouble getting up 
and going through the municipalities, I just would like the 
minister to speak to that a little to see why we aren’t 
recognizing the ability to use the surplus dollars from one part 
of the recycling system that can offset the cost of providing that 
recycling program in the rest of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
It is indeed a very good question and I know the member has 
had a lot of background and certainly is keenly interested in the 
whole notion of waste management and the regional waste 
authority that we’ve been working towards. And I thank him for 
the question. 
 
One of the things I think is very important is that in our role as 
environmental protectors, so to speak — regulators, if you will 
— we are often trying to find ways and means in which we 
could reduce environmental challenges that we face in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And some of the examples that the 
member spoke about, when you talk about REACT, you know, 
and for folks that aren’t familiar with REACT, very quickly I’ll 
give a history lesson here. 
 
What we’ve done with REACT, which is a program of waste 
management around the Humboldt area, is to try and see if we 
can lessen the amount of landfills that are out in the province by 
looking at a wide variety of options that municipalities and 
different partners could utilize to reduce the landfill and of 
course the cost associated with that. 
 
So they’ve done things like recycle as much of their garbage 
area as they can, manage their waste better, look at a scrap tire 
corporation taking away the scrap tires, looking at the bag-a-tag 
or tag-a-bag program. Like those are some of the things that 
SERM and the REACT project looked at. And mind you, this 
was a number of years ago but what we wanted to do was kind 
of have a model or a template of how we can apply the 
Humboldt REACT model right across the province. 
 
The intent behind the whole notion of managing your waste 
areas for solid waste is really something that’s admirable, I 
think, overall for the Saskatchewan people because you want to 
not see 7 or 800 landfills out there that aren’t being regulated or 
monitored. You want to see them of course managed quite well. 
 
So after we done the REACT, which of course was $1.5 million 
worth of experimental work, we had to look at different 
stewardship models. And some of the stewardship models, 
again there we wanted to make sure we took out as much waste 
out of the landfill as possible and that’s where you come with 
the scrap tire corporation, the used oil. And of course SARCAN 
enters in the picture; it takes away some of the cans and some of 
the other hazardous materials that are, that are also in our 
landfills. 
 
And what we wanted to do was to try and reduce the amount of 
landfills throughout the province. And the REACT model 
talked about getting municipalities, towns, and villages, and 
RMs, and Indian bands, and resort villages working in a certain 
region collectively to try and reduce their waste, to try and reuse 

some of the products they have and to try and manage their 
landfills better. And instead of having 20 in one given area, 
you’d have one. And our theory there is the economies of scale 
would make it more easier to manage our waste and then be 
more environmentally friendly. 
 
And then you look at how we were going to help out in terms 
of, as a province, some of the initiatives that have been 
undertaken by many groups out there to which the member’s 
familiar with. So then we started talking about the Centenary 
Fund. Perhaps what we should do is help finance some of these, 
some of these regional landfills that, you know, were trying to 
follow the REACT model. So then we went into the centenary 
program and we give $575,000 per year to help with that 
theory, that we could certainly build together a better way of 
managing our waste. 
 
And not only did we look at that, we also looked at some of the 
other challenges when you talked about the REACT model — 
how about protection of water, the water area in any given area; 
for example, the used oil. There’s a lot of people that take, 
when they change oil in their vehicle at some of these service 
stations, they take that oil to a certain place. Now what happens 
if you have an abandoned service station in the middle of 
nowhere that is contaminating your water? Well that’s a 
problem as well. 
 
So what we’ve done was we’ve also looked at the abandoned 
service station aspect, as a government, to try and clean up 
those sites. 
 
And as the member, as I’ve mentioned before, is acutely aware 
of some of the efforts we’re trying to undertake through SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), being a 
former member of SUMA, is that we have had agreements with 
SUMA. And some of these agreements are close to $1 million 
to try and look at cleaning up some of the abandoned service 
stations throughout the province. 
 
So then you also look at some of the abandoned . . . some of the 
decommission costs of some of the landfills that we’re trying to 
reduce as well. Because when you shut down a landfill, you 
don’t just simply walk away from the landfill saying great we 
have this regional landfill in place, now this one over here we’ll 
leave it continue in its natural state of littering the area and 
nobody’s watching it, and of course the environmental 
challenges associated with that. So there’s also cost for the 
cleanup of some of the abandoned landfills. And we went to 
about 6 or 700 landfills in the province. We’ve reduced them by 
roughly 80 to 85 less landfills in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so the REACT model has some very good lessons for us to 
learn. And you look at the stewardship models that we’ve 
implemented, you look at the Centenary Fund, you look at some 
of the abandoned service stations that we had to clean up in 
concert and in co-operation with SUMA and with SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities). 
 
Now we’re looking at, you know, these decommissioning of 
some of the landfills that we’ve decommissioned. And you add 
up all those efforts over the last number of years and clearly 
what I’m trying to point out here is that SERM and . . . or 
Saskatchewan Environment has done a tremendous amount, a 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

 

tremendous amount of recognition of what SARCAN has done. 
So no, nobody’s putting away money at the expense of 
SARCAN. We are expanding our program province wide to 
look at a wide variety of issues to try and make sure that we 
take a better . . . we become better stewards of our environment 
and of our lands. 
 
So again, even simple things like we have 12 most 
contaminated sites in this province of Saskatchewan . . . there’s 
12 sites we’ve identified that are the most contaminated sites. 
And we are now working towards cleaning up six of the sites. 
And those cost a tremendous amount of money. 
 
So you look at all the planning, all the policy development, all 
the programs in place, all the continual efforts that’s necessary; 
then you throw in travel time for the staff; we throw in some of 
the policy development time; and this goes on every year on a 
continual basis. You can see that there is nobody ripping off 
any kind of environmental protection effort from any one 
particular sector. We are all sharing the load in trying to make 
rhyme and reason behind all of our collective efforts. 
 
And clearly I believe, I believe at the end of the day, the sum of 
all our efforts and the power through our partnership, that 
Saskatchewan people can rest assured that this whole effort of 
trying to work with SARCAN, with regional landfills, learning 
the lessons from REACT, is that we are going to develop a 
better, sounder protection of our environment strategy than any 
other province in this country. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And furthermore, as we go down this path of trying to look at 
some of the options available, and much of our time, our staff 
time dedicated to this whole thing, it takes a tremendous 
amount of research and thought and travel. And I can go down 
the list if you’d like of the effort necessary to put forward a 
vision, a plan to acknowledge our partners and to pay them 
tribute, but more so to set broad goals and visions and 
objectives to point out that eventually, one of these days — and 
I’m going to go out on a limb here — that we’re able to reduce 
our solid waste by up to 50 per cent within the next four, five, 
six, seven years. 
 
And I think those laudable objectives that we have as the 
Government of Saskatchewan cost money. And I would say, sir, 
today, that that money, I think Saskatchewan people will say is 
well-spent. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Mr. Deputy Chair, through to the minister. 
Thank you for that eloquent explanation I guess of the whole 
recycling program that we’re trying to implement in the 
province as such, as well. But I think we’re still missing the 
point that there is some serious dollars that SARCAN is 
generating on an annual basis. 
 
When you talk about the centenary funding, there’s $2.3 million 
that went into a five-year program. So we’re looking at about 
500,000 or just about a half a million dollars that’s coming out 
through the centenary funding, but that’s only a five-year 
program. And it doesn’t look after the decommissioning of the 
sites. So the decommissioning of the sites isn’t, I guess, an area 
of responsibility that the centenary funding was going to be 

looking after. That was the responsibility of the municipalities 
that they needed to look after that as well. 
 
The minister talked about stewardship programs and I guess we 
need a stewardship program in the sense that we need to be 
responsible and be good stewards for the environment. And I 
think the minister and his department has put a no-burning 
regulation on the municipalities as well, and that’s become 
somewhat of a responsibility of the municipalities now for not 
having, you know, all these midnight lightning striking and 
having the burning that goes on in the countryside as well. 
 
But it also put some tremendous pressure on the municipalities 
of what to do with their product. The REACT system has 
developed a system where you’re needing to collect this over a 
regional conceptual basis where some of these other 
municipalities haven’t got that opportunity to be even belonging 
to a region. They’ve got 50, 80, 100 miles to travel to get rid of 
their product as well. And that’s become a real hardship in the 
sense of some of these municipalities 
 
There is a difference also between the urban and the rural Act in 
the sense of what type of system of collection that you have in 
the urban centres, as well as what you do in the rural centres. 
And that burning one is one, as well as the collecting of the 
product and how you handle that and deal with it. In that sense 
as well, there’s a requirement through the urban Act that the 
municipalities is responsible to provide that service, where the 
rural Act is not required unless they have a certain, I think it’s 
amount of 10 dwellings or as such in that regards. 
 
But I guess we’re still struggling to understand why we can’t 
have those regions access those dollars. When you’re talking 
about 6 to $7 million a year that comes out of SARCAN and 
you’re spending in the neighbourhood of maybe $1 million a 
year in your other programs or thereabouts, why can . . . or why 
are we trying to start a program that we haven’t got adequate 
funding to get it off the ground and get it going? 
 
Again that paper . . . (inaudible) . . . program is one that we’ve 
all talked about. The minister had implemented an examination 
team about a year and a half to take a look at that whole 
process. There was a couple of meetings that were held — and 
SARCAN was part of that process as well — that talked about 
the opportunities of making some changes. But we needed some 
funding in there to make those changes. 
 
And I think we need an explanation of why we can’t go down 
that road and why we can’t access those dollars to make those 
changes and take the pressure off some of these municipalities 
that the pressure’s been put on through the legislation that was 
put into place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Once again I’m 
quite impressed with the member’s knowledge of the system. 
Obviously the member has had exposure to the programs 
through SUMA. 
 
And certainly what I would . . . take it under advisement from 
the minister, when he mentioned amendments to the municipal, 
especially The RM Act in terms of them having to collect and 
manage their landfills in a better . . . I don’t believe that they 
have to now. 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

And that’s one of the issues that the member has raised today 
and it’s certainly one of the issues we can take forward to 
SARM, indicating that, at this stage of the game, having 
managed landfill is very important. And that may be part of our 
legislative agenda. If that member would support that, we 
would certainly go down that path and look at those options. 
 
I would say that there’s a lot of work that needs to be done. This 
is a work in progress. And as much as you want to say the 
programs that you are doing in other aspects only come to $1 
million, the answer is, no. There’s clearly more costs than $1 
million per year. 
 
So I think the other notion of the examination team was exactly 
that when we were approached by a number of folks telling us 
SARCAN has this stream dedicated to their organization; and 
then you have this stream dedicated to the Scrap Tire 
Corporation; and then you have this stream dedicated to the 
used oil industry; and then you have this stream dedicated to 
this organization, and the list goes on and on and on. And we’re 
not asking the question of paper. Then all of a sudden we begin 
to say, well where do the regional landfills fit in for getting 
money from the provincial government to develop the regional 
landfills? 
 
Because you have all these streams that are dedicated and then 
you have people burning their dumps, which they’re not 
supposed to because of The Clean Air Act. Clearly I think when 
you burn at your landfills, you’re not just burning paper and 
wood as the member knows. You’re burning chemicals, you’re 
burning paint, you’re burning vinyl, and all these . . . Really 
those are noxious gases and those are materials that go into our 
air and certainly threaten the air quality of Saskatchewan. 
 
So this is not an activity that we should condone, nor should we 
try and diminish in terms of the importance of us always 
realizing that you shouldn’t be burning at your landfills. Now 
all that takes time, it takes education, I’ll grant the member that. 
 
But I’ll say as well is that when we established the examination 
team, the intent there was to recognize good work done by 
regional landfills. And what I said at the time is there’s all kinds 
of options. So instead of us coming along as a government, 
being heavy-handed and saying this is what you’ll do, this is 
what you’ll do, why don’t you work together in a group and 
determine for me, as a Minister of Environment, what options 
are available to us as a government to implement, to assist you 
in your regional landfill’s financial needs. 
 
And when you do that, you engage all the partners. And I had 
spoke about power through partnerships. This is the whole 
intent behind the regional landfill concept is that you’ve got to 
have partnered communities. 
 
And the premise behind the regional landfill — and I hope the 
member will agree with me — is that we can never in this 
whole world ever imagine us having zero costs for waste 
management. That is simply not on. We cannot have that. 
 
So part of the process is to educate the RMs, the Indian bands, 
and the communities, saying, guys as much we think in a 
perfect world that we could recycle everything, we could sell all 
our tires in our landfill and it won’t cost us any money to 

operate our landfill even if there’s 30 of us together — well we 
need to explain to them that we’ll never achieve that. There’s 
always going to be costs to managing your solid wastes. That’s 
a principle behind anything we do with regional landfills. 
 
So therefore when I go back to my earlier point, when I put the 
examination team, there are things like paints we need to look 
at. There are things like outdated information technology units, 
whether it’s computers. There’s pesticide containers that we’re 
moving on as well. And there’s other areas that we need to look 
at to try and make sure that we look at streams that could be 
available to help regional landfills. 
 
But the premise again is that municipalities cannot expect zero 
costs in managing their solid waste. 
 
What we’re trying to do, in collaboration and in concert with 
them and all the other players out there, is to establish a vision 
and a common plan through policy development with SERM, 
and through continual support and seeking and reviewing all 
policy development issues and new opportunities. And that 
takes an incredible amount of work, and that also takes an 
incredible amount of money. 
 
So we’re continuing moving forward because as much as you 
may not want to admit it, it does cost us money to have a CO 
(conservation officer) travel out to the landfill and take the 
evidence of somebody burning at the landfill. It does cost 
money to have an environmental officer go out and monitor a 
certain area where landfills are operating. It does cost money to 
test water near landfills. It does cost money to collaborate in the 
event that there’s a development happening near a water stream, 
that we also have to look at those costs. 
 
So yes, you know SARCAN has done a tremendous job, but we 
look at them as being very valuable partners, and will continue 
going down this road of making sure we do all that we can to 
move forward on a laudable goal of having 50 per cent of our 
solid waste managed just through recycling and reducing and 
reusing as much as we can within the next five, six, seven, 
eight, ten, eleven years. 
 
So anyway, Mr. Chairman, I think the goals are very clear. I 
think the member shares the goals, and rest assured we’ll 
continue looking at all the options available. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Again thank 
you to the minister for, I guess, explanation of some of the costs 
and some of the initiative that’s been taken in trying to develop 
the whole recycling program. 
 
And I don’t think any of the municipalities out there are asking 
for zero costs in driving that whole system, but I think we’ve 
got to recognize that any of the payers in the system have 
already been taken out of the system. The beverage containers, 
there’s revenue that’s generated through them. Scrap Tire, 
there’s revenue that’s somewhat generated through the 
programs that they’ve developed. As far as the milk jugs are 
concerned, there’s revenues that are being generated there as 
well. Same with the used oil. 
 
So what’s left in this system is the costly part of the operating 
of the recycling system. And that’s where the burden seems to 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

 

be right now, with the municipalities, to carry that system on. 
 
SARCAN produced a paper back about two or three years ago, 
and they took a look at that whole area of recycling. And they 
were looking at other opportunities that they could get involved 
in, in recycling different types of products within the system as 
well. And they were prepared to move down that whole area of 
recycling and taking other responsibilities on for recycling as 
well. And that paper never really has been released or has been 
talked about. 
 
And when you talk to the people in SARCAN, they felt quite 
comfortable in the sense of what the opportunities there were to 
do some other recycling with some other products, that they 
could offset the cost of running that recycling program, that 
they wouldn’t be just dead costs to the municipalities. It could 
be picked up through some of the revenues that SARCAN is 
generating. 
 
Can the minister talk about that a little bit and see where that 
whole initiative that SARCAN had put forth, where that’s 
heading. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just wanted to just quickly interrupt the Committee of Finance 
to introduce some folks back in my constituency. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Is the minister requesting leave? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
With us in the west gallery, we have a number of students from 
Pinehouse Lake. 
 
And just to explain to the students what’s happening right now 
is we have what they call committee of estimates and it’s when 
each minister gets up and explains to the opposition what 
departments do on a number of fronts. 
 
And with the Pinehouse Lake School we have Gloria Belcourt, 
Jennifer Smith, and Henri Iron as the chaperones and the 
teacher that are helping bring the students forward. And I am 
looking forward to joining the students at 4:45 and certainly 
having a conversation with them in my office. 
 
So I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join us and welcome 
the students from Pinehouse Lake. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I think one of the points 
that the member brought up in terms of the examination team, 
when we looked at the whole issue of trying to find some 
support — financial, some technical, perhaps some 
communication, and educational support — on the value behind 
the regional landfills, the examination team put together a 
number of recommendations. And SARCAN was clearly . . . 
And some of the examination committee’s role . . . They come 
to the committee with probably the strongest recycling partner 
amongst the groups. 
 
And there’s other very strong recycling partners as well. And 
the member knows about the Scrap Tire Corporation, where 
nowadays they use all the tires throughout the province. When 
you and I buy a tire we pay $3.50, I believe, for the tire. Where 
a trucker buys a tire, it may cost 10, $12 to get the tire recycled. 
And then the Scrap Tire Corporation gets the money, and then 
they recycle these tires, marketing different products they can 
make from recycled rubber. 
 
And one of the things that they’ve done — and this is a great 
credit to the Scrap Tire Corporation — is they have coarse 
mulched the rubber and they have used that for a base in a 
number of golf courses in the States, different arenas in the 
States. And what they’ve found out is that in the case of a golf 
course, when they put this mulched-up rubber tire under the 
grass greens, it’s much easier to manage. There’s less watering 
that is required. So it’s really an efficient form of certainly 
supporting things like golf course bases. 
 
So I guess my point being is that the Scrap Tire Corporation 
came up with this tremendous idea and now they’re marketing 
that in the States. And we hope and we envision that eventually 
that we would have so much demand for some of the Scrap Tire 
Corporation’s ideas of utilizing scrap tires that we would end up 
having no scrap tires in the province of Saskatchewan. That is 
the vision here. 
 
And people say that’s a far-fetched idea. Well let me assure you 
that it isn’t. As we speak, Alberta’s looking for a certain amount 
of tires that they could use in their efforts and they can’t find 
them. So there’s a demand that was developed and created by 
the Scrap Tire Corporation. 
 
So that was the premise that I went to the partners as the 
Minister of Environment, saying, you guys have some great, 
fantastic ideas. So SARCAN and Scrap Tire Corporation, you 
know, I need you guys’ help. And the phrase that I used, for the 
member’s information — and SUMA and SARM are part of 
this equation — is I said, half of being intelligent is knowing 
what you’re dumb at. And in this instance, as a minister, I was 
not privy to a lot of the efforts that they were undertaking, so I 
look to them for intelligence on this whole notion on recycling 
as much as we can and developing an opportunity for recycling. 
 
So that being said, SARCAN, through their examination team, 
looked at a wide variety of options. They looked at plastics, 
they looked at bottles, they looked at cans, they looked at paper, 
they looked at everything that they could look in terms of 
examining some of the options. And the report is several years 
old. And we have in fact responded to a number of 
recommendations. And most of these recommendations right 
now is really around the awareness and the sharing of 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

intelligence and knowledge-based efforts, best practices, and 
that kind of thing. We haven’t really done a whole lot in some 
of the other areas that they’ve asked us to undertake action on. 
 
But that’s not to say that we have not learned any lessons from 
the examination team. We will continue moving forward, but 
one of the most valuable partners in this whole exercise is of 
course the industry that we’re going to impact. So consultation 
has to happen with that particular industry as well. 
 
On the final note on the paper argument. I believe paper, if I can 
be corrected, is probably the largest, if you will, occupier of our 
land masses or of our landfills throughout Saskatchewan. If fills 
a fairly large mass on our landfills. And people are saying that 
the price of paper is so low that it ain’t worth recycling so we’re 
not going to do it. It costs us money to recycle and that’s why 
we can never get money for our regional landfills. 
 
Well I hate to point this out — it’s not something that I admit 
often — but the price of paper cannot be dictated by 
Saskatchewan alone because the volume of paper that we 
consume in Saskatchewan is relatively small compared to the 
other jurisdictions. Our heart and our minds and our vision and 
our dreams are big, but our paper use is small. So we cannot 
artificially inflate the price of paper by our volume numbers, so 
obviously some of these options presented to us do pose some 
other risks and other challenges. And our job here is to make 
sure that we’re able to look at these options thoroughly and 
move forward from here. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for I guess again giving us the understanding and 
maybe a little bit of the background and knowledge of what’s 
happening with that system. 
 
But I think with SARCAN the question still needs to be asked if 
SARCAN has some interests and wants to take the initiative on 
to make some changes in the system. And you’re recognizing 
that SARCAN is a very valuable player in the whole recycling 
program, the same with Scrap Tire. SARCAN’s hours are being 
cut back and the days are being cut back in the sense of the 
opportunity that people can access that program as well. 
 
And I just would like the minister to speak to that a little bit, 
and in the sense of why we’re seeing that that whole 
opportunity to be able to access the SARCAN program is being 
diminished in the province as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I’d like to 
reiterate and re-emphasize that SARCAN is a very valuable and 
valued partner. There’s no question that any time you see a 
organization that has grown and expanded to the effective size 
that SARCAN is, as the member very well knows, that always 
when you look at efficiencies of operation, a board — and 
SARCAN’s not immune to that — they look at ways in which 
they can make their organization efficient and thereby saying 
. . . Well in a sense I’m saying that some of these decisions that 
they’re making, I would point out that there’s probably two or 
three reasons why they’re doing it. One is, obviously is 
efficiency. And the other is they may be taking on some new 
programs and new planning. 
 
So I think what I would point out, there’s been no centres 

closed — obviously that’s something that’s very important — 
that I’m aware of. They’re also involved with a pilot project in 
reference to some of the computers, the old computers I was 
speaking about. 
 
They take all the beverage containers. They take all the milk 
containers — they’re working with the dairy producers on that 
front — and they aren’t making any money on that particular 
aspect. It’s really, you know, an effort by their organization to 
try and address the milk containers argument. And through 
contractual obligations and discussion, this year we’ve 
increased our operating grant by well over a half a million 
dollars. So it is valuable in the sense of what they’re doing. 
They’re doing a lot of extras which is much appreciated by this 
minister and by the province of Saskatchewan. But as I 
mentioned before, like any other organization, they have to look 
at constant improvements, new programs, efficiencies, and 
that’s a decision that they could certainly make on their own. 
And we will continue supporting SARCAN as much as we 
possibly can. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Mr. Chair, thank you again to the minister for 
that answer. But I think there is still that concern. There are 
communities such as Davidson and Wilkie and Macklin that are 
being cut in hours and cut in days. And if we have the interest 
in enhancing this service to delivery that is being provided by 
SARCAN, we need to recognize that if they’re going to get into 
the servicing of these other products, that you’ve got to give 
them the abilities to provide the hours and the manpower to 
provide that service as well. 
 
And I think if we’re going to work with that system in the 
fullest and allow it to develop, you can’t start handicapping 
them and taking hours and days away from them to be able to 
provide the service as well. 
 
Just wanting to go back to the landfill situation, and I guess the 
way we’ve tried to regulate and control that whole burning 
aspect out there . . . And until we develop the regional concept 
and have the regions developed and have that full-access ability 
for these municipalities to get into that regional delivery of 
service, we need to somehow appreciate how that regulation is 
going to work with these municipalities and how some of these 
pressures are going to come down upon them — that in some 
fashion they still have to function. And sometimes burning still 
is an acceptable process in the sense of getting rid of that 
product. 
 
Now there maybe needs to be a bit of separation in there. And 
we can recognize that we shouldn’t be burning everything out 
there but there’s a certain amount of product that needs to be 
burnt and dealt with in the respect of not having the ability of a 
regional facility that you can get access at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Again, Mr. 
Chairman, you can obviously tell that the member’s had some 
extensive experience in this particular field. And it is always a 
breath of fresh air to see a Saskatchewan Party member have 
extensive experience and background on certain aspects of what 
SERM does. 
 
But I would point out, I think it’s important that we continue 
striving home the fact that burning at landfills is something that 



May 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

 

shouldn’t be condoned. Obviously I think the member knows 
that the activity does happen and there has been some 
tremendous progress that has been made. 
 
But I would say this, is that SERM, through an educational 
awareness campaign, does allow burning at landfills when you 
look at certain aspects of the conditions of the weather and so 
on and so forth. So burning is allowed and it is permitted under 
certain circumstances, and we would ask the members to look at 
a permitting system before they’re allowed to burn. Obviously 
we don’t want to see things like butane bottles and paints and 
other chemicals being burned as a whole. So there’s good 
separation of dry brush and old lumber that isn’t being used, 
and other things that could be burned. Then we would ask that 
the municipalities get a burning permit and we work very 
closely with them. 
 
And I’ll point out in closing that there’s been good, tremendous 
progress made on that front. And it is not in our desire, nor is it 
in our ambition, to charge and be unfair to the municipality 
partners out there. I talked about a partnership, but it’s been the 
regional landfills, it’s been the certain organizations out there 
and other folks that have asked me, what’s the use of pushing 
regional landfills if the communities are allowed to burn; so, 
Mr. Minister, get on those communities that burn. 
 
And it is not our desire or objective to charge people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s not what I’m here for. So through 
education, to working with them, to awareness campaigns, and 
eventually if they don’t follow through with what the regional 
landfills go, we do have to, you know, slap a few folks on the 
wrists and tell them, come on, folks, you know we got to get 
with this program. So that’s the only time that we’ve done a few 
. . . we laid a few charges, but it’s not a preferred option. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, 
I’ve a couple of questions that hopefully have short answers to, 
and it relates to some water issues. And although this is from 
the urban municipal Act, I want to read a quote from section 
144 of the urban municipal Act. And it states: 
 

. . . The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 
2002 and The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, a 
council may, by bylaw, regulate and control the use of 
wells and other sources of supply water for the urban 
municipality, make provisions for a supply of water for the 
urban municipality . . . flowing through or past the urban 
municipality. 

 
My question to the minister is: does Saskatchewan Environment 
have a law that supersedes this? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And to the member, I think one of the terminology in any Act, 
the urban Act or the northern Act, is that the terminology may 
and will and shall have certainly different meaning to it. 
 
And in this instance, I would point out that the may in the Act 
was probably designed to anticipate that The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act, the EMPA Act which is a 
provincial Act, would supersede that Act in the event that 

public health was a threat . . . or public health was a threat. 
 
And I think in this instance, I would say that Saskatchewan 
Environment does have the EMPA Act which would supersede 
a notion by a local council that they would not, say, for 
example, treat your water if they’re providing water services to 
their community. So I guess my point being is that that’s 
probably the logic behind the terminology, may. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you. My next question again 
is a short question and from pamphlets that you have left, your 
department has left, it says that Saskatchewan Environment is 
responsible for water systems designed to deliver 4,000 gallons 
per day or more. 
 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I’ll try and keep this answer as short as 
I can. The system is a municipal supply or a volume higher than 
4,000 gallons a day. It is managed under EMPA. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Now the 
reason that I bring this up, we have a village or a small hamlet, 
whatever you wish to call it — it’s under the urban municipal 
Act — that have received a citation or a violation notice from 
Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
This town has something in the neighbourhood of 19 people. 
The water is not provided by the town; it’s provided by 
individual wells. The consumption of water in this town is no 
more than 1,000 gallons a day, and yet they received a notice of 
violation. And it says further violation may result in court 
action. 
 
And the town is basically saying it’s not even their water 
supply. Would you like to comment on why they would receive 
a violation order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the 
information. I believe the community, if the member . . . If I’m 
wrong, I ask the member to correct me. It’s under Wood 
Mountain, and if that’s the village you’re referring to, I believe 
that they have a community well, or a well that is serving the 
communities . . . or the homes, if I’m correct. Now if these 
systems are considered a municipal system, then they come 
under EMPA. 
 
But what I would caution that member on — and I realize the 
member has got a lot of information on the water file; he’s been 
working this for a couple of years — is be very, very careful. 
Because what I want to point out is that, to a lot of folks, is 
we’ve had a challenge with water quality throughout the 
province. 
 
And we always, on this side of the House, making sure that 
folks know that treatment of your water is so very crucial. We 
want to make sure that everybody across Saskatchewan knows 
that, if your water is not treated, then you need to get it treated 
ASAP (as soon as possible). You need to advise your folks and 
you have to get your water tested on a regular basis. 
 
So what we’re trying to do there is to educate people because 
the worst case scenario were to happen — and I’m hoping that 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2003 

 

member’s not suggesting that — that if you don’t treat your 
water, if you don’t treat your water, then people get sick. And 
when people get sick, there could be serious consequences as a 
result of that, and we don’t want to ever see that again happen 
in Saskatchewan. That is a challenge that all of us in this 
Assembly face. 
 
Now it is not again in our interest to charge Saskatchewan 
people. And a notice of violation, for the member’s 
information, is much like a speeding ticket, or a speeding 
infraction where often . . . I’m not sure if the member ever got 
stopped for speeding, but if you did, then what they say is they 
say: well slow down here a bit; I’ll give you a break, but here’s 
a . . . here is a warning. 
 
So a notice of violation is much like a warning that you have to 
make sure you get your water treated. If it’s a municipal system 
and is a threat to public safety, then we have to make sure that 
people know it is not being treated, and we do our very best, our 
best efforts to make sure that it gets treated. And of course that 
works with, with the community as well, we have to work with 
them. And we have to make sure that public health is not 
threatened. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a follow-up on 
that question. I have a village of Keeler which has 10 people in 
it. Same problem — they’re going to be citated because they 
don’t chlorinate the water. Obviously they just don’t have the 
money. I mean you know how much tax base you’re going to 
generate with 10 people. 
 
Next argument you might get up and say, well they can join the 
RM, but the RM still has to pay for that. There is Hutterite 
colonies out there. I have individual farms out there that 
probably have more than 10 people in the house of their own 
well water. 
 
How low on the town system do you go? If even Keeler drops 
to five people, will they still be falling under the same rules that 
follow under a town or a village of 500 to 1,000 people? And 
individual farms that don’t fall under any rules or Hutterite 
colonies or . . . out there in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Concern there is they do send their water in once a week to be 
tested voluntarily, but they just can’t afford the systems that 
you’re bringing . . . that you want to put forward, that’s saying 
they have to bring them in. Will there be any help for these 
towns in that small of shape, or RMs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And I’d remind that member, whether it’s 10 people or 5 people 
or 20 people or 20,000 people or 200,000 people, we are 
concerned with human life and we’ll continue being concerned. 
And we’re going to implement our Act and make sure that we 
protect the public, or the public safety is protected. 
 
I would point out that this system that you are referring to is 
considered a municipal system. And what you have to be very 
careful — whether it’s Wood River or whether it’s any of the 
smaller communities — is that if they’re considered a 
municipality, they’re eligible for the CSIP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) program to 
apply. 

And secondly, and the most important, alarming thing that 
we’re worried about is perhaps some of these systems . . . and I 
can confirm today, I understand that some of them may have 
bacteriological problems and challenges with their water 
supply. 
 
So I’d urge that member to be very careful because what you 
don’t want to do is you don’t want to propose to have lax laws 
when it comes to smaller communities. We still have to work 
with them, we still have to be cognizant of their financial 
challenges, but if there is a threat to pubic safety, we will be 
engaged. 
 
Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:57. 



 

 

 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................936 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................936 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................936 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Belanger .............................................................................................................................................................................944, 959 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................946 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 SaskPower Poster Contest 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................936 
 Tenth Annual Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................937 
 Skate Canada — Saskatchewan Annual Meeting And Awards Banquet 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................937 
 Hon. Member from Lloydminster Receives St. John Ambulance Award 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................937 
 2003 Kalyna Dance Festival 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................938 
 Humboldt Broncos in Royal Bank Cup Tournament 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................938 
 University of Saskatchewan Research in Organic Farming 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................938 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Retention of Physicians 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................939 
 SaskPower Policy on Firefighting Expenses 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................940 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................940 
 Investment in Coachman Insurance Company 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................940 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................941 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................942 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Rates for 911 System 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................943 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................943 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................944 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................944 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 13 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................945 
 Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................945 
 



 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 20 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................947 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................947 
 Bill No. 21 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................948 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................948 
 Bill No. 22 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................948 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................949 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2003 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................949 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................950 
 Bill No. 18 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................951 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................952 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2003 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................952 
 Bill. No. 18 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................952 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................953 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................953 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................954 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................955 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................961 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................962 
 


	SECOND READINGS
	SECOND READINGS

