















































Hansard: June 13, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1643 
 June 13, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of people who are concerned about the amount of education tax 
paid on property. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and district who are concerned 
about a lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina, and I’m pleased to present 
on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petition today, 
Mr. Speaker, is in regard to crop insurance premium increases 
for 2003. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Consul, Eastend, and Frontier but to show how 
widespread the concern is, there’s also signatures from Calgary 
and Quebec. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gravelbourg, Coderre, Lafleche, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people from this 
wonderful province who have deep concerns regarding the 
condition of Highway 47 between Estevan and the Boundary 
dam resort. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the citizens of Estevan, Roche 
Percee, and Regina. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Yates: — I rise today to present a petition signed by 
Saskatchewan citizens who are concerned that deregulation and 
privatization in the electrical industry is causing electrical rates 
to rise dramatically in other jurisdictions. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to rise again with a petition from citizens of various 
parts of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the deplorable 
condition of Highway 43. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Regina, Lafleche, 
and Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of citizens of west central Saskatchewan concerned with 
the lack of cellphone coverage and the dangers this poses 
specifically for our oil patch. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
construct a new cellular telephone tower at Coleville, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Coleville and Kindersley, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 2003 
premium increases. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Davidson and Tugaske. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
presenting a petition from citizens that are concerned about the 
deterioration of Highway 14. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take necessary steps to reconstruct 
and repair the highway in order to assist safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
As duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by citizens of Wilkie, Landis, and 
Lloydminster. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens of this province who 
are very concerned with the inaction of this government in 
dealing with the issue of the Qu’Appelle Valley river/lake 
system. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that water level of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from Pasqua 
Lake and Regina. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Shellbrook. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
signed by Saskatchewan people who are concerned that 
deregulation and privatization in the electrical industry is 
causing electrical rates to increase dramatically in other 
jurisdictions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 

 
Now this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by people from 
Estevan, Glenavon, Bienfait, Macoun, and Rocanville, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 27, 41, 100, 114, 119, 120, and no. 124. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 63 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: could 
the minister please provide an explanation for the process 
for allocating taxpayers’ dollars from this province for the 
production of the Toronto, Ontario program Designer 
Guys; and further to that, how much Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ dollars has been allocated for this production? 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. I give notice I shall on day no. 63 
ask the government the following question: 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

 

To the Minister of Highways: did the minister purchase the 
speed limit sign that they donated to a charity recently from 
the Department of Highways; if so, how much did he pay 
for the sign; can any citizen of the province buy a similar 
sign? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you it’s my pleasure to introduce the Eston grade 12 
class. The Eston grade 12 tourism, hospitality and 
entrepreneurship class are visiting here today seated in your 
gallery. The class is travelling a good portion of our province 
having a look at some of the province’s tourism facilities — the 
spa and tunnels in Moose Jaw, museums and our legislative 
buildings here in Regina, a bed and breakfast in Kandahar, 
Batoche, and a bike tour in Saskatoon. 
 
Members of the class are the teacher, Mr. Brad Hartsook, Jeff 
Wells, Casey Stevenson, Dee Beckstrand, Darnell Japp, and 
Jenna Tunall. The two other members of the class are Alex 
Llewellan of New Zealand and Louise Smith of Australia here 
on an exchange program. And the class is accompanied by their 
teacher, Marea Olafson and fathers, Allan Japp and Dale Tunall. 
 
And on behalf of the Assembly, I welcome you here today. I 
look forward to meeting with you in the near future or shortly 
after session, and I hope that you enjoy today’s proceedings. 
And I’d ask all members to welcome the folks from Eston. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the west gallery today we are joined by a large number of 
students and teachers from the Saskatoon French School. I am 
privileged that the Saskatoon French School is in the 
constituency of Riversdale, but I know that the students come 
from across the city of Saskatoon. 
 
And so I want to say on behalf of all of the Saskatoon MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and all MLAs in this 
legislature, a word of welcome to the 42 grade 5 and 6 students 
from the Saskatoon French School and all their teachers and 
parents who may be with us here today. We hope they enjoy 
their visit at the legislature and I look forward to meeting with 
them a little later this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would join with the Premier in welcoming the Saskatoon 
French School. 
 
And I understand that a good family friend, Kendra Chernoff, is 
with the group today. Kendra, could you give us a wave? 
Kendra? Give us a wave. I just wanted to say that Kendra is the 
daughter of Roy and Shannon Chernoff, and Roy’s a classmate 
of mine from med school. 
 
Kendra is a very accomplished swimmer. She has set two 
provincial records this year in Saskatchewan and she’s rated 
number two in the world in the butterfly 100-metre and 
50-metre in her age category, so . . . 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — So I’d also like to welcome Kelly 
Patrick, who is a parent chaperone with the group today and 
well known as a social activist in her support for a skateboard 
park in Saskatoon. 
 
But just a few words of French — hopefully I can get this right 
— with regard to Kendra: 
 
Félicitations, Kendra, et les meilleurs souhaits à toi et tes amis 
de l’école. Et bienvenue de l’Assemblée ce matin. Merci. 
 
(Translation: Congratulations, Kendra, and best wishes to you 
and your school friends. And welcome to the Assembly this 
morning. Thank you.) 
 
And I’d ask all members to welcome them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Huskies Football Team 
Inducted into Sports Hall of Fame 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe I am correct in saying that every member of the 
Saskatoon . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. I’m having 
difficulty hearing the member and he’s actually only about 15 
feet from me. So I’d ask members to . . . The member for 
Sutherland, let’s start again. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe I am correct in saying that every member of the 
Saskatoon caucus has a close association with the University of 
Saskatchewan. And in fact many other members have more 
than a nodding acquaintance with our excellent first university. 
 
On behalf of all U of S (University of Saskatchewan) alumni 
and friends, I’m very pleased to announce to the Assembly that 
this Saturday, tomorrow, the 1990 University of Saskatchewan 
Huskies football team will be inducted into the Saskatchewan 
Sports Hall of Fame. 
 
This was the team, Mr. Speaker, that in 1989 went to the Vanier 
Cup for the first time in Huskie history, only to be turned back 
by a team from the wicked East. But the next year, more 
experienced and toughened by that disappointment, the Huskies 
coach under coach Brian . . . the Huskies team under coach 
Brian Towriss defeated St. Mary’s University by a score of 24 
to 21. As former Saskatoon sportscaster Lloyd Saunders used to 
say, it was a cliff burner. 
 
Not only did this team go to the Cup twice and win once, it set 
the stage for a very successful decade in the 1990s during which 
subsequent Huskie teams went to the Cup four more times, 
winning twice; in other words, they created a dynasty — a 
dynasty which we can say influenced the new University of 
Regina Rams football team, who have already been to the Cup 
once. 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was an excellent team of 76 Saskatchewan 
players out of 77 members — well deserving of their induction 
into the Sports Hall of Fame. 
 
I ask all hon. members to join me in congratulating them. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(10:15) 
 

Scholastic Achievements of Kindersley Resident 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to applaud the achievements of 
Darin White of Kindersley. Darin is leaving the University of 
Saskatchewan with some of the most prestigious awards a 
faculty can offer. 
 
After five years of study, 22-year-old Darin received the 
Governor General’s Silver Medal, awarded for the highest 
academic standing of all graduates receiving undergraduate 
degrees; the Earl of Bessborough Prize in Science, awarded to 
the highest academic standings among science majors in arts 
and science; and the Haslam Medal for the most distinguished 
graduates in arts and science. 
 
Darin is leaving the university with a Bachelor of Science 
Honors degree, with high honours in physiology. He attained 96 
per cent or higher in 30 of his 36 classes. At the spring 
convocation held on May 29, associate dean of sciences, Dick 
Neal, described Darin as the most gifted student in the 
physiological department in the dean’s memory. 
 
Darin will attend McGill University in Montreal this fall to take 
a combined medical doctorate, Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy) 
program. Please join me in congratulating this outstanding 
young man on his accomplishments and wishing him future 
success in his studies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Oil and Gas Land Sales 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Last Friday my colleague from Regina 
Dewdney reported for the 13th consecutive month jobs in 
Saskatchewan have increased. Today is Friday the 13th and, 
contrary to superstition, I have more good news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The June oil and gas land sales have just been completed and 
interest in Saskatchewan’s resources keep climbing. The sales 
in June were more than triple the figure a year ago. Mr. 
Speaker, we speak of the Saskatchewan advantage in the oil and 
gas industry. Here are the numbers that given credence to that 
motto. 
 
June land sales generated $33.9 million bringing this year’s 
total so far to 86 million in revenue for our province, well ahead 
of the $24.4 million of a year ago. This sale broke April’s 
record of exploratory land sales with 115 exploration licenses 
going for 26.9 million. Another 190 lease parcels sold for an 
additional 7 million. Bidding activity was high in all areas of 
the province — more good news. 
 

The sales this year represent a continuing confidence in 
Saskatchewan by the oil and gas sector. These strong numbers 
reflect a healthy industry in a province with a future that’s wide 
open. 
 
Last Friday we talked about jobs. This Friday we are happy to 
call attention to the industry that is a major generator of those 
jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Young Spirits Campaign 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, along 
with the Minister of Health, I was pleased to visit at the 
community school, Wascana école communautaire, in the fine 
constituency of Regina Elphinstone. 
 
We joined principal Lucie Anderson, teacher Barbara Jones, 
and her grade 5 and 6 students for a ceremony celebrating their 
participation in the Young Spirits: Proud to be Tobacco Free 
school campaign. 
 
These 20 Wascana School students, Mr. Speaker, were proud to 
represent more than 400 grade 5 to 9 students from across the 
province who initiated and carried out their own projects to 
promote a tobacco-free society. The projects were varied and 
imaginative, as we would expect from Saskatchewan kids. 
 
The Wascana students, for instance, made thank you certificates 
for neighbourhood smoke-free Tim Hortons. They walked to 
the restaurant to present them to the manager, Imelda Gonzalez, 
and I’m happy to say that Ms. Gonzalez was able to join us for 
the ceremony. 
 
Other students made posters, videos, or colouring books. They 
kept journals and lobbied local officials for smoke control 
bylaws — worthy projects all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Young Spirits campaign is a partnership 
between Saskatchewan Health, the federal government, the 
Missinipi Broadcasting Corporation — which is producing and 
airing radio ads in English, Dene, and Cree — and each student 
who undertakes a project receives a portable radio. 
 
More importantly, these students will, we trust, learn to remain 
tobacco-free for life, a goal worthy of the work and imagination 
put forward by all 400 of these students. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Nomination 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the end of the political road is 
near for the member from Prince Albert Northcote. Little did 
the member realize that when he started the entire SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) 
embarrassment six years ago, he had begun the process of 
ending his own political career. 
 
The journey reached another leg last night as the Saskatchewan 
Party candidate was nominated for that constituency. Mr. 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

 

Speaker, 150 people packed the building last night as three 
excellent candidates ran for the nomination. 
 
The crowd enjoyed plenty of SPUDCO jokes and SPUDCO 
stories about how the minister wasted almost $30 million on 
this fiasco and basically was not forward with the taxpayers 
about how he tried to cover it up. 
 
There was a lot of laughter last night, Mr. Speaker, from the 
large, enthusiastic crowd but there was also a lot of anger — 
anger at the NDP (New Democratic Party) government for the 
SPUDCO fiasco; anger at the Premier for not even giving the 
SPUDCO minister the boot from the cabinet for his truth 
expansions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the most serious anger was vented at the 
current member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. While the 
members are allowed a lot of freedom on debate, one of the 
things that we must not — we must require of ourselves as 
members is to — impugn bad motives on the part of members. I 
hear the member there impugning rather unworthy motives to 
the member from Prince Albert Northcote and I would ask him 
at this time to withdraw the statements and apologize to the 
House because it demeans the House when statements of that 
— Order. Order. Order! — when statements of that type are 
made. 
 
Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Now would the member for Redberry Lake please rise in his 
place, apologize to the House, and withdraw the statement. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw and 
apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed with his remarks. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — There was also a lot of anger at the NDP 
government for the SPUDCO fiasco — anger at the Premier for 
not even giving the SPUDCO minister the boot from cabinet for 
his less than openness in the matter. And, Mr. Speaker, the most 
serious anger was vented at the current member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it was noted last night, the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve better than what is currently being 
offered by the former SPUDCO minister and the, Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Prince Albert especially deserve better 
representation. 
 
The winning candidate and the next Saskatchewan Party MLA 
for Prince Albert Northcote is Prince Albert lawyer, Mr. Peter 
Abrametz. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Point2 Internet Systems 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, a few years ago a Saskatoon 
company, Point2 Internet Systems, created software for on-line 

heavy equipment auctions that quickly dominated the market. 
That led to a deal with heavy equipment giant Caterpillar 
incorporated to supply them with Internet software and to look 
after that company’s global trading system. 
 
Now Point2 has successfully launched Internet software for the 
real estate sector. The software known as Point2 Agent was 
launched in January and already has over 7,000 real estate 
agents using it in North America and a number of other places 
around the globe. The company is expecting the number to 
more than double by July. 
 
The software is easy to use, allows real estate agents to 
maintain high-quality, customer-friendly Web sites at low cost. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, since 2001, Point2 has grown 
from 25 to 60 employees. When asked about the success of 
their company a spokesperson said: 
 

The reason we are doing so well here is we have a huge 
talent pool with some of the best programmers in North 
America right here in Saskatoon. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Point2 Systems 
management and staff on their past successes and wish them 
well in their current and future endeavours. It’s companies like 
them that keep this province’s future wide open. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Unity Filmmaker Wins Golden Sheaf Award 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Unity 
filmmaker wins national award. Jessie Wallace, a former Unity 
resident, is making a name for herself in the Canadian film 
industry and she now has the hardware to prove it. 
 
Ms. Wallace won the Golden Sheaf Award at the Yorkton Short 
Film and Video Festival, May 21, for the best experimental film 
for 15 Minute Death, a film she wrote, produced, and directed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Wallace used different shooting and editing 
techniques to give the film a different look. Wallace hopes to 
hit the festival circuit with the film and hopes more accolades 
are coming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the creative Wallace has an endless number of 
ideas for projects. She is also currently working as a producer 
on two feature-length dramas and a feature-length documentary 
on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) in the spring for 
2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, join me in congratulating Jessie Wallace in her 
workings with the film industry and her recognition in winning 
of the Golden Sheaf Award, and wishing Ms. Wallace every 
success in her future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Support for Beef Industry 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Labour. Over the past four weeks the BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy) has devastated the 
Canadian beef industry across this country. 
 
There have been many workers in the beef industry and related 
spinoff sectors who have been temporarily laid off or have lost 
their jobs permanently. Yet despite repeated calls for the federal 
government to waive the waiting period for applicants to the 
Unemployment Insurance program, they have refused to act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal Minister of Human Resources 
Development will be in Regina this afternoon. Has the minister 
and the Premier got in touch with the minister and will they be 
meeting with this federal minister later on today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
As the members know, we have been working on this since the 
first letter was sent May 23, when the one case of BSE was 
discovered in Alberta. 
 
I guess I would take a little exception to the member opposite 
when he says the outbreak of BSE has devastated the industry. 
It’s really the closing of the American border which has 
devastated this industry and the continued insistence . . . 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the effects of this on the 
economies of Western Canada, and also on the workforce in 
Western Canada, Mr. Speaker, we made what we felt was a 
reasonable request that the minister responsible for HRDC 
(Human Resources Development Canada) would consider 
waiving the two-week wait period for entitlement to EI 
(Employment Insurance). 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have carried that discussion on a number of 
levels with myself sending letters and having discussions with 
the minister, also with the Premier sending a couple of letters to 
the minister . . . to the Prime Minister. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
were informed yesterday by the media that Ms. Stewart would 
be in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question was simple and to the point. Will she be meeting with 
the minister today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I was informed yesterday 
late in the day that Minister Stewart would be here in 
Saskatchewan doing a bit of a promotional tour. I have not been 
in contact with her. I was not notified by the federal minister 
that she would be here in Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
plan on attending her conference this afternoon in Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely 
unbelievable how ineffective this NDP government has been 
when it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, it’s 
unbelievable how ineffective this NDP government is when it 
comes to dealing with the federal government. It doesn’t matter 
whether it’s a drought disaster that we called for over the last 
couple of years because of farm land being devastated with lack 
of rain, to the BSE issue and how the federal government seems 
to just have a double standard across this country. But what is 
even more appalling is that the federal minister will be in our 
province, in the capital city, and that minister cannot even have 
a meeting with her. It’s unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s great that she’s going to be in the audience 
during a news conference but that does very little when sitting 
across the table, as compared to sitting across the table 
negotiating Unemployment Insurance for our people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister demand a meeting with Jane 
Stewart while she’s in Regina? Could you ask her for five 
minutes of her time to discuss the issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to speak on behalf of government. 
And I’ll tell you what’s unbelievable and unconscionable, that 
we . . . 
 
(10:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Now, 
order. Order. 
 
I would at this time like to make a blanket statement, that the 
conduct of the members is really quite inappropriate in terms of 
what should be going on in the House. And I would ask 
members, instead of pointing fingers and hollering at one 
another, to wait their turns, wait their turns, be patient. 
 
Order. Order. Order. And I do have patience and I can wait this 
out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell you 
what’s unbelievable and unconscionable; that we have a federal 
minister of the Crown coming to Saskatchewan today and this 
government, this Minister of Labour, learns about it — learns 
about it — through media sources, through media contacts. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll tell you what’s unbelievable, is a federal 
government that will so treat with disdain and contempt the 
Government of Saskatchewan to set a precedent in the nation. 
 
Now I want to ask the Labour critic who’s been on his feet this 
morning, will he please demonstrate how he’s made contact 
with the Minister of Human Resources Development Canada? 
Will he please tell us about the meeting that he has set up 
today? Will he please show us the letters that he has sent to the 
Prime Minister? Will he tell us what he has done, other than — 
other than — from his seat in this House and on platforms 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

 

across the province, speak to the destruction of labour law in 
Saskatchewan? That’s what he does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Conditions 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I can 
assure the Premier that our Labour critic will be glad to meet 
with the federal department at . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member for Wood 
River may start over. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll repeat it 
again. The Labour critic would be pleased to meet with the 
federal minister as soon as the Premier gets the courage to call 
the election, and we are government. Then he would be glad to 
meet with the minister from Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite all of the NDP’s bragging, many highways 
in Saskatchewan are still in terrible shape. The Minister of 
Highways recently received an e-mail regarding Highway 334 
near Kayville, and it says: 
 

(On April 11) . . . about 200 meters north of the Kayville 
access, we hit an unmarked hole with extremely large 
chunks protruding from the highway . . . I found several . . . 
gashes marking the points where the protruding pavement 
chunks had attempted to rip apart the bottom surfaces . . . 
Saturday afternoon, I found oil leakage under my vehicle 
coming from a damaged transmission pan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Highway 334 is falling apart. When is the NDP 
going to fix this highway? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, we recognize that there 
are highways that are in difficult shape. We have spoken to the 
people in these areas where the highways are in difficult shape. 
We have area transportation planning committees that are 
helping us set priorities in those areas. They live and work in 
the areas. They know what the priorities are. We work with 
them to determine which highways will be fixed when. 
 
In terms of maintenance, our crews are out there. They have 
been working steadily in a very difficult year to bring our 
highways up to a safe standard. The member opposite should 
know that. If he drives in his constituency, he’ll know that the 
crews are out there working. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of any claims that people have, if 
there is any damage because of those roads, I have said in this 
House, and the members opposite know, that people can submit 
those claims. And if they are legitimately caused by highways, 
they will receive a remittance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to advise the 
minister that I do travel the rural highways in this province and 
I do know how terrible they are and I could list a number of 

them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the letter goes on to ask: 
 

Why . . . were (there) NO markers, signs, flares, or other 
warnings (on this road) . . . Some of these holes varied 
from one foot around by six inches deep, up to the extreme 
of a hole that was at least EIGHT feet around and ten to 12 
inches deep. These holes had . . . broken pavement chunks 
that created damage to my car and threatened the safety of 
my FAMILY! 

 
Mr. Speaker, why isn’t this highway fixed? Why weren’t these 
dangerous potholes marked? And will this driver be reimbursed 
for the damage to his car? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I already answered the 
member’s last question in his series and I will now respond to 
his comments. 
 
We look around this province and we see the amount of work 
that is going on, the amount of work that has gone on in these 
last three years — $900 million put into Saskatchewan 
highways. 
 
And I want to talk about the constituencies down there. Wood 
River constituency, the last four years, $21.2 million. That’s 
nothing to sneeze at. Mr. Speaker, Cypress Hills constituency, 
last four years, $58.8 million. Swift Current constituency, $6.1 
million. Twinning all along that front, Mr. Speaker. Thunder 
Creek constituency, $13.2 million. Weyburn-Big Muddy, $19 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is responding to the need. We are 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
will be doing a check to see if those numbers are more accurate 
than the last ones put out by that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the RM (rural municipality) of 
Estevan has also written the Minister of Highways regarding the 
terrible shape of Highway 47 south of Estevan. They say, and I 
quote: 
 

This highway is a heavily travelled highway which is used 
by local residents as well as our US neighbors. I might add 
that for our neighbors to the south, it is their first 
impression of our province. This highway is in a terrible 
state and becoming worse daily. It not only is hard on 
vehicles, it is a safety hazard which deserves your 
immediate attention. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when is the NDP going to fix 
Highway 47 south of Estevan? 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, Highway 47 is scheduled 
for regular maintenance and upkeep. Highway 47 is also a bit of 
a dilemma in that it is partly a mining road, Mr. Speaker, and 
the mining is changing in that area. That road may in fact be 
moved, Mr. Speaker, and you don’t want to invest heavily in a 
road that is not going to be there in the near future. 
 
So we are maintaining the road so that it’s safe and we will 
continue to do that until the decisions are made. We will not 
invest money that will just be thrown away. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, what are these people supposed to 
do — drive in the ditch? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this letter from the RM of Estevan also includes 
an invitation to the Minister of Highways to travel to Estevan 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order, order. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, they can laugh but it’s probably 
safer in the ditch. 
 
This letter is from the RM of Estevan and also includes an 
invitation to the Minister of Highways to travel to Estevan and 
accompany the RM council on a tour of this deplorable 
highway. They say, and I quote: 
 

Once you are able to see the road and confirm our 
contentions that the road is harmful to personal safety . . . 
we are sure you will agree to our demand to have this road 
repaired immediately. 
 

Mr. Speaker, has the minister responded to this invitation? 
When is he going to Estevan to see the terrible condition of 
Highway 47? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I have been to Estevan and I have travelled on Highway 47. I do 
know the condition that Highway 47 is in. And I will repeat — 
routine maintenance is going on on Highway 47 South. There 
will be hand patching, there will be blading done, and Mr. 
Speaker, our department is on the job doing a good job 
wherever they are and they are out there working on Highway 
47 as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a copy of 
a letter to the Minister of Highways and it’s from the manager 
of the Tugaske Co-op. And it’s about the terrible shape of 
Highway 42 from Keeler to Eyebrow. He says, and I quote: 
 

In 2000, the department converted to gravel 12 km of failed 

(highway) areas (failed areas) on Highway 42. This 
conversion has now failed with many unsafe and dangerous 
areas appearing. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I happen to know this area of highway because I 
travel it often when I am going to and from my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conversion to gravel three years ago was 
supposed to be a temporary measure. The gravel is still there, 
the dust and the holes. The highway is falling apart. The 
government has not kept its word. The NDP has not kept its 
word. When is this government going to fix Highway 42? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
brag often about being from rural Saskatchewan and really 
knowing rural Saskatchewan. If they do, then they should 
understand that when you’ve got a very moist year like this, it 
wreaks havoc on our highways. There is a lot more damage; it 
happens a lot easier. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m not going to get into all the issues around hydrolyzing the 
roads, and dry roads from drought years, and what happens in 
the moist years. 
 
But what I will say, Mr. Speaker, is that that piece on Highway 
42 — which I travel a number of times each year as well — that 
piece on Highway 42 that was reverted to gravel is a very low 
spot, gets mushy quite easily. We have been putting more 
gravel into that spot to make it safe, and that spot is on the 
schedule, Mr. Speaker. It’s on the schedule and it is part of the 
PGRP, the Prairie Grain Roads Program, and the work will be 
completed. It will be brought up to a standard that is much 
better than it’s been by 2005. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister had 
two dry years to fix up that highway but he didn’t do it, and 
now it’s a little wetter and he’s got a big problem and people’s 
lives are at risk and he doesn’t care. He’s going to wait till 2005 
to fix that highway. Who knows how many lives will be lost, 
how many vehicles will be destroyed, because of the negligence 
of the NDP government and their failure to respond to the needs 
of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from this letter I quote: 
 

We are located beside the largest man made lake and two 
of the best golf courses in the province. The potential for 
tourism is unlimited. This potential will never . . . be 
realized if a safe transportation route is not established. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this highway is not only dangerous, it’s damaging 
tourism in the area. Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP broken its 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

 

commitment to fix this highway? Why is it taking so long to fix 
Highway 42? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — That’s an interesting area over there 
because it’s not just around tourism, it’s also about building a 
potato industry. And we have some key roads in that area. We 
have some very key roads in that area that are used for the 
building of that industry and we have been investing heavily in 
them. We have been doing that with the express guidance of the 
area transportation planning committees who live in the area. 
 
The member opposite lives off to the side of that area, the 
Leader of the Opposition. He should know better. He should 
know that those people living in the area have priorities. We 
have tremendous backing for our highway programs. Those 
people in the area have set priorities. We’ve been working with 
them and building on those priorities. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the Minister 
of Highways would have spent the $28 million that the member 
from P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote squandered on SPUDCO, 
not only would we have a state-of-the-art highway there, but 
we’d have a stronger potato industry as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the manager of the Tugaske 
Co-op makes an offer. He says: 
 

To help you experience . . . (the) hardship (of driving on 
this highway), the Tugaske Co-op is willing to give any 
MLA or Provincial Political Leader a FREE tank of gas. 
The only stipulation is that you must use Highway 42 
(using the) section from Keeler to . . . (Tugaske, Mr. 
Speaker) to come . . . and get it. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today the member for Arm River and myself are 
going to drive up to the Tugaske Co-op and take the manager 
up on his offer. We’ll be driving down Highway 42 and I’m just 
simply asking the Minister of Highways, would he come along 
and see what his negligence has done to that highway? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I have no trouble believing that 
members opposite would try and take a free ride on the owner 
of the Tugaske Co-op. Mr. Speaker, I have been down that road 
at my own expense many times and I will be down that road 
again at my own expense. And my officials have been down 
that road, Mr. Speaker, and we know what needs to happen 
there. We are maintaining, we are building . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: —Mr. Speaker, I really think the 
members opposite need to take a little bit broader look at the 
highways program in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we are 

spending almost $300 million this year, 300 last. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been upgrading the highways in this 
province; we have been reducing the number of TMS (thin 
membrane surface) roads by upgrading them to a paved 
standard. They don’t have much to complain about. We know 
the roads are not perfect but we’re getting there. We’re making 
progress at a good rate. 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, last October the NDP set up a 
circus tent at Belle Plaine and announced a deal with an 
American real estate company called Broe industries to build an 
ethanol plant. It was quite a show, Mr. Speaker — school kids 
bused out, hot dogs on the barbecue, students’ artwork hung 
around the tent. The Premier even managed to climb on to a 
backhoe and dig a little dirt. Unfortunately in the eight months 
since then, the only digging on that site are gopher holes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP create a media circus in Belle 
Plaine last October to announce an ethanol deal that clearly did 
not exist? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the Sask 
Party opposite also likes digging dirt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I’ve said many times in my 
place that we would not be into construction until we had the 
deal, the best deal possible, for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, out of the Lloydminster Booster 
of May 7, 2003, Mr. Speaker, the member from Lloydminster 
agrees with us. It says here, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . Lloydminster MLA Milt Wakefield isn’t entirely 
critical of both parties (CIC and Broe) for taking their time 
in the deal. 
 
He says: 
 
“. . . when you’re talking about a project this big, there has 
got to be adequate and thorough . . . preparation done so 
that we don’t mess up. To attract ethanol in the province 
and make Saskatchewan the production leader, I still think 
is a great objective.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, you know what? There’s one member on that side 
that understands that ethanol is good for Saskatchewan and that 
we should take our time, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to that 
member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP, the NDP 
set up a circus tent and fired up the barbecue at Belle Plaine last 
October to announce an ethanol deal with Broe industries that 
senior NDP officials now admit never existed. 
 
Then last December, the minister responsible for SPUDCO 
cover-up announced that the ethanol deal was right on schedule 
for a construction start in April. But according, but according to 
CIC vice-president, Zach Douglas, the NDP didn’t get a deal 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

signed with Broe industries until February. Frank Hart, CIC 
president, also admitted the NDP didn’t even start negotiations 
with senior banks until late April and that construction would 
not begin until late June at the very earliest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would the minister tell the media in 
December that the Belle Plaine ethanol project was right on 
schedule for an April construction start when he was fully 
aware there was no deal with Broe or the banks? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for that member to 
say that negotiations with the lending institutions didn’t begin 
until April, Mr. Speaker, is just not factually correct. Mr. 
Speaker, there were negotiations, Mr. Speaker, with the banks 
beginning way back in January and before the beginning of the 
year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have said many times, and unless those 
members opposite from the Sask Party want us to start 
construction before we have the deal that we said we wanted 
which would be the best deal for the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker — Mr. Speaker, if that’s what they want, Mr. 
Speaker, then they should come out and say it —but until we 
have the best deal possible for the people of Saskatchewan, we 
are not about to begin construction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day I would 
ask for your attention and I would like to respond, or bring 
down a ruling at this time on an issue that was raised yesterday. 
 
Yesterday the issue was raised by the Deputy Government 
House Leader and responded to as well by the member for 
Rosthern regarding unparliamentary language by the member 
for Saltcoats. 
 
I have reviewed the verbatim record of the exchange yesterday 
and find that, although the words themselves do not always fall 
into the strict category of unacceptable language, the words 
taken in the complete context leave an unmistakeable 
impression that members on the other side are of doubtful 
veracity. 
 
I want to . . . Order. Order, please. Order, please. I want to take 
a few moments of the members’ time to indicate to them — to 
all members — some of the guidelines that I use in making 
judgments of this type because things are not always very 
clearly black and white. 
 
First of all, a Speaker must rely on the basic concept of 
democracy, that is freedom of speech, which is probably the 
most important thing to preserve in a legislature and to allow 
passionate debate where concept, ideas, words, and statements 
can be challenged. 
 
There are limits to how far members should be allowed or 

members themselves impose upon themselves on free speech, 
and that is anything that could be considered libellous or may 
impute bad motives such as illegalities or immorality, or being 
unethical, as well as personal attacks on the members 
themselves because the debate should be taking place on the 
issues. 
 
There are several precedents in Hansard that a Speaker can 
refer to. On page 145 I bring to members’ attention, the word 
fabricate which . . . fabricate has at times been used, stated as 
unparliamentary. On page 149 the words distorting, distort, and 
mislead, fabricate and fabrication have also been called and 
declared as being used in an unparliamentary sense. 
 
And last of all, I use in interpreting what I consider to be the 
member’s own intention, that is to uphold the honourable 
tradition of this House and a respect for the institution. 
 
It clearly has a bad effect on the House and the dignity of this 
institution is lowered when words are put, crafted in a fashion 
which impute bad motives. And it also tends to escalate 
negative emotions as opposed to bringing out the positive in 
what members have to say. 
 
Now members, when I looked specifically at the statements on 
page 1621 of Hansard, I would like first of all to bring to the 
attention that the two first statements on the right-hand column 
by the member for Saltcoats, which give good examples of how 
questions can be asked. 
 
Then, members, further on when I go to page 1622, one of the 
statements is: 
 

. . . city members in Regina — fabricate the numbers and 
distort the facts . . . 

 
Now in this . . . Order, please. In this case, what has happened 
is the member has made a rather specific allegation and it also 
— coupled with what is, with the context of some of what has 
been said before — implies bad intentions. And I feel in this 
case where the member . . . where the use of the word fabricate 
can be used in a positive sense and a creative sense in many 
ways, in here it is used in a negative sense and non-positive and 
I would ask members to avoid that. 
 
Going back to page 1621, the member for Melville uses the 
phrase: 
 

. . . there appears to be more distortion coming from the . . . 
 
From, implying the opposite side. 
 
Now in this case as well, although it is much more general than 
the second case, again it is a borderline situation. And I do want 
to caution members on that. 
 
Therefore, members, what I first would like to do, based on 
what I’ve just said, is to draw caution and ask the member for 
Melville not to use that type of statement again. With respect to 
the member for Saltcoats whose statement was perhaps more 
direct and more personal, I would ask the member for Saltcoats 
to withdraw the statement at this time. 
 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
this time I would withdraw that statement. You must remember, 
Mr. Speaker, that it was so loud in here . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I would just accept the 
member’s withdrawal. I’m fully aware of how loud it was. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions nos. 722 through 725 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 722, ’23, ’24, and 725 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Implementation of the Third Report of the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is with pleasure today that I rise to move the motion that has 
been on the order paper for some time, concerning the 
implementation of the Third Report of the Special Committee 
on Rules and Procedures. 
 
I think that it is an important step forward for this Assembly as 
we move to have a more efficient, a more democratic, a more 
inclusive, and I would say a more effective legislature, that we 
move forward with these implementations. It’s of course of 
interest to all of us who come to this legislature to work through 
a number of issues from question period, presenting of 
petitions, the legislative work that we have to do, the 
examination of estimates. 
 
It’s interesting that so much of the important work that we do 
goes without the attention of the media, of others; that there is 
so much focus in this Assembly on that half hour, that 
25-minute question period. That, Mr. Speaker, is not what I 
believe is our finest moments in this Assembly. That is not what 
draws us into politics. It’s that ability to legislate; it’s the ability 
to make substantive change that I believe attracts each of us, 
irregardless of party — regardless of party — to come to this 
Assembly and to work on behalf of the people who have elected 
us. 
 
The changes that we have been contemplating over the last 
several years in the special committee I think take an approach 
which is one of best practices from a number of commonwealth 
jurisdictions. We’ve had the opportunity to take a look at how 
Australian states function. We’ve had an opportunity to look at 
federal systems like New Zealand. We’ve had an ability to look 
at how our sister provinces utilize their system. 
 
What we have pulled from each of these is the best of practices 
that we believe can be incorporated here, and we’ve made some 
additional enhancements. Enhancements that will improve the 
way that private members’ day is dealt with, enhancements that 
will improve the ability for individual members to take more of 

a leadership role in committees, an ability for us to invite in 
citizens to have a better dialogue with each of us as legislators. 
 
I think that these changes are important. I think that they will 
help us move forward to a more progressive, more modern 
legislature, as we enter this 21st century, and indeed as we enter 
Saskatchewan’s second century. Mr. Speaker, I won’t take a 
great deal of time today to highlight again the detailed changes, 
the members are familiar with them. 
 
(11:00) 
 
There has been of course some debate as to when we should 
implement these rules. It was certainly the wish of the NDP 
government, the NDP caucus, that we proceed with these 
immediately so they could have been in place for this legislative 
session. Through discussions with other members in this 
Assembly, we had decided and agreed to defer that. Personally, 
I wish we had had these in place. I think that this would have 
been an opportune time for us to do this. We have a large 
number of members with a good experience on both sides of 
this House who I think could have helped us bring this into 
place. That was not the view. It was our approach instead to be 
more conciliatory, to work with the opposition — not to jam 
them on this and force it in at this time. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, it is our view that the time has come 
for us to bring these changes into place and we believe that they 
should be brought into effect at the start of the next session of 
the Legislative Assembly. I understand that there is some 
debate among members in this House who would argue that 
perhaps this should be delayed and not come into effect until 
the first day after the next election. While that would have the 
impact and have the effect of allowing members who would be 
appointed as committee Chairs to be put on payroll for their 
duties, while it would allow the committees to start on special 
investigations and those kind of matters, it doesn’t deal with 
what I believe are two of the central issues that need . . . that 
really brought about the reasons for these changes. 
 
The first of those was to allow citizens to have more direct say 
and more direct participation with legislators in the legislative 
function that we have. That was a primary reason for us making 
this change — to change the way Committee of the Whole 
functions, to change the way the estimates function, to allow 
greater citizen contact with each of us as we review these 
matters. 
 
The second change that that delay would cause, if we waited 
until after the next election, is it presupposes that there would 
not be another session before the next election. Given the types 
of issues that we’re dealing with today, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that is presumptuous. We may well need to come back this fall. 
We may well need to come back next spring. No one can tell 
when the election is going to be because the legislative mandate 
is not up for at least another year. 
 
I think we want to make sure that if the legislature does 
reconvene that we will in fact be in a position to implement this 
new process. I say that not to be critical of members opposite. I 
do believe that we have reached a unanimous agreement in 
terms of the nature, the substance of the changes that need to 
become . . . come into effect. It’s just our view that we should 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

move forward with these now. We’ve been patient and we have 
waited for this legislative session despite the fact it was our 
interest to bring it in, despite the fact the NDP caucus has been 
working on this since 1999. And I believe that the time for 
waiting is done. 
 
So as such, Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Deputy 
Government House Leader, the member from Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That the practices and rules recommended by the Third 
Report of the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures, 
as were adopted by the Legislative Assembly on April 3, 
2003, be implemented and brought into force effective the 
first sitting day of the next session of the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my pleasure to briefly enter into debate and in support of the 
motion moved by the hon. minister for public corrections and 
safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to make some similar points and add to 
the comments made by the minister in support of this motion 
and put into context its place in the relevance of democratic 
reform. 
 
As we look across not only the country, Mr. Speaker, we will 
see, for example, within the legislatures across Canada different 
kinds of expressions as to ways committees are used, question 
period is scheduled, and so on. And we are oftentimes thought 
to believe when we look only to our own borders that the 
practice of democracy is everywhere what it exists here and, 
clearly, that’s not true. 
 
And even more so when we look beyond the borders of Canada, 
we will recognize that the practice of democracy has forms that 
are significantly, in many ways dramatically different from the 
way that we practice democracy here in Canada; here in 
Saskatchewan we practice the conduct of our legislatures. And 
just a case in point we’ll see dramatically different ways of even 
conducting elections, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Are any of those less legitimate than ours here in 
Saskatchewan? The answer is, no. And why is that? Because, 
Mr. Speaker, it is a characteristic of democracy well practiced 
that it represents the sense of engagement and a sense of 
relevance for the people of that jurisdiction. 
 
And it would seem to me then that as we look at improving the 
operations of our legislature, that the standard that we should 
ought to use is the degree to which our practice better engages 
and provides that sense of meaningful relevance by the people 
of Saskatchewan in doing what we do here. 
 
And it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, and I think it has been 
universally adopted by this House, that the rules that have come 
from the Rules Committee after several years — actually it’s 
not just a few months, but several years — of considered 
deliberation by members of all parties and on both sides of the 
House, that we have defined some directions for moving 
forward to make the operations more meaningful to the people 
of Saskatchewan, mainly in three ways, Mr. Speaker, that strike 

me as being an improvement. 
 
First of all — and I think perhaps I put this number one because 
I think it is number one; it’s the most relevant — is that it will 
provide, the new rules will provide for an increased level of 
public input on the legislative agendas being considered by this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. What the rules will enable the people 
of Saskatchewan to do is to have input in the committee 
consideration of legislation and ensure that when we then come 
to the third reading of legislation, that it is with the benefit not 
only of the consultations that are typically done of government 
— because it is always clearly part of the practice of 
government in bringing legislation that those who have vested 
interest are consulted with — but it also enables those who have 
a vested interest in legislation to come in the public forum, not 
only to a committee of the legislature but, Mr. Speaker, as part 
of this amendment as well to our rules, over the public air, 
televised over the public air, to demonstrate their support or 
their concerns related to proposed legislation. 
 
And it would seem to me then that that is the single most 
outstanding characteristic of the changes is that the . . . it moves 
from a process, once legislation is introduced in this House, 
instead of it making solely the purview of this House to have 
input then from that point forward in terms of expressing it, to 
enable the people of Saskatchewan to do that. And I think we 
all think that that makes sense. 
 
I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that because of the rule 
changes, it will enable work to be done intersessionally and so 
it will not limit the public input or the consultations or 
deliberations related to legislation to the period of time from the 
moment that the House is called into session until there is 
adjournment at the end. So it enables that work to be done 12 
months a year instead of what has been the Saskatchewan 
practice, some four or five months of the year. 
 
So first of all, Mr. Speaker, greater public input. 
 
Secondly, what it does is provide a greater opportunity for the 
input of private members, and private members on both sides of 
the House, in the development and the scrutiny — but both — 
scrutiny which is permitted now but an increased opportunity 
for input for the development of policy in the public agenda, 
some of which may be legislation related, some of which may 
not. It may be more budgetary related leading to ultimate 
decisions and conclusions by this Assembly. 
 
And I think it would be the view of the people of Saskatchewan 
that they would like to see their member who is sent to 
represent them, not only specifically from the constituency but 
also for interests of Saskatchewan, to have a greater opportunity 
for influence of the public agenda as is decided in this House. 
And so the committee structures and the new freedoms of 
ability to scrutinize and to explore policy agenda will enable a 
greater role for the private members on both sides of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think that is a step forward and is seen by 
the people of Saskatchewan as better connecting them to their 
legislative process. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, what will come about as a result of 
these changes is an increased coverage, television coverage of 
the deliberations in committee including, Mr. Speaker, 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

 

television coverage of what is currently taking place, not 
televised, in what is now known as the Crown Corporations 
Committee and the Public Accounts Committee. I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that will be included and also then the potential for 
people to see scrutiny of deliberations, including 
intersessionally. 
 
So what there . . . It enables for people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, to see their legislators at work in the development 
stage at times. And it surely is a principle of connection 
between the public and this Chamber that the signal is sent so 
that . . . People don’t have to watch. Sometimes we quite 
recognize the ratings aren’t all that high, but sometimes they are 
as well. Some of the . . . One of the hon. members opposite just 
finds that hard to believe, that sometimes they’re not all that 
high. But we have to admit that. 
 
But the thing that we would all want, we would all want as a 
matter of principle, Mr. Speaker, is that in a free and democratic 
society, that ultimately in this system in which we have 
replaced is a very decent structure for making choices about the 
laws that affect people’s lives. 
 
We have chosen in our nation and in our province a tradition 
where we have, we have replaced the traditional battle with the 
bullet, with a battle for the ballot. I mean, over the course of 
history, Mr. Speaker, the large majority of governments have 
been selected not by democratic process, but by military might 
over the course of history. And surely in a democracy, what you 
would want is that when ultimately people exercise their most 
important franchise, the ability to cast a ballot, that they would 
do that with the full information of the issues and the positions 
of those who are engaged in that and the political parties that 
make up the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And so therefore, extending the opportunity — people can 
choose to turn it on or turn it off — but the opportunity to 
scrutinize, themselves, not through the reports of the media, but 
themselves, to scrutinize the workings of the members, I think 
also enhances the connection of the people of Saskatchewan to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So I summarize, Mr. Speaker: the greater opportunity for direct 
input in committee deliberations; secondly, the enhanced role 
for private members; and thirdly, the increased coverage of 
committee deliberations that are available to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I think, Mr. Speaker, these are sound principles 
that help to connect the process of democracy to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and the time to go is now. 
 
As the hon. minister has said, their deliberations have taken 
place over some three or four years. It was not my privilege to 
be a part of the committee for all of that period of time but I 
think it’s been good work that’s been done. 
 
The time to proceed is soon. And although there had been some 
consideration to in fact implement right in the session that we 
are in now, having ruled out the practicality of that, clearly the 
next time that this legislature is called into session is the most 
appropriate time for us to begin to get on with this, making a 
greater connection between the people of Saskatchewan and the 
legislative process. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s for that reason that I support the motion 
that’s before the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to stand and rise finally to address this particular issue. We have 
been waiting for a long time to come to the point where the new 
rules would have an opportunity to be implemented in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This has been a long process to arrive at this point, a long and 
sometimes strenuous ordeal, Mr. Speaker, and this is another 
step along the road. It will be an excellent day for the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan when we reach the point 
that we’re actually having the new rules in place; when the first 
day in session that we have those new rules in place, I think, is 
something for the people and the legislators of Saskatchewan to 
look forward to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we need to take a little look at the history 
of this entire development. I heard the member from Regina 
South comment that the NDP caucus has been working on this 
from 1999. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be proper and 
accurate to say that both caucuses have been working on this 
since 1999. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I recollect talking to the then 
House leader, Mr. Lingenfelter, in the session that we had in the 
fall of 1999 to actually set up the committee, Mr. Speaker. And 
so the accurate statement I believe would be that both caucuses 
have been working on this since 1999, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(11:15) 
 
And at that time it was agreed that there would be two themes 
to our initial steps on the rule changes, and that those two 
themes would be community structure and private members’ 
day, Mr. Speaker. And that other rule changes that were 
necessary would be dealt with subject to the changes that were 
taking place on committee and on private members’ day, that 
other changes would be looked at later. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those rules were looked at dealing with 
private members’ days, with committee work, throughout the 
winter and year of 2000, Mr. Speaker, with a report culminating 
for presentation to the Assembly in the year 2001, Mr. Speaker. 
 
From that point on, there was a little refining to do, cleaning up 
the words, getting it written up, Mr. Speaker, in a form that was 
usable for the legislature so that the rules were actually written 
in the forms that we’re normally used to in this House, put in 
. . . so that they could be inserted into our rule book. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that was done in the year 2000 and throughout the year 
2001. 
 
The rules were actually in place, Mr. Speaker, and available to 
us had we desired to implement them for the 2002 session. 
However, Mr. Speaker, that didn’t happen. 
 
The member from Regina South says that the opposition at this 
time was reluctant in this session to bring those rules forward 
and implement them during this session, and he’s right. We 
were reluctant because we could have had those rules in place 
in 2002, Mr. Speaker. 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

And what the whole rule structure part of is dealing with, as the 
member from Moose Jaw spoke, about public input, about the 
public being able to see what the legislators were doing and to 
participate in that. To accomplish that we need to put in place 
what the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow was talking 
about, the television system, the voice — Moose Jaw North, 
sorry; I was moving him a constituency over, Mr. Speaker — 
the ability to record for Hansard, for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and to broadcast through television. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the time that the rules were . . . the second 
report of the committee was presented, the opportunity was 
there to put in place those facilities that were needed to provide 
provision for the broadcasting of the proceedings, both of the 
legislature and of the committees, Mr. Speaker. But 
unfortunately that didn’t happen. The government members on 
the Board of Internal Economy did not agree to provide the 
funding necessary to carry that out. 
 
In 2003, Mr. Speaker, the government members came into the 
House and wanted to implement the new rule changes a couple 
of weeks into the system, into the current session. But again, 
Mr. Speaker, the proper procedures were not in place. The 
proper facilities were not in place to accomplish what these new 
rules were designed to do. So that’s the reason, Mr. Speaker, 
why the opposition was reluctant to have these rules come into 
play midway through this session. The procedures and the 
facilities had not been put in place yet by the government to 
accomplish those changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Board of Internal Economy has now approved 
the monies to put in place the proper broadcasting facilities, the 
proper recording facilities, and the proper facilities to allow 
public participation in the committee hearings. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, those things will be worked on once session is out of 
here, throughout the summer, and will be available to us at a 
reasonable point in time in the near future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the member from Regina South said, there 
is no guarantee as to when the next election will be. What the 
member’s motion calls for is that these rules come into place at 
the beginning of the next session. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, that 
is a good time to start — if there is no election. 
 
One of the provisions that’s in place in these rules, Mr. Speaker, 
allows for this new committee structure to begin its work — 
whether it’s this election, the next provincial election, or the 
provincial election after that — for these committees to start 
their work as soon as the writ period is over, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The House Services Committee has been given the authority, 
Mr. Speaker, to convene and appoint members of the other 
standing committees, which in turn can then commence their 
work, whatever that may be. That may be reviewing legislation. 
That may be reviewing regulations. That may be reviewing the 
appropriate Crowns and other government agencies that have 
been assigned to that standing committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the rules of the new procedures envision having in place, 
Mr. Speaker, after a writ period, provincial writ period, the 
abilities of the new committees to commence their work. And I 
believe that would be appropriate for the new rules to start, Mr. 
Speaker, either at the beginning of the next session, the first 

day, or, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the next provincial writ 
period as the rules envision happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is not a change to what the new rules see; this is actually 
the implementation of the new rules, Mr. Speaker, that these 
things will happen at every time after a provincial election, after 
the writ period for that provincial election, that the new rules 
allow the committee structure to be implemented, put in place, 
and commence to carry on their duties. 
 
So when the member from Regina Albert South says that he 
does not agree with that kind of an implementation, that it 
should only happen at the beginning of the next session, which 
may or may not be after an election, Mr. Speaker, I disagree 
with that. 
 
The rules that are in place, the new rules that we have all 
accepted in this legislature foresee those rules being 
implemented after any provincial election, even though they 
may have been in place prior to that provincial election as well; 
that those committees have the ability to start their work after a 
provincial election. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to the 
motion. And that amendment would read: 
 

By adding the following words after the words, “next 
session of the Legislative Assembly”: 

 
And I quote: 

 
or immediately after the next provincial election writ 
period, whichever occurs first. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few minutes 
here to comment on the motion, or the amendment put forward 
by the house . . . the Opposition House Leader regarding 
implementation. 
 
I don’t think there is much use going on about the rule changes. 
I think we’ve been through that and we’ve talked about the rule 
changes and the need for rule changes and the opening it up to 
the public. I guess the last little piece of business is really when 
they are implemented. 
 
And certainly there has been lots of work, both sides, back and 
forth, and lots of agreement. There has certainly been, as I’ve 
sat through the committee hearings and committee meetings 
regarding the rule changes, there have been lots of agreement 
and there has been a little bit of give and take on both sides. 
 
But I do . . . would say that this amendment does make a lot of 
sense. That the committee structure could be implemented 
immediately after the next writ period which may be, quick 
frankly, six, seven months before the next legislative session. 
And there is no reason why those committees, because of the 
new rule changes, could not be doing their work leading up to 
the next legislative session. 
 
And I think that’s the whole point of these rule changes is to 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

 

allow more time for some of this work to be done, to allow 
more accessibility to the public to watch the legislators do their 
work, and that’s exactly what this amendment — be it a 
friendly amendment — talks about is allowing the committee 
structure to be implemented prior to the next legislative session 
but post-writ period. 
 
And in the motion moved by the government members it 
doesn’t allow for that. It allows for only the structure being 
started whence the legislative session starts. And I think that 
was one of the hesitations, quite frankly, when before this 
session that we are in right now started was the fact that they 
wanted to push it in and we wanted to try and get all this 
operating as we are sitting in the House here. And I think it 
would be just so much more functional. I think it would be 
seamless if we started after the next writ period, prior to the 
next legislative session. Personally I think the amendment 
makes a lot of sense. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Motion agreed to nemine contradicente. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, after my . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
get two applauses for the price of one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after my comments I’ll be moving second reading 
of The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003. 
These amendments, Mr. Speaker, are intended to assist 
Saskatchewan in negotiating a timely resolution with the 
softwood lumber trade dispute with the United States. 
 
As all of us in this House should be aware, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan’s forest industry plays a crucial and critical role 
in the economic well-being of our province. The production of 
softwood lumber is a large piece of that industry, each year 
producing almost 415 million board feet valued at nearly $150 
million. Most of that is exported, Mr. Speaker, with the 
majority of the exports bound for markets in the US (United 
States). 
 
(11:30) 
 
Saskatchewan lumber producers are certainly feeling the effects 
of the US tariffs. Here in Saskatchewan where we have one of 
the most modern and most efficient forestry industries in the 
country, we’ve seen temporary mill shutdowns and layoffs — 
some mills slowing down their production, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What our industry needs and what we’re all seeking is a timely 
and lasting resolution to this situation. We continue to work 

with the provinces and the federal government to pursue all of 
our options including negotiations and legal redress under 
NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement). And this, 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do. 
 
However, history has shown us that simply winning legal 
challenges — which Canada has consistently done on this issue 
— does not result in a lasting solution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the next few weeks we may have an opportunity to come to a 
made-in-Saskatchewan agreement with the US by submitting a 
changed circumstance application based on our previous 
discussions with the Americans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments now before us will improve 
Saskatchewan’s position by providing our forestry industry with 
the flexibility to adapt to changing markets. This is 
accomplished without compromising in any way our 
fundamental principles of sustainable forest management and 
public ownership of the Crown forest resources. 
 
Under these amendments, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan forest 
companies would be allowed to sell their harvesting rights to 
another forestry company provided there are no concerns about 
the new licensee’s ability to sustainably manage the forest or to 
meet licence obligations. The amendments would also allow 
companies to respond to poor market conditions by harvesting 
less than their allowable level without fear of permanently 
losing these harvesting rights. 
 
These changes, Mr. Speaker, will enhance Saskatchewan’s 
position with respect to negotiating access to US markets for 
our lumber industry. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are entitled to be 
assured of receiving a fair return for the harvest of Crown 
timber. Towards this, these amendments also provide for the 
setting of harvesting fees that cover the province’s cost of forest 
management plus a reasonable rate of return. Provincial cost to 
be incorporated and a minimum stumpage charge will be 
verified by an independent third party, ensuring transparency. 
 
These amendments will allow the option of competitive sales 
for new forest management agreements for surplus timber left 
unharvested by licensees and for a portion of the saw logs 
harvested by each licensee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this allows us to determine the maximum price 
that harvesters are willing to pay for the Crown forest resources. 
As well, these amendments provide for the development of a 
timber pricing system that is more market based and such a 
system will provide a more complete, current, and transparent 
comparison of the market value of lumber and what it costs to 
produce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments in no way diminish our ability 
to be responsible stewards of our Crown forest resource. They 
in no way diminish our ability to ensure that Crown forest lands 
are sustainably managed. 
 
What the amendments before us will do is give us the flexibility 
to negotiate effectively with the Americans and work towards a 
speedy resolution to the softwood lumber dispute. 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

These amendments will not take effect until cabinet is sure that 
all the elements of a sound agreement are in place. The details 
of the system that set dues as well as the details of timber sales 
under special circumstances will be set out through regulation 
when talks with the Americans have progressed to that point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan forest industry has been 
consulted and is in support of this approach. Our lumber 
industry is being hurt not only by the punishing duties imposed 
by the Americans, but by the rising Canadian dollar and the low 
lumber prices. 
 
The Council of Saskatchewan Forest Industries has written a 
letter expressing its support for the government taking all 
reasonable steps to resolve the tariff issue quickly, Mr. Speaker. 
They support these proposed amendments in particular and will 
continue working very closely with our industry as the details 
of around the changed circumstance application are being 
worked out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments I’ve talked about today will 
enable the government to negotiate effectively with the 
Americans to regain our lumber industry’s access to their most 
important market. These amendments also ensure that the 
government continues to have the ability to protect and to 
manage the province’s important forest resources for the benefit 
of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker. I now move the second reading of The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this particular Bill has, I believe, the opportunity to make 
significant changes in the forest industry as it’s changing the 
way in which government receives its monies, its royalties, 
from the forest industry. 
 
The minister is talking about dues. Is that different, Mr. 
Speaker, from stumpage? Is that a change from stumpage to 
dues, is that in addition to the stumpage fees that have been in 
place, Mr. Speaker, is one of the questions that I think needs to 
be answered. And the minister didn’t provide that in his 
commentary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the issues I believe that is significant in this 
particular piece of legislation is that it’s moving us away from a 
more or less homogeneous forest operation across the country 
and it looks like we’re going to be heading towards a very 
piecemeal operation, something different, some different 
agreements and arrangements with our customers outside of the 
country on how charges are made to the industry for their 
resources — Mr. Speaker, the resources that they’re harvesting 
— on how government receives its money. 
 
We’re going to end up with a patchwork quilt. And if we’re not 
very, very careful, Mr. Speaker, we could very well end up in a 
situation where the provinces are competing against each other 
to see who can give their resources away. The minister is 
talking about trying to maximize the return by seeing how much 
the forest industry, the operators in the forest industry are 
prepared to pay in dues. Well what is going to likely happen, 

Mr. Speaker, is that in negotiations with the Americans, each 
different province, it’s going to be a contest to see — for the 
Americans — to see who they can drive down the furthest in 
price by increasing the fees to the forest industry in each 
province. 
 
So that the forest industry in each province pays a higher and 
higher fee so that it makes the American high-cost lumber more 
competitive with our Canadian supply, and so to freeze them 
out of the market. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that we will end up 
in a position of trying to compete with the other softwood 
producers across this country to see who can get their prices up 
the highest based on their negotiations with the Americans, 
which at the end of the day will diminish the amount of lumber 
that we will be supplying. And that’s what their whole object is 
about, Mr. Speaker, is diminishing the amount of lumber that 
we ship out of this country. 
 
And I think we need to be very, very careful in those 
negotiations. Mr. Speaker, we’re probably better off negotiating 
from a national point of view. And I don’t necessarily mean the 
national government because they certainly do not understand 
any of the issues that happen outside of virtually the capital of 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. So I think we need to be very, very 
careful when we get into a situation of trying to negotiate 
piecemeal on an issue that’s affecting all of us nationally, Mr. 
Speaker, that we don’t simply get picked off one at a time to 
our own disadvantage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that there needs to be some serious discussion with the 
industry itself to determine whether or not this particular piece 
of legislation serves the best interest of the industry, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as serving the best interests of the province, 
because a weakened forest industry, Mr. Speaker, does not help 
us grow Saskatchewan. That is where we need to be 
concentrating and how does our resources in the forest areas 
maximize our potential, Mr. Speaker, not diminish our 
potential. 
 
And I have great fear that any rules we put in place that allows 
for us to be picked off one at a time diminishes our 
opportunities, does not enhance them, Mr. Speaker. Therefore I 
would move . . . To give us a chance to consult with the 
industry, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — And I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you and the committee members here today, to my 
left, Mr. Keith Comstock, who is the policy manager for 
Government Relations. Also with me here today is Ken Kolb, 
who is a senior analyst; Rod Nasewich, who is also a senior 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

 

analyst; and Noela Bamford, who is a senior analyst. And as 
well we have with us Mr. Doug Morcom, who is a director of 
grants administration with Government Relations. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to 
your officials, Mr. Minister. Considering our past record the last 
couple of days I know we’ll be very careful in our choice of 
words today, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess with The Cities Act, the amendments to 
The Cities Act, maybe the first question I have is, being that 
The Cities Act was only brought in a year ago could you maybe 
go . . . give us some explanation of why this number — it’s 
fairly extensive — amendments to a Bill that was just brought 
in. Could you maybe give us an overall explanation of why we 
needed this many changes this quick? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll be happy to, and I’ll be 
careful of my choice of words. The amendments to The Cities 
Act primarily addresses requests from the cities for some 
further clarification and refinement, or to restore certain 
wording and provisions from The Urban Municipality Act, 
1984 that were not continued in The Cities Act. So it’s cleaning 
. . . doing some cleanup work. 
 
As is almost always a case with a new Act, as city 
administrations set about implementing new provisions of the 
Act, various issues, questions, and gaps have arisen. And 
government has proposed amendments to solve these problems 
and in the process enhance the implementation of the new Act. 
 
(11:45) 
 
So Government Relations officials have undertaken extensive 
consultations with the cities to identify the provisions that 
needed amending and to develop suitable wording. So 
Government Relations is working with the cities to develop an 
ongoing process for dealing with future amendments which 
may in fact be found necessary. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just a few more 
questions on the Bill. I believe the cities are very happy with 
what is happening here. I don’t think they have a problem with 
that. 
 
Just some, maybe some explanations, Mr. Minister, the first one 
to do with the change in the phase-in period. I believe we’re 
going to four years, which to me seems to make sense. We’re 
going to fit more with our reassessment times. The only 
question I may have is there communities out there that are 
actually in the process of the six-year phase-in and how will this 
affect them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Briefly, Mr. Chairman, there are none at 
this point. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Another 
question I have, and I’m a little bit more familiar with this one, 
the sales verification form that SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency) is trying to put together and 
work on, could you maybe give us, elaborate a little bit on just 
what the purpose this is supposed to serve and just how that is 
going to work? 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the sales verification form 
is principally for database and valuation purposes and will aid 
in determining which sales should be used for the calculation of 
market adjustment factors. The data will help keep the 
assessment system up to date, fair, and equitable since accurate 
information on arm’s-length sales of property is in fact an 
essential requirement for property tax assessment. 
 
So the assessing authorities require the sales verification form 
as soon as possible in order to obtain data that may be essential 
for the use of new assessment methods, such as sales 
comparisons and income based approaches. So some of these 
approaches require several years of stable data in order to be 
properly utilized and this will assist them in being able to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess where I 
might have some concern with this depending on how SAMA 
functions with these values, that they find out very quickly after 
a sale has been made. But possibly in the smaller communities, 
even in RMs for that matter where there’s not many sales 
happening, and I know we saw that in the . . . I think it was the 
’95 reassessment where a lot of problems were caused in a 
community where one house, say, for an example, would sell 
possibly at a very exorbitant price. 
 
And I can see this happening with even a quarter of land out 
there. If one neighbour really wanted to get his hands on a 
quarter of land, sometimes they will pay an atrocious price — 
let’s put it that way — what may be more sometimes closer to 
double the actual real value. 
 
And I guess my concern would be . . . And I know in my own 
hometown of Saltcoats and I know there was others that the 
officials will remember had problems with things like this, is 
where if a house is valued very high and yet the sales 
verification comes in saying this house sold for $120,000 and 
yet realistically that house if it was worth 70,000 on the market 
would be probably far closer to the real actual value. 
 
So I’m kind of wondering how SAMA intends to deal with this. 
And I would hope they would take into consideration that if 
there is a number of these sale verifications and the trend is 
there, I don’t think we have a problem. But I think where 
there’s very few or maybe only one that they’re going to go by, 
I would hope that we would take that into consideration. 
 
Could you respond to that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member raises a 
valid point on this issue and concern. And I am told that we can 
be assured that SAMA will take into consideration those types 
of situations, where if there is insufficient valid data then it will 
be determined in another fashion. 
 
So there will be the effort to ensure a fair assessment based on 
the information that’s obtained and on the overall basis of 
what’s been happening in a particular community. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Glad to hear that 
because I think we could have problems for a number of years 
if we took one value and stuck to that and then said that this is 
actually what sold, we can’t help it, that’s what we’re going by. 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

And I think sometimes we need a little common sense with 
some of this stuff. It goes a long way. 
 
Next question, Mr. Minister. Maybe with respect to the 
simplified appeals process, could you just give us an overall 
view of why this was asked for? Or was it asked for? And what 
you’re actually doing here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, for the member, we’re not 
making those changes in this Act. It’s for the purpose of the 
other Acts that we will be discussing. It’s not within The Cities 
Act. We relate it to the other Acts that we’ve been amending, to 
allow them. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe at 
this time all parties concerned here seem to be satisfied with the 
changes that are in these amendments. So that’s all the 
questions we have, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, members. There seems to . . . there’s 
quite a few clauses to this Bill. Is leave granted to deal with it 
by page? Would that be agreed? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 74 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Chair: — I see that the minister does not have any new 
officials, so unless he wants to make a brief statement, we’ll 
proceed. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I want 
to thank you for the heads-up on the amendment to this Bill. 
Would you possibly just give us an overall view of the concerns 
that SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
had? I believe I understand them, but give us the overall view of 
the concerns SARM had and how you’ve dealt with them in the 
amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank 
the member. During our most recent consultations with SARM 
on the proposed changes, there was a concern that was raised 
about a possible misinterpretation that could be made as a result 
of how the amendment was written . . . or amendments were 
written. 
 
The House amendment is being used to clarify the intent of the 
provisions in the Bill and to hence avoid any interpretation. I 
should also add that SARM is in favour, as the member may be 
aware, and was consulted on the particular wording of that 
particular amendment. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Some of the 
questions I have on this Bill actually I think have been 

answered, that we talked about previously, with the sales 
verification form. I think that also applies to rural land, the 
phase-in period and things like that. 
 
And I think at this point interested parties again seem to be 
satisfied now that that House amendment has been brought in. 
So I think that satisfies our questioning on this Bill, Mr. Chair. 
Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I move the following 
amendment to this Bill: 

 
“Section 189 amended 

7 The following subsection is added after subsection 
189(3): 

 
‘(4) If a rural municipality does not pass a bylaw 
pursuant to section 188.1, the rural municipality may 
adopt a policy respecting the issuance of permits 
pursuant to this section that, among other matters, 
takes into consideration: 

 
(a) facilitating the movement of vehicles, goods, 
and other commodities between the rural 
municipality and adjacent rural municipalities, 
urban municipalities, cities and northern 
municipalities; and 
 
(b) if an adjacent rural municipality has designated 
routes in a bylaw passed pursuant to section 188.1, 
harmonizing the routes in the rural municipality 
with those designated routes in a manner that 
facilitates the movement of vehicles, goods, and 
other commodities between the rural municipality 
and adjacent rural municipalities, urban 
municipalities, cities and northern municipalities’ ”. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Chair: — Will the members take the amendment as read? 
Okay. Thank you, members. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — And I see that the minister does not have any 
new officials. 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

 

(12:00) 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. If the minister can . . . 
Prior to us going into the particulars of Bill 41, can the minister 
speak a little bit about the background of the Bill, the interested 
parties that were involved in requesting this amendment to the 
urban municipal Act, some of the reasoning of the 
amendments? We understand that some of it pertains to The 
Cities Act which is understandable why that need was there. 
But there’s other changes in . . . you know, it’s pertaining to the 
urban Act as well in that regard. 
 
So if the minister can speak to that to some degree to give us a 
bit of a background of where the Bill is coming from and why 
some of these other changes are needed at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the 
member, yes, I’d be happy to. The 2003 amendments have two 
primary functions. The first group of changes will provide 
greater flexibility for the urban municipalities to deal with 
governance and election issues related to council sizes, 
establishing ward boundaries and ward systems, election 
schemes, and the naming of new or restructured municipalities. 
 
With the passage of The Cities Act, government is afforded the 
opportunity to update and adapt these provisions to meet the 
current and future needs of towns, villages, and resort villages. 
 
In addition, over the past number of months the department has 
been working with the resort villages in Katepwa Lake region 
that have developed a plan to consolidate. The amendments will 
facilitate that process and could enable other locally driven 
consolidation efforts in the future. 
 
So, and the second . . . That was the first set of amendments. 
The second group of amendments relate to property assessment 
and include provisions for a simplified appeal process as 
introduced last spring in The Cities Act. 
 
And in addition, amendments will shorten the maximum period 
over which changes to property taxes resulting from a 
revaluation may be phased in from six years to four years. This 
will then match the four-year reassessment cycle. 
 
Other amendments will ensure that notification of property 
sales by owners and vendors is provided in accordance with the 
sales verification form being developed by the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Also, Mr. Minister, 
we’re seeing that this Bill is repealing some unproclaimed 
provisions that we’ve had in previous years Bills. Can the 
minister give us, I guess, an indication, or give us I guess the 
amount of previous Bills that have proclamations that were 
never made, that are still sitting there, and why are we starting 
to repeal some of those unproclaimed Bills, and how that is 
going to affect the urban Act in a sense of I guess its new 
structure that we’re looking to develop within that Act as well, 
with the flexibility and the usability of the Act for the 
municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, the 
unproclaimed amendments relate to a number of matters such as 

the definition of person, and prescribed dates, and other matters 
related to assessment and taxation, such as the sales verification 
form. 
 
Now they were not proclaimed as a result of lack of stakeholder 
consensus or because on further review were considered 
unnecessary. In some cases amendments were enacted in 
subsequent years that better addressed the issue at hand or that 
achieved stakeholder consensus, such as those regarding the 
sales verification form that are contained in this year’s 
amendment packages. 
 
So those that were not proclaimed would not have any affect. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess then what 
we’re hearing is that parts of the Bills or the amendments that 
were issued and were not proclaimed are areas that are not of 
need at this time; that the changes that you are making to The 
Cities Act, per se, and to the amendments that you’re proposing 
at this time through Bill 41, those Bills that are unproclaimed 
are Bills that right now don’t have value in the sense of giving 
us a better Act to function under, giving us the flexibility that 
maybe some of those sections were going to give us, that we’re 
making those changes in a different form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the member is correct in 
his assessment, that those amendments are either redundant or 
serve no useful purpose. 
 
And again I just want to re-emphasize and assure the member 
that before any changes are made there is extensive consultation 
in order to ensure that the dialogue with our stakeholders is 
such that they are changes to Bills that will benefit, will . . . 
And again, as we’re moving towards allowing local 
governments more autonomy to handle their own governance 
matters. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just wanting 
to go into Bill 41, the new section 6, and it’s 6(6) I guess that I 
would like to refer to: 
 

A council may, by bylaw, provide . . . (the) elections of . . . 
(a) members of (the) council of . . . (an) urban municipality 
are to be held in accordance with: 

 
And you speak, within this Bill, you speak as (a) that it pertains 
to The Local Government Election Act and then you go to 
section (b) where it speaks to The Rural Municipality Act. 
 
Is the understanding here that the urban municipalities have the 
choice now to use either one of those Acts and pass bylaw in 
the sense of the ability of how they’re going to run their 
election, the amount of council they’re going to have election 
. . . on the election? As well, is there a choice now that you’re 
giving the municipalities between those two Acts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, once again the member’s 
assessment is correct. It’s allowed them that opportunity, and 
one of the reasons being is to allow for consideration of 
restructuring. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then is the . . . 
The question then is, is it all municipalities, urban 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

municipalities, or are you restricting that to only a sector of the 
municipalities as per se the resort villages or villages or towns? 
Or are all municipalities under the urban Act able to have the 
choice of choosing between these two different forms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it would be all. And once 
again, primarily so it opens the door and allows consideration 
by those communities to restructure and move in that direction 
if they so wish. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now the 
differences between those two Acts is that the urban Act, 
running their elections now through their local government 
election Act, is a three-year term. And if you go through the 
rural Act, it’s a two-year term. They have elections every year 
and it’s a rotating system that they go through. 
 
Now you’re going to have urban municipalities that you’re 
going to have some municipalities that are going to be on a 
three-year term and you’re going to have some municipalities 
who are going to be on a two-year term. So there won’t be any 
consistency in the sense of the terms of your office that you’re 
going to be holding for the mayor or for council. 
 
Does the minister see that that’s going to cause any kind of a 
concern? Or is there going to be any problems in the sense of 
representation that you have? 
 
Once they make this choice to either follow under one Act or 
the other Act, are they required to stay under that decision that 
they’ve made and that bylaw that they’ve passed? You can 
always repeal bylaws; we understand that. But what is the sense 
of, I guess having some consistency within the urban structure 
that you have the differences now in the terms that these 
councils can be sitting as? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, from the 
way it’s described there may very well be inconsistencies; 
however, the important thing is that it is still the decision of the 
local councils, the local government, to determine which they 
might choose. So it allows them that autonomy. 
 
And despite the fact that, as the member mentions, it may create 
inconsistencies it is still a local decision. It has to be, has to go 
through at least one general election. And it’s up to those local 
governments to enact the bylaws and rescind them or change 
them however they see fit. But it allows them more flexibility 
and autonomy to, as I mentioned, restructure — as earlier I 
mentioned the resort village of Katepwa Beach. 
 
So it’s to accommodate what the local governments feel would 
best serve their individual purposes. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Once again thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess 
then we need to ask, you know in the sense of how much time 
you spent with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and the executive of SUMA speaking to this, you 
know this fact that there’s going to be that amount of flexibility 
built into this amendment? 
 
Discussion that I’ve had with the executive — or part of the 
executive, not all of the executive — is that their understanding 
was that this was only going to pertain to Katepwa and maybe 

that pilot project that’s going to happen there with the 
amalgamation of Katepwa; that this wasn’t going to be a 
provision given to all the municipalities within the urban Act as 
well, towns, villages, as well as resort villages. This was just a 
provision made for that particular situation. 
 
And I guess the question is, has the minister had enough 
discussion with SUMA that they are under the full 
understanding that this is going to give them that type of 
flexibility for the municipalities to be functioning under? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, I’m told 
that the SUMA board chooses not to meet with officials but 
prefer to have their staff determine what proposed legislation is 
being implemented. And there was acceptance to the type of 
legislation being proposed by our officials in the amendments to 
this Act. So they chose to be receptive to that. 
 
And if in fact Katepwa Beach . . . the situation there very 
definitely this applies to. But with the intent perhaps of others 
that may wish to come forward, it allows them to do so. So 
there is consultation and it is not — I want to assure the 
member — it’s not an imposition by Government Relations of 
any type of legislation that might hinder and/or be offensive to 
the administration of any our stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I think, you 
know, with that explanation we maybe need to spend some 
more time with SUMA to get an understanding or feeling from 
them because the last discussion I’ve had with some of their 
executive, this wasn’t their understanding that this was a 
provision given to all municipalities that are under the 
jurisdiction of the urban Act. 
 
So I think we need to have some further discussion with them to 
get their understanding and appreciation of what is going to 
happen here, because I think some of the discussion we’ve had 
was that, just for an example, if we have some of the SUMA 
executive that were sitting there on a two-year term, that could 
be lost within the three-year term of the other municipalities 
that are sitting there as well. So you’re having elections within 
election terms as well, so you need to do some restructuring 
even with the function of the executive of SUMA, which is the 
body that represents the municipalities within the province. 
 
(12:15) 
 
So I think again their understanding was that this was for 
Katepwa and the situation of Katepwa, which they were fully 
supportive of, but if it goes beyond that we need to spend some 
more time and give them I think a fuller understanding of what 
this implication may be. And the flexibility is accepted and I 
think it’s appreciated, but I think the ramifications, what may 
come out of this, is something that we need to take a closer look 
at to kind of see where we may go with this as well. 
 
Just wanting to move on to the areas of wards and an 
establishment of wards. Can the minister give us an explanation 
and a bit of background on how that process is put together? 
When there is a municipality that is wanting to establish wards, 
you know, how that ward commission is appointed and 
developed and what I guess the responsibility of that ward 
commission and authority of that ward commission is? Can you 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

 

give us a bit of a background or an overview of that whole 
process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the intent of the 
amendment is to provide wards commissions with greater 
ability to consider, study, and recommend a variety of ward 
scenarios to address local circumstances or to facilitate unique 
restructuring proposals. Once again we keep going back to the 
restructuring that require the flexibility in representative 
arrangements to accommodate communities and their diverse 
interests. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then when the wards 
are established within those municipalities, and I guess 
Katepwa is a good example of when the municipalities are 
coming together through amalgamation and they’re wanting to 
establish wards, how are those ward boundaries established and 
representation established? Is it through again the commission? 
Does the commission go out there and do that structuring 
themselves? Are the municipalities involved in determining 
what the boundaries may be and the representation may be? 
What is the process there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — There is a wards commission, Mr. 
Chairman, that’s appointed by the municipality, and they’re 
required to hold these public hearings. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — But that board commission, is that comprised 
of municipal people or is it department people that make up that 
commission? And how is that commission, I guess, driven in 
the sense of the purpose of developing these wards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it cannot be councillors but 
it’s up to the municipality to have people on that wards 
commission. But they can’t be councillors. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay. I guess, you know, wanting to. . . 
finishing it off. We’ve got this, I guess, this situation wanting to 
go back to SUMA to confer with SUMA in the sense of those 
. . . the ability within structuring the election. And I think we 
don’t want to leave that undone. I think we need to have the 
opportunity to still go back and talk to SUMA to get their 
feeling and understanding of, you know, that they’re 
comfortable with having that ability to have a three-year term 
and a two-year term all at the same, within the same structure of 
their municipalities. 
 
And I think we need to have some consultation with SUMA to 
get a good feel for that if they’re prepared to support the 
direction of the Bill as well. So I think at this time we’d like to 
defer further discussion to another opportunity. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Members. This is a fairly lengthy 
Bill. Is leave granted to deal with it by page? 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Mr. Minister, just wanting to go back to that, I 
guess, that structure of the wards process again. Is the 
understanding then that the municipality can identify the people 
that they want to sit on that ward commission and they’re the 
ones that can make the decision on the boundaries and the 
representation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, it’s always been that way and there’s 

no change. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay. And again, thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Talking to the Katepwa people, there is a misunderstanding 
there because they’re feeling that somebody is directing them 
on the way that whole process is going to be put together, who 
the commission is going to be, who . . . you know, there needs 
to be a clarification with them. So we’ll need to deal with that 
another day. 
 
But if that is the process, then we’re fine with allowing them to 
establish the commission and identify the boundaries so they 
have representation according to their likes of where the 
boundaries are going to be and where the wards are going to be 
as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — They have complete control of that and 
they don’t necessarily have to go into wards if they choose not 
to. But they have the control of that entire process. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess just 
only going into an area that talks about that the minister has the 
ability to structure the corporations of villages, resort villages, 
and towns, and it’s done according to population. Once you 
reach the population of 100 people plus, you can . . . you make 
that, I guess, decision of moving that community or that 
municipality from a resort village into a village and then also 
into a town at 500 — I think is the breaking point — or maybe 
the numbers aren’t quite correct there as well. 
 
But the question that I’ve got is we have some municipalities 
out there, some communities, that are still called towns but they 
only have the population base of a village. What are we doing 
with that whole sense of purpose of still identifying them as 
towns but the population there is only as a village? 
 
We’re going to go into discussion about changing the formula 
for revenue sharing and revenue sharing is going to talk about 
the towns and villages and resort villages, and there’s base 
grants that we talk about, there’s . . . The formula needs to be 
worked through here on a sense of how we’re going to support 
these municipalities. 
 
What’s the minister’s I guess thoughts, and what direction is he 
going to be taking in the sense of having these municipalities 
sitting in the categories they may not fit, according to 
population? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, very briefly. Yes, the 
revenue-sharing formula is under review and so I can’t tell you 
specifically what it might turn out to be. But I want to assure 
the member, Mr. Chair, that it will be equitable, and as has been 
in the past, it would . . . it did involve a per capita 
considerations regardless of the title of a community. So that 
will be taken into consideration. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay. Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 
think that’s one area that we need to pay some special attention 
to. The per capita formula is, I think, only the part of the 
formula that was used because of the original . . . Or the money 
that’s there for revenue sharing came from a formula that used 
just a multitude of different ways of calculating it. 
 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

The last insertions of revenue sharing were always calculated 
on — the last, I guess, couple of years — were calculated on the 
distribution on a per capita basis. But the prior money that was 
put together was put together with a combination of assessment 
and a capita and as well as there was a bit of a base grant 
involved in there as well. So I think we need to down the road 
take into consideration of how this formula is going to come 
together. 
 
If it’s only going to be on a per capita basis, then it really 
doesn’t matter if you call them a town or a village. But if we’re 
going to use some other ways of identifying that we’re going to 
distribute this money, we need to recognize that these 
municipalities kind of fit into the category that they are going to 
be applying for these dollars for as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The member makes a very good point, Mr. 
Chairman, but we’ve not, as I say, the review of the revenue 
sharing, the pools — both the big pool and the other local pools 
— that’s not been decided as yet. And we’re in consultation 
with SUMA and we will be with the other stakeholders to make 
sure that however, whatever formula we strike, will be fair and 
equitable to the people that should have access to those 
revenues. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay, Mr. Chair, to the minister, thank you. 
Those are all the questions that I’ve got here for this afternoon. 
So thank you to you and your officials. 
 
The Chair: — Members . . . Does the minister want to make a 
statement? 
 
Members, this Bill is fairly lengthy. Is leave granted to deal 
with it by parts? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 49 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — And I see the minister does not have any new 
officials. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
believe in this Bill, it’s very short and I think it’s very similar to 
many of the changes in the previous Bills. Could you maybe 
just comment if all the changes here fit in with the city or the 
urban and the rural, and if there’s anything specific to the North 
that’s in this Bill that isn’t in the other Bills. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, there’s 
no discrepancies, no other changes. It’s basically the same. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I believe then we’ve 
had our questions answered that we would have on this Bill, so 

at this time we’ll let it go. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I see that the minister does not have new 
officials, just rearranging them. So we can proceed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, I 
think we’ve been over this through, either through question 
period or estimate discussions many times before so you know 
where I’m coming from on this. 
 
(12:30) 
 
I guess some of the concerns I have are not so much with the 
Bill but what has been happening around the revenue sharing 
for municipalities, as yesterday, Mr. Minister, we talked about 
Regina and so on, about what has been put out there for the 
funding for the city of Regina, and I think that’s become fairly 
well known. 
 
I noticed, Mr. Minister, too — and not so much specifically 
with this Bill — but NDP MLAs were saying that, in one of 
their brochures, that funding for municipalities is up 54 per 
cent. And I guess where we have a problem with that, which 
pertains to revenue sharing and somewhat to this Bill, is that 
picking and choosing the year when this starts —this 54 per 
cent — yes, if you start at what point. 
 
I just might like to remind, Mr. Minister, that let’s go back and 
pick and choose 1991-92 where urban revenue sharing at that 
point was $62.2 million. And the last numbers I can get 
according to public accounts was 2001, so we know last year 
you put more money in — I believe a half a million dollars for 
urban — and almost the same amount this year again. But if we 
go to 2000-2001, the urban revenue-sharing amount was about 
$26.9 million. 
 
So if we’re picking and choosing numbers here, and members 
of the government side are saying that funding is up 54 per cent, 
I might want to remind them and the public that they’re talking 
to, that municipal funding has dropped dramatically in the last 
10, 11, 12 years. So I think maybe if we’re going to be honest 
and fair with the public — and actually fair to the municipalities 
that are affected by what we’re talking about today — that we 
should tell the whole picture and not pick and choose one 
certain part. 
 
Probably I would be in deep trouble if I held this Bill up, Mr. 
Minister, because the municipalities involved definitely want 
their money and we certainly aren’t going to hold this up. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I think our questions have been answered. If the 
minister would care to comment on that, fine. Otherwise I don’t 



June 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

 

believe we have any more questions on this Bill at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — If I may just, Mr. Chair, and I do 
appreciate what the member is saying in referring back to the 
1990-91, and at that point there was a call on everyone for some 
serious belt tightening. But I would like to point out that the 
actual . . . actually the pool, the revenue-sharing pool, at this 
point is currently at 57 per cent of its peak amount. So with 
another $10 million next year, from what we’re talking about 
previously up until now, the increase — the pool — will be at 
65 per cent of its peak. 
 
So it’s moving in the right direction and there are other monies 
that are transferred, as we discussed to . . . under a variety of 
other titles, and the revenue-sharing portion plus additional 
monies that are transferred from the province to try and assist 
municipalities in meeting the needs of their communities. 
 
And it’s, as I mentioned, it’s been appreciated that those 
communities are asking for additional funding, not unlike the 
province finds itself in some difficulty with the federal 
government in some of its transfer payments, and the reluctance 
to share some of the revenues that it takes from our province 
and does not return in some form or another. 
 
However I know that we’ll continue to work together in 
ensuring that we can come up with funding that’s required not 
only by the province but by municipalities and by our urban 
centres, because by making those communities strong we make 
the province strong and we’ll continue to work together and 
strive to ensure that we can indeed accomplish on behalf of our 
citizens and the people that we serve, provide them the type of 
service that they certainly deserve in this province. 
 
With that comment, Mr. Chairman, if I may, I want to sincerely 
thank the members of the opposition for their review, the 
revision, the questions they’ve asked on the various Bills that 
we’ve discussed here; the implementation of legislation that we 
together view as being helpful to our communities, to all the 
citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s by 
collaborating and by having consultations with stakeholders and 
discussing it with members of the opposition that we’re able to 
arrive at good legislation that will in fact be good for all the 
people in this province. 
 
So I want to thank the members of the opposition. I want to 
sincerely thank all the officials that work so very, very hard on 
behalf of the people of the province and on behalf of our 
stakeholders to ensure that we meet their needs as well. So 
thank you once again, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member from Moosomin on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I notice that we 
have a number of students and teachers and chaperones from 
Rocanville area have joined us this afternoon. We have 28 
grade 4 students who’ve made the trip in, and I trust they’ve 

had a good journey in today. I know they are looking forward to 
this day away from school, but actually still an educational 
process as they’ve come to the Legislative Assembly and to 
observe the proceedings on the floor. 
 
And I look forward to visiting with the students a little later in 
the afternoon and I’ll explain a little bit more about the 
proceedings at that time. But certainly, would the members join 
me in welcoming the teachers, chaperones, and students from 
Rocanville. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2003 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, members. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2003 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 

 
Bill No. 40 — The Rural Municipality 

Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2003 

 

Bill No. 24 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:43. 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1644 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1644 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1645 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1645 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1645 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Huskies Football Team Inducted into Sports Hall of Fame 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1645 
 Scholastic Achievements of Kindersley Resident 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1646 
 Oil and Gas Land Sales 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1646 
 Young Spirits Campaign 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1646 
 Saskatchewan Party Nomination 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1646 
 Point2 Internet Systems 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
 Unity Filmmaker Wins Golden Sheaf Award 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Support for Beef Industry 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
 Highway Conditions 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1649 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1649 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1649 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1650 
 Ethanol Industry 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1651 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1651 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1652 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1653 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1653 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1653 
 
 



 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Implementation of the Third Report of the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1653 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1654 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1655 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1656 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1658 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 23 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
 Bill No. 40 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
 Bill No. 41 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
 Bill No. 24 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2003 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
 Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 23 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
 Bill No. 40 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
 Bill No. 41 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
 Bill No. 24 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
 Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
 
 


