















































Hansard: March 26, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 175 
 March 26, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise again on behalf of residents of my hometown of Swift 
Current who are very concerned about the state of the hospital 
in that community. And the prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners again today are all from the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the crop 
insurance rates. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in view 
of the government’s unwillingness to renew a lot of the land 
leases that have come up for renewal in the Southwest, 
constituents there have asked that this petition be presented on 
their behalf: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by producers from 
Gull Lake, Webb, Tompkins, Maple Creek, and Eastend. 
 
I so present. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 4, 10, and 12. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 12 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: how much funding did 
pre-kindergarten programs receive in the fiscal year 1998 to 
1999? 

 
I also have similar questions for the fiscal years 1999-2000, 
2000-2001, 2001-2002, and 2002-2003. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 12 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Agriculture minister: what is the total amount of 
money deducted from the 2002 farmer claims regarding the 
grasshopper control penalty; further to that, how many 
producers were assessed a penalty in 2002; also, what was 
the criteria for assessing grasshopper penalties 2002; and 
were these grasshopper control penalties assessed to 
organic grain growers last year? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
should like to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of the House, three guests who are seated in the west gallery. 
They are Gord Gunoff, the business manager, Ron Hitchcock, 
the assistant business manager, and Mike Kator, the assistant 
business manager, of the International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers, Saskatchewan Local 2067. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in extending them a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to members of the 
Assembly a constituent of mine from Saskatoon Greystone 
constituency, Margaret Woloshyn. Margaret is a long-time 
friend and is involved in many, many community organizations 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Margaret, I’m sorry that I don’t know the name of the person 
who is accompanying you, but I want to welcome your guest as 
well. I’m being helped out here because I understand your sister 
is also visiting. So it’s lovely to have you both here. 
 
And would all members join me in welcoming Margaret and 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

her sister to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the government in welcoming the member 
from the IBEW (International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers) to the Assembly today. I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings and the questions that will be coming forward. So 
enjoy the session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of this legislature, one 
Tanner Morrison, seated in the western gallery. Tanner is no 
stranger to this place. His name sits on a couple of the debating 
trophies down the hallway in the library, and he’s a champion 
debater, and a good person, and a student of this institution of 
ours. So I’d urge all members to please give Tanner a warm 
welcome to this place. 
 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

War in Iraq 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
American ambassador to Canada, Mr. Paul Cellucci, yesterday 
addressed the economic club of Canada, where he expressed his 
dismay over the Canadian government abandoning the 
Americans in these troubled times. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, he was 
right. What is even more troubling is the statement Mr. Cellucci 
made regarding the United States’ commitment to Canada. And 
I quote: 
 

There is no security threat to Canada that the United States 
would not be ready, willing and able to help with. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the war is now on. The decision or process of how 
to go to war has been made and is now over. What matters now, 
Mr. Speaker, is that either we are with our allies or against 
them. The ancestral and historic ties that we share with the 
United States, Great Britain, and Australia leaves the position of 
our federal and provincial governments to be questioned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all pray and hope for the swift resolution of 
this conflict. Our prayers are with the families of those who 
have men and women serving in the coalition. Mr. Speaker, our 
prayers are also with Alexis Dustyhorn and her friends and 
family. Alexis was born in Saskatchewan and is now serving in 
the United States Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 74, 
Charlie Company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to say that it is in times of 
crisis that families stick together. They don’t run and hide or 
point fingers. Great Britain, Australia, and the United States are 
family . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 

Car Thefts in Regina 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
inform the House that car thefts in Regina have dropped off 
dramatically since this government, in co-operation with the 
Regina city police, implemented an anti-crime strategy last 
year. Mr. Speaker, auto thefts were down 46 per cent in January 
and February of 2003. That’s compared to the same period last 
year. And, Mr. Speaker, overall in 2002 auto thefts declined 
28.5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the strategy that has effected this change relies on 
the resources of the city police and the departments of Social 
Services, Justice, Corrections and Public Safety. It emphasizes 
early intervention for first-time offenders, stricter supervision of 
repeat offenders, more youth workers, and providing the courts 
with information about youths who will appear before them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the opposition believes that the only 
solution to young offenders is so-called boot camp. They would 
have us lock these children up, Mr. Speaker. That will teach 
them a great deal, Mr. Speaker. And that is absolutely right, Mr. 
Speaker, it will teach them — it will teach these kids to be 
criminals and it will teach them how to be better at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is usually the case . . . we believe there are 
solutions to complex problems other than the extreme, angry, 
knee-jerk, and simplistic solutions of the members opposite. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Achievements of Moosomin Moose Hockey Team 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you are aware, the 
Moosomin community and area have been actively raising 
funds to build a new hospital and long-term care centre. 
 
Last year the local Moosomin Moose rec hockey team began 
asking themselves, what could they do to assist in this very 
worthwhile project? The idea they came up with was setting a 
new Guinness book world record for the longest hockey game 
played, and in the process raising some funds for the project. 
 
In January ’02, Mr. Speaker, the Moose put their skates on, hit 
the ice, and 26 hours later set a new record for the longest game 
played, at the time, while raising over $125,000 for the building 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year the Moose decided to again respond to 
the challenge placed before them by two other communities 
who bettered their record. In January the Moose again hit the 
ice, played 62 hours of hockey, raising more than $205,000 for 
the health project. 
 
On April 19, the community will be hosting a community 
dinner to say thank you to the Moose for their efforts. I look 
forward to attending this event and extend an invitation to the 
Premier and the Minister of Health to join with us in not only 
saying thank you to the Moose but as well to give official 
approval and commitment, allowing construction to begin on a 
very worthwhile and necessary health project. 
 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Additional Seats for Northern Nursing Program 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I have good news for First 
Nations, Métis people, northerners, and nursing education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is funding 40 additional nursing 
seats as part of a new northern nursing degree program. The 
program is being offered through the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated campus in Prince Albert with 37 students currently 
taking nursing classes. Since 1999, the number of nursing seats 
in the Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan has 
increased by 65 per cent to a total of 300. 
 
The initiative will help to address the need for more health 
professionals in northern Saskatchewan and for greater 
Aboriginal and northern representation in the health care 
system. Through these programs we are creating education 
opportunities for Aboriginal and northern students in Prince 
Albert, often closer to their homes and communities and family 
support. 
 
Graduates from this nursing program will be well positioned to 
work in northern Saskatchewan or anywhere else in the 
province with their skills which will be in high demand. 
 
Keeping and attracting key health providers are top priorities of 
our government. Our Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health 
Care recommends finding ways to increase Aboriginal 
participation in the health workforce. The nursing program in 
this case will be an important step towards this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recruiting, training and retaining front line health 
professionals are among the top priorities of this government. 
This will be a significant contribution . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
North Saskatoon Business Association Honours Businesses 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night myself, 
along with my colleague, the member from Rosthern, had the 
privilege of attending the North Saskatoon Business 
Association sixth annual business awards dinner. It was a fun 
time and I’d like to share with the Assembly the winners from 
that last evening and hope all members join me in 
congratulating them on their success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wayne Wilson of Business Furnishings Ltd. won 
the prestigious Business Builder Award. And the Member of 
the Year is Jim Nowakowski, principal of JNE Welding. 
 
Other winners, Mr. Speaker, were Healthserv Ltd., radio station 
grouping CJWW, Hot 93/Magic 98.3, Ecol Laser Services, 
Sawyers Tree and Landscapes. 
 
Management Quality Award was won by North Ridge 
Development Corp. and Nu-Fab Burton LP was also a winner. 

Mr. Speaker, the small business is the economic driver for jobs 
in Saskatchewan — and not the government. And our 
government is very excited and encouraged by such private 
business success. We must create an economic climate where 
other small businesses can thrive and not have to compete 
against the NDP (New Democratic Party) government and the 
business-oppressive record. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to these, winners all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Balfour Senior Girls Basketball Team 
Captures Sixth City Title 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to take 
this opportunity to tell my colleagues about the success of the 
Balfour Redmen senior girls basketball team. Mr. Speaker, this 
season the Balfour senior girls went undefeated for their entire 
season — 35 straight games beginning with the exhibition 
season, through the regular season to capturing the Regina 
Intercollegiate Basketball League title, to winning the 
Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association 5A senior 
girls final. 
 
And that’s not all, Mr. Speaker. In the last six years the Balfour 
senior girls have won a record six straight Regina 
Intercollegiate Basketball League titles, they have won two 
provincial titles, and they have been provincial runners-up the 
last three years in a row. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wendy Bileski has been the coach at Balfour 
throughout their amazing six-year run, and if her winning 
record does not speak for itself one of her opposing coaches had 
this to say of her team: they’ve got a really positive outlook and 
a strong vision; they set their goals high and they accomplish 
them. Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder that the girls she has coached 
have enjoyed such success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all the members of this House will join 
me in congratulating the Balfour Redmen senior girls basketball 
team. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Katimavik Project at Eastend 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On January 22 this 
year the first group of 11 young people from across Canada, all 
members of the organization Katimavik under the leadership of 
project co-ordinator, Steve Sloot, arrived in the community of 
Eastend for a 10-week work program with local non-profit 
organizations. 
 
Katimavik is a nationally recognized organization for Canadian 
youth between the ages of 17 and 21 with the purpose of 
encouraging personal development through volunteer 
community service, training, and group interaction. 
 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

For seven months, three separate groups of remarkable young 
people will each spend 10 weeks working within selected 
communities, such as Eastend, learning leadership skills by 
completing projects for local organizations. It’s been described 
as a program that helps people learn how to make compromises, 
to help, assist, and respect others. 
 
The 11 young people who have become a part of our 
community will soon be leaving for Alexandria, Ontario, for 10 
weeks and then on to St. Stephens, New Brunswick before 
returning to their respective provinces and homes. 
 
They have indeed benefited from the experiences that they 
encountered in southwest Saskatchewan, but so too have the 
volunteer organizations that were the recipients of this groups’ 
skills and abilities. They have contributed many hours of 
volunteer service to Eastend already and will continue to play 
host to two more Katimavik groups over the next five months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join with me in 
wishing each member of this Katimavik group, who have been 
visiting Eastend, a hearty Saskatchewan farewell and the best of 
luck in their future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Population Decline 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the best 
ways to evaluate, perhaps the very best way to evaluate the 
performance of a government is to ask the question, are more 
people moving in or moving out? In spite of the NDP’s $3 
million advertising campaign the government is still driving 
people out of Saskatchewan. 
 
Statistics Canada released it’s year-end population figures and 
they show that Saskatchewan’s population decreased in the year 
2002 by over 5,000 people. Mr. Speaker, in fact 7,600 more 
people moved out of Saskatchewan than moved into 
Saskatchewan. That’s 7,600 people — most of them under 35 
years of age — who decided that their future was wide open 
outside Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that we need more than an advertising 
campaign to keep Saskatchewan people here. Why is the NDP 
driving so many people out of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in his usual gloom and 
doom manner, the Leader of the Opposition wants to tell us all 
the bad news. Nobody likes it, Mr. Speaker, when people move 
out of our province. But what the Leader of the Opposition did 
not tell the people is that these numbers show that out-migration 
is at its lowest level in the last four years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say to the leader, I want to 
say to the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, that things are 
turning around, Mr. Speaker. Things are turning around . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 

Order. I recognize the . . . Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Things are turning around, Mr. Speaker. 
There are 10,000 more people working in Saskatchewan today 
than there were a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And yes, yes, there has been a slight 
fluctuation in the population in the last quarter, Mr. Speaker, 
but this province is on a roll. We’re on a roll in oil and gas; 
we’re on a roll in mining; we’re on a roll in forestry; we’re on a 
roll across the piece, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s good news out there and the only ones that don’t 
recognize it are sitting right there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is correct, 
the people of Saskatchewan are on a roll — they’re rolling right 
out of the province in the tune of 7,600 people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the old minister of Industry said it was good 
that people were leaving Saskatchewan. He said there’d be 
more left for the rest of us. Now the new minister says it’s good 
that people are leaving because not quite as many people left 
this year as last year. But 5,000 people, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of 
people. 
 
So what did the NDP do? What are they doing about the 
problem? Well, Mr. Speaker, are they doing anything to attract 
more investment? No. Are they doing anything to make 
Saskatchewan more business friendly? No, not at all. Instead, 
they spend millions on an empty advertising slogan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the result is 5,000 fewer people in our province. 
Mr. Speaker, we need more than an empty slogan and some 
fancy commercials. We need a little bit more than this positive 
thinking and these shallow motivational speeches by the 
Premier. Why is the NDP driving so many people out of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just to point out how 
wrong the Leader of the Opposition is, he gets up and he says in 
this House, we can’t attract investment in Saskatchewan. We 
pick up the newspaper today, what does it say? Venture capital 
triples in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — What does it say? He likes to talk about his 
right-wing cousins in British Columbia and Alberta, but it says 
here Saskatchewan was the only Western Canadian province to 
see growth in venture capital investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, there’s 10,000 more people 
working in the province this year; oil and gas drilling up 80 per 
cent; youth employment up thousands over last year, Mr. 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

 

Speaker. And what do we hear from the Leader of the 
Opposition? Doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker, doom and gloom. 
 
Well I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition that not 
everybody shares his gloomy view of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, if the NDP raises the bar 
from 1 inch to 3 inches, even the most incompetent 
backbencher will still be able to get over the hurdle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these numbers, these numbers are staggering 
because each one of these numbers represents a real person. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s our friends, it’s our 
families, it’s our neighbours that are leaving. And about 
two-thirds of the people who leave are young people. Mr. 
Speaker, they are between the ages of 15 and 35. They are our 
sons and our daughters and that, quite frankly, bothers me a lot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everywhere that I go when I talk to young people 
in Saskatchewan, they tell me they’d like to stay. And when I 
talk to former young Saskatchewan residents outside of the 
province, they tell me they’d like to come back. But, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re saying either the NDP’s got to go or we can’t 
come back because there’s no opportunities under an NDP 
government. Mr. Speaker, the solution starts with getting rid of 
the NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The evidence speaks for its itself. Why 
does the NDP have no plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again we have the 
Leader of the Opposition getting up and saying young people 
can’t find jobs. But we look in the media, the Regina 
Leader-Post, January 25, what does it say? It says this, Mr. 
Speaker: “More youth finding jobs.” That’s the truth, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the truth. 
 
And I want to quote to the Leader of the Opposition something 
that a couple who moved here from BC (British Columbia) are 
saying, Dick and Diane Coombs who say this: 
 

. . . they are trying to convince everyone in B.C. to join 
them (in moving to Saskatchewan). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And Dick Coombs has this to say to the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. He says: 
 

I can’t imagine how much money we’d have if we came 
here 20 years ago . . . 

And they’d started an organization called the Last Cattle 
Frontier, a group dedicated to luring more immigrant farmers to 
Saskatchewan, which they consider the new promised land. 
And that’s a testimonial, Mr. Speaker, to the fact that a real plan 
works. A phoney slogan doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are 
outraged at the flagrant abuse of public money by Dutch Lerat 
— luxury vehicles, trips around the world — over $800,000 in 
spending. But the Saskatchewan people are even more outraged 
at the government for allowing this to happen and for refusing 
to take responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dutch Lerat did nothing to hide his extravagant 
spending. That means someone in the NDP government must 
have known this was going on and if they did not know, they 
should have known. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority) had a legal responsibility to oversee spending 
practices at SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority). 
Who in this government is responsible and who failed to do 
their job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, no question, there were 
issues that have been addressed. Let me just explain once again 
to the opposition what’s taken place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SLGA, when the issue was brought to their attention, ordered a 
special audit with comprehensive review of SIGA — number 
one. Number two, the Provincial Auditor has conducted his 
report on this file and reported in November 2000. Number 
three, Mr. Speaker, somebody that they obviously don’t have 
any respect for — the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
and the criminal justice system — had investigated this file. The 
Department of Justice reviewed the file and made its decision, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve got everything in place now to try our very best to 
ensure that this does not happen again and it will not happen 
again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead of being critical, I think that member should celebrate 
with the Leader of the Opposition, who said in a Saskatoon 
article and I quote: 
 

Hermanson praised the FSIN for running a successful 
gaming business . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, if it is possible, the government 
is even worse than Dutch Lerat because . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If it’s possible, Mr. 
Speaker, the government is even worse than Dutch Lerat 
because they are the regulator and they allowed this to happen. 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

They chose to turn a blind eye. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the Provincial Auditor, SIGA 
financed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, according to the Provincial 
Auditor, SIGA financed Lerat’s lifestyle and violated the terms 
of the casino operating agreement. But this government signed 
the casino operating agreement and this government is 
responsible for ensuring SIGA lives up to the terms of this 
agreement. Clearly the government failed to do its job. 
 
Eight hundred thousand dollars of public money gone forever 
and the NDP tells us everything is just fine. No wonder the 
public is outraged. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister either can’t or won’t tell us who was 
responsible for SIGA’s spending. If the minister won’t answer 
this question, will he order a public inquiry so the people of 
Saskatchewan can have an answer to this question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And with all due 
respect, the gentleman’s name is Lerat — Mr. Dutch Lerat — 
for the member opposite, with all due respect. 
 
Now I just pointed out the four independent audits and 
investigations that were carried out. Is that opposition 
suggesting that we go to an additional public expense? Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve already carried out due diligence through these 
four independent reviews and investigations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a result of that, we did suspend the negotiations for the new 
agreement until the new SIGA board, the new CEO (chief 
executive officer), and the new people both at SLGA and SIGA 
agreed that they had met certain benchmarks that the auditor of 
the day had put forward. 
 
Now the province . . . And this is some other information. That 
opposition is misleading the public, Mr. Speaker, by telling 
them that they’ve lost millions of dollars. We recovered the 
$1.36 million of the taxpayers’ money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP does not want to say 
who is responsible and they do not want a public inquiry to find 
out who is responsible. Then at the very least will they allow 
the members of this Assembly to look into who was 
responsible? 
 
Mr. Speaker, for over two years the NDP has refused to allow 
any discussion of SIGA in Public Accounts Committee because 
of the ongoing investigation. Now the investigation is over. 
Will the government allow a special investigation by the Public 
Accounts Committee to determine who was responsible for 
overseeing SIGA’s spending and how they allowed this blatant 
abuse to happen? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I regret that the opposition 
refuses to see the progress that has — serious progress — that 
has been made. The costs of operating SIGA has been reduced 
significantly. The profits have almost doubled. And those 
profits go to all the people of this province, the communities 
where those casinos are located, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to quote my good friend, Chief Perry Bellegarde, by 
saying to these members something he said to the people of the 
province, and I quote from Saskatoon, StarPhoenix: 
 

“We’ve already streamlined our operations. We’ve learned 
what to do and what not to do. We’ve separated the politics 
from the management and administration. There are proper 
financial policies and procedures in place. We just want to 
move forward now, creating more jobs and more wealth.” 

 
And I still insist they should join the Leader of the Opposition 
over there if he is sincere, if he’s sincere in what he says about 
the success . . . running a successful gaming business and 
complimented it for addressing government challenges. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agricultural Policy Framework Agreement 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has 
finally signed the first stage of agriculture policy framework 
agreement which is only an expression of the intent to 
participate in the new safety net programming offered by 
Ottawa. This allows the provincial government to have a seat at 
the table where the new agriculture risk-management program 
is being designed. 
 
Typical of this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re 
attempting to get aboard the ship once it’s already sailed. And 
the farm families are going to be faced with yet another 
program that has primarily been designed by the bureaucrats in 
Ottawa, simply because our government missed the boat. Now 
the federal government is urging the provinces, Mr. Speaker, to 
sign the agreement of implementation for the new program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the province has only recently indicated 
their intent to participate in the APF (agricultural policy 
framework), has the minister already decided that he will sign 
on to the agreement of implementation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member has obviously 
shown her true colours and lack of understanding of what’s 
happening in agricultural policy . . . (inaudible) . . . absolutely. 
 
We’re the last province in Canada to sign the agreement, Mr. 
Speaker. Why, Mr. Speaker? We’re the last province in Canada 
to sign the agreement, Mr. Speaker, because we said that we 
wanted to make amendments and adjustments to the program. 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

 

The member from Watrous, Mr. Speaker, this past summer, 
when everybody in Canada was saying do not sign the 
agreement, what did the member from Watrous say, Mr. 
Speaker? What did she say? She said that the Saskatchewan 
government should be signing the agricultural policy 
framework, Mr. Speaker, and get in . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. 
Speaker. Back last summer, Mr. Speaker, when everybody else 
is saying we shouldn’t sign the agreement, the member from 
Watrous said we should be signing the agriculture policy 
framework. So out of touch, Mr. Speaker, with agricultural farm 
policy that she should resign her seat, Mr. Speaker, and let 
somebody else do the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I find it appalling that the 
minister doesn’t understand that there’s more than one stage of 
signatures for that agreement. First is the . . . a signature for the 
agreement of intent which allows you, at the table, in helping 
with the designing, and then there is a signature for the 
implementation. And this province, that government, has 
typically sat back, not been involved in the designing, and then 
they sign intent, say it’s Ottawa’s fault we got a crappy 
program. It’s time to change and time to be at that table, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of provinces who many months ago did 
sign the agreement of intent to participate in the APF and have 
been at that table all along through the early designing stages 
are saying that they will not be signing the agreement of 
implementation. They say the program’s not ready to be 
implemented and there will be considerable improvements that 
need to be made and a lot of questions that need to be answered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister support the other provinces in 
their request to extend the existing programs for one year, and 
will he consider to do . . . to commit to doing an independent 
assessment using actual Saskatchewan farm scenarios to see if 
this program will work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is an incredible position 
for the member from Watrous to be taking and it shows her 
total, her total disrespect for the process that’s happened across 
the country and her lack of knowledge about what happened, 
Mr. Speaker, over the past year and a half. 
 
The minister from Alberta, Mr. Speaker, in The Western 
Producer — and I wish I had the article here — this past week 
is quoted as saying that they have signed not only the 
implementation agreement, they’ve signed the agricultural 
policy framework agreement, Mr. Speaker, is what she said. A 
Conservative friend from across the way, next door, have 
already signed not only the implementation agreement but also 
the agricultural policy framework agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all provinces at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, will sign 
the implementation agreements. 
 
And we said we’re not signing the implementation agreement 
yet or the agricultural policy framework because there’s not 
enough money in the contract, Mr. Speaker. 

And the member for Watrous said — past June — sign the 
agreement; farmers will be happy. Totally out of touch, Mr. 
Speaker, with what’s happening in agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Genetically Modified Potatoes 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as a result 
of an article that appeared in today’s daily newspapers, we 
know that not only did the NDP not tell the truth about their 
level of investment in SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) or their attempts to avoid their own 
union tendering agreement, or we also know that they didn’t tell 
the truth about a test which showed our potatoes fried up black. 
And now we know, Mr. Speaker, that they didn’t tell 
Saskatchewan people, nor did they tell other local potato 
farmers, perhaps even potato buyers, that they were producing 
— the NDP government was producing — GMO (genetically 
modified organisms) potatoes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a former employee of SPUDCO who spoke to a 
reporter with the Saskatchewan News Network says, the 
potatoes were grown and shipped to buyers without being 
identified as genetically modified product. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), why did SPUDCO misrepresent 
their product and deceive the companies who purchased their 
potatoes? Did the minister approve of that strategy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members 
opposite today and to the member from Swift Current that I had 
a wonderful experience today touring the potato sheds and 
meeting with the industry in the home of the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, today, first and foremost, Mr. 
Speaker — and I say to the member from Swift Current — 
there was absolutely no requirement, no requirement in 1998 to 
label potatoes, Mr. Speaker, in Canada. There was none. To 
label them, Mr. Speaker, as genetically modified, there was no 
restrictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker, until the spring of 2000. And 
why did it happen in the spring of 2000, Mr. Speaker? Because 
the population of Canada said, we want to see some segregation 
here of the GM (genetically modified) potatoes, led by 
McDonald’s in the year 2000. 
 
The federal government today, Mr. Speaker, has yet today . . . 
yet has today, Mr. Speaker . . . The CFIA (Canada Food 
Inspection Agency) has not required any labelling to occur 
today in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, apparently everything’s okay. 
Everything’s fine again, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t matter that they 
could have taken the extra effort . . . 
 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t matter that 
they could have taken the extra effort to tell the truth, but that is 
too much of an extra effort for this government. They’ve 
avoided the truth for six long years and that’s why they’re going 
to face the wrath of the voters in the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder when the Deputy Premier was down at 
the potato sheds if he actually took the minister in charge of this 
file who made these decisions with him. And if he did, I wonder 
if he talked to Tom Dolman of Outlook who is quoted in this 
story. Mr. Speaker, he grew GMO potatoes for SPUDCO and 
was never fully compensated for any of the potatoes he grew for 
the company. And he has been driven into bankruptcy. I wonder 
if that’s the kind of economic development the Deputy 
Premier’s been talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does that Deputy Premier, what does the 
minister have to say to Mr. Dolman and the other people — the 
farm families and the businesses in the area who suffered huge 
losses because of the failure of SPUDCO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the 
member from Swift Current has an opportunity to be out in the 
area where the potato sheds are or not. I don’t know if he’s ever 
been there. And I don’t know how many members of the 
opposition have been there, Mr. Speaker, to take a look at what 
we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I hear the member from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, for the 
last four months standing up on his feet and I hear members 
from across the House, Mr. Speaker, from the Saskatchewan 
Party berating the work that’s been done on that part of the 
province in growing the potato industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the people whom I met 
with today, 14 strong from the . . . who are representatives of 
the member from Rosetown, Mr. Speaker, and they said to me, 
what’s happening in Saskatchewan today is a shame as to how 
they’re putting down the potato industry, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
shame because they’re driving investment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, as far back 
as April 2000 members of that government were very 
concerned about this issue. Here’s what the member for Regina 
South said April 11, 2000. He said, and I quote: 
 

There is a huge concern, particularly in Europe, that GMOs 
and GM foods are in fact going to be . . . are not . . . (they) 
are going to be a harm. 

 
He says, the member goes on to say: 
 

Now (he says) for those members opposite who are 
farmers, they will know the problems that you have (been 
when you combined) . . . these two sets of seeds. 
 

So the member for Regina South understood the issue. 
 
And the question to the Deputy Premier and the minister is this. 

Is the Deputy Premier and the minister confirming for the 
House that they knew all along that the SPUDCO was growing 
GMO potatoes and then that they wilfully withheld that 
information from the farmers and from the companies? Is that 
what he’s telling the Legislative Assembly today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Today, Mr. Speaker, as I visited the potato 
sheds today and the people who are growing potatoes and 
growing the irrigation industry in that part of the world, that’s 
what I want . . . that’s what I’m sharing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Number one, producers in that part of the province are saying it 
is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the consumers in 
Saskatchewan, in Canada today, Mr. Speaker, do not want GM 
potatoes because producers in that part of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, and in Canada, wish that they could still grow GM 
potatoes, Mr. Speaker. Because we grow 400,000 acres of 
potatoes in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and 4 per cent of the industry 
was growing GM potatoes. And in that part of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, of which the Leader of the Opposition comes from, 
they wish they could still grow GM potatoes, Mr. Speaker, 
because that’s what the country would like to see, but we don’t 
have it today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:15) 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that today on this side of the 
House, with the members from the . . . with the people who are 
growing potatoes in Saskatchewan are working to make a 
difference, Mr. Speaker, in growing the industry in spite of 
what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, about making a difference 
with the industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6, The 
Podiatry Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Occupational Therapists 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 7, The 
Occupational Therapists Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a response 
to written question no. 1. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to no. 1 has been tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I certainly 
was looking forward to entering this debate and for a while it 
was questionable whether I’d be able to enter it, but I thank you 
for this opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I make my remarks about the Speech from 
the Throne, I would like to also extend my welcome to the two 
newly elected members of this Legislative Assembly — the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview and the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — I can just imagine what their life has been like in 
the last couple of months here with hastily called by-elections 
and then right after the by-election the start of the new session. 
 
And I can remember back in 1999 when I was nominated late in 
the process and I was busy with our farming operation and 
trying to campaign and all those sorts of things. And then of 
course the election was called in the middle of harvest and we 
all know what type of stress that put on those of us that 
represent rural constituencies. 
 
And these two new members, I’m sure they have things like 
organizing constituency offices and for both members finding 
appropriate accommodations here in Regina and so on. And I 
wish them the best in their efforts. And a word of advice is, take 
your time and things will wait until tomorrow if you don’t get 
them done today. And the constituents, at least from my 
experience, have been very understanding; I’m sure your 
constituents will be also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the change proposed . . . changes that will 
come in effect to the constituencies on the call of the next 
election, Last Mountain-Touchwood was one of those 
constituencies that will undergo significant changes in 
boundaries. We will . . . Presently the boundaries of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood start at the Qu’Appelle River and go 
north to the Quill Lakes. That will change significantly. We’ll 

lose the whole northern half of the constituency and we will get 
pushed over east, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would like to say, take this time to say a few words about 
these changes and about my experience in having served the 
constituents in the northern part of Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
There’s a number of towns like Duval and Raymore and 
Quinton and Govan and Wynyard and Elfros and so on that 
we’ll be losing. And I certainly have mixed emotions about 
losing some of those communities. I have got to know a lot of 
good people in those constituencies. I’ve worked with them and 
enjoyed attending functions and events in those various towns 
and around that part of the constituency. 
 
And I would just like to say at this time that I’m sure they will 
be ably represented by a new Saskatchewan MLA after the next 
election because they will become . . . Most of those towns will 
become part of the Arm River-Watrous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when I looked at the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I 
noticed that it was an interesting document in that it stated . . . 
Mostly what it did is it stated the obvious, Mr. Speaker, and it 
really didn’t mention any new initiatives or any new plans that 
this government may have. And to me, that tells me that this 
government is out of new ideas and new initiatives. 
 
A small example, Mr. Speaker. There was, I believe, about a 
sentence and a half mentioned of the Canadian Light Source, 
the synchrotron, that’s nearing completion at the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan). And, Mr. Speaker, this . . . And 
I’ve said this in the House before that that scientific project, it’s 
the largest scientific project undertaken in Canada, not alone 
Saskatchewan, in the last 30 years. 
 
And what do we see in this Speech from the Throne? One or 
two sentences. There’s no mention, Mr. Speaker, of any 
innovation that could develop around this scientific project, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s no mention of some of the initiatives and 
some of the things that have happened in other areas in this 
country and in our neighbours to the south, in the US (United 
States) and, in fact, in other countries around the world. 
 
When a major scientific project is built in a province and in a 
city, quite often there . . . research parks spring up, Mr. Speaker, 
around those facilities and economic activity develops, Mr. 
Speaker. None of that is mentioned in the Speech from the 
Throne; none of that is mentioned in anything from this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll give you an example of some of the things that this 
government isn’t doing. Last fall the president of the U of S, Dr. 
Peter MacKinnon, along with some other folks in Saskatoon, 
organized a conference, a seminar on innovation. And they 
brought in speakers from all across North America who are . . . 
who have some very good expertise in this whole area. Myself 
and my colleague, the member from Lloydminster, attended 
that seminar. Was there any members from the opposite side of 
this House at that seminar, Mr. Speaker? No, not a one — not a 
one. It’s not on their radar screen. 
 
You know what? When you talk to them about the synchrotron, 
the light . . . you know what they’ll tell you? Well we finally 
got the Sask Synchrotron Institute up and running — about a 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

year and a half or two years later after Alberta got theirs up and 
running, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I said, those are some of the things that weren’t 
mentioned in the Speech from the Throne. That’s just some 
examples of some of the things that weren’t mentioned. 
 
In the area of health care, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the 
Throne stated the obvious — we now have 12 regional health 
authorities. Well I guess we have 12 regional health authorities. 
We passed, in the evening, legislation in the last session, Mr. 
Speaker. But it didn’t mention anything about any plans or 
initiatives to address the long surgical waiting lists. It didn’t 
mention anything or any plans or initiatives to address the 
increased demand on long-term health care. 
 
As I said, it states some of the obvious, some of the simple 
things but no new plans, no new initiatives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there are a number of things, Mr. Speaker, that can be done 
in some of these areas that don’t cost a lot of money, that would 
improve the system, and yet we don’t hear these initiatives 
coming forth from that side of the House. 
 
Long-term care, for instance, Mr. Speaker. There are some 
things happening between our health regions that cause the 
people that need to use the services great problems like . . . I’ll 
give you an example. 
 
I had a constituent who was moving her parents from the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority to the Regina Regional 
Health Authority. And this constituent had had her parents 
assessed in Saskatoon, and then she moved them to Regina and 
asked the Regina Regional Health Authority to look at the 
assessment that was done in Saskatoon. 
 
Do you know what she was told, Mr. Speaker? We don’t 
recognize Saskatoon’s assessments; we do our own. I ask the 
question, why, Mr. Speaker. We are living in the same 
province. We’ve got 12 . . . now 12 regional health authorities. 
Certainly can we not have a standard assessment procedure that 
we don’t have to repeat this process, Mr. Speaker? 
 
That’s just one small example of some of the things that could 
be done to make our system more efficient and make the lives 
of the people that need to use the system a whole lot easier, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When I look at what was said in the Speech from the Throne 
with regards to highways and transportation, there was a small 
. . . some lip service paid I guess to that area at the very most, 
Mr. Speaker. When you stop to think of it, highways and 
transportation affect every social and economic . . . almost 
every social and economic activity in the province. It’s 
fundamental. We are a large province spread over a large area 
where people need to get from one point to the other. We need 
to have the infrastructure in place, Mr. Speaker, and we have 
very little mention of the . . . of that particular activity of 
government. 
 
There was small mention of . . . that this government will be 
able to increase the rate of twinning of our two national 
highways in the province and that’s due to some modest help 

that they received recently from the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s a good thing that we increase our . . . the 
rate of our twinning and so on. But it’s not going to happen 
overnight. I’m told that with a little bit more effort there are 
more federal dollars that this government could have accessed, 
but at least we’ve got some additional new dollars and I do 
acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again as I said, there was . . . the Speech from the Throne was 
interesting for the things it didn’t mention, and I think that’s 
something that we’ve heard from various sources including 
other members of this House. When we look, there was no 
mention of long-term planning in highways and transportation. 
In fact the assistant deputy minister’s position of policy and 
planning has been vacant for some months. So that sort of tells 
you something that . . . as to what’s happening as far as 
planning and that sort of thing. 
 
There’s no mention of any type of plan or initiative to address 
some of the problems in transportation in our urban centres. For 
example, the traffic congestion that the city of Regina has on 
the east side of the city dealing with the Victoria bypass and 
those sorts of things, there’s no mention of anything to deal 
with that, with those sorts of problems. 
 
There’s no mention of a common sense approach to paving and 
reconstruction. It seems like . . . And I’m not the only one 
who’s observed this. A number of people, citizens of this 
province, observed that it seems like there’s no plan as far as 
repaving and reconstruction. Quite often we’ll have a section of 
highway which is paved on either end and will leave a section 
in the middle that’s almost impassable, and that situation is 
allowed to continue over a number of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:30) 
 
I have a situation in my constituency which probably illustrates 
this more so than anything. About a year and a half ago Pioneer 
Grain opened up a brand new cement terminal about 7 
kilometres to the west of Southey, and located on No. 22 
Highway. Well No. 22 Highway is a secondary highway and 
that particular stretch of highway has been in need of repair for 
quite some time. 
 
Now this grain terminal has been built and put in place for the 
purpose of taking grain off of our highways and putting it onto 
the railway tracks so that it can be shipped to the ports and on to 
the markets and so on. Now you would think with a common 
sense approach, you would provide at least some access to that 
plant at least from one direction. There’s a primary highway 7 
kilometres to the east of that particular plant and you would 
think that at least those 7 kilometres could be put in such 
condition that customers of that particular plant could access 
that grain terminal. But no, that’s not the plan. 
 
In fact, I talked to the Minister of Highways about this situation 
in last session during estimates. I asked him where that section 
of highway was in terms of their long-term plans. Well it’s not 
even on the radar screen, Mr. Speaker. And that’s just one small 
example. I’m sure there’s other examples across the province 
where that same situation exists. 
 
There was no mention about dealing with the whole area of 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

 

rolling budgets within the Department of Highways. What we 
have now, it’s a spend-it-or-lose-it situation, Mr. Speaker. 
Surely this government must have . . . they’ve been in power for 
some 10, 12 years. They must have some idea of how to address 
this problem. 
 
We have the situation in this last calendar year where we had an 
early fall, an early freeze-up; there was numerous highway 
construction projects that were unable to be completed. Then 
what happens is that the deputy minister in charge of 
construction and that whole area has to scramble to see how he 
can use the money before the end of the fiscal year. Well I don’t 
think that’s a very efficient and effective way of using 
taxpayers’ money, and we need to find a mechanism, Mr. 
Speaker, where we can roll some of those funds forward into 
the following year to get efficiencies in construction and 
efficiencies of scale, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing that wasn’t in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker, there was no plan and there was no mention of 
developing trade corridors. Most of our trade now, Mr. Speaker, 
is on a north-south axis. And we need to develop plans as to 
how to get our products to the markets that exist on the 
north-south axis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there are people south of the border who feel that they 
would like to work with us and put a plan together so we have a 
continuous flow of goods both coming up from the south and 
going south from the north across the border, Mr. Speaker. Well 
I don’t see any plans and even any initiatives to start developing 
plans, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also short-line railroads, it doesn’t seem to be on the radar 
screen, Mr. Speaker, with this government. And with the 
rationalization that has been taken in the grain transportation 
and handling system, we need to look at that option and there 
are some challenges there that need to be addressed, Mr. 
Speaker. And we need to get on with that and again, with this 
government we don’t see any initiatives dealing with that 
particular area. 
 
And I would like to state, Mr. Speaker, that a Saskatchewan 
Party government would address all of those issues. We hear 
from that side of the House that we have a slogan and no plan. 
Well we do have a plan. We have a plan in . . . to highways and 
transportation to address those issues. 
 
And when they screw up their courage to call the election, we 
will roll out the full plan. We rolled part of it out and we’ll roll 
out the rest of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened closely today to the answers that the 
Minister of Agriculture gave to the question asked by my 
colleague, the member from Watrous, with regards to the 
agricultural policy framework. And I will . . . I will . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
members. 
 
Mr. Hart: — What I would like to say before I get to that part 
of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, is that I was pleased to see the 
comment or the statement made in the Speech from the Throne 
dealing with carbon sinks. This is an issue that some of us on 

this side of the House have raised with the Minister of 
Agriculture in the last two sessions. And at least I was pleased 
to see that there’s a recognition of the importance of this issue. 
 
Now having . . . It’s easy to talk the talk, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 
more difficult to walk the walk, Mr. Speaker. And I am quite 
concerned as to the resources that have been committed by this 
government to deal with that whole area of negotiating a 
program and a plan that will, that will allow the farmers of 
Saskatchewan to receive the benefits of the carbon sinks under 
this whole Kyoto implementation plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as I said a few moments ago, I listened very carefully to the 
answers that the minister gave to my colleague from Watrous 
during question period. And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I was 
. . . well I was not impressed as I heard from that side of the 
House — I’m actually searching for the word, Mr. Speaker. 
Disappointed, I might describe. Disgusted, perhaps. 
Bewildered, is probably . . . probably more accurately describes 
my reaction to his answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture in this NDP government is playing 
games with the farmers of this province, Mr. Speaker. He’s 
saying that, oh no we couldn’t sign the initial framework 
agreement because it wasn’t a good thing to do; there wasn’t 
enough money in the program — a whole host of reasons, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But there are two . . . As my colleague said, there are two parts 
to this whole APF as far as agreements between the two levels 
of government. One is the framework agreement and one is the 
implementation agreement. Well if you don’t sign the 
framework agreement, how do you become part of the program 
design? You don’t. 
 
So what had happened here in the last number of months when 
this program was being designed by the federal government and 
the other provinces that did sign earlier on, is that when it takes 
. . . there was general discussions and then when it came down 
to talking about specifics as far as program design, 
Saskatchewan had to leave because they didn’t sign. If you 
don’t sign, you don’t sit at the table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this reminds me very much of what happened back in 1999 
when we had a crisis here in agriculture. The then minister of 
. . . Ag minister, Eric Upshall, went down . . . said to Ottawa, 
it’s your problem; you figure it out; I’m going on holidays to 
Mexico. Well we know what the results were, Mr. Speaker. We 
ended up with AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance), a program that was designed to deal with the hog 
farms in Central Canada and it was applied to Western Canada 
and it just didn’t work. 
 
And I’m afraid we’re heading down that same path now. We 
keep hearing from this Minister of Agriculture that in the areas 
of business risk management which is one envelope of a 
five-envelope policy, framework, that the two main programs 
are crop insurance and NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account). Well we’ve seen . . . Well I guess we haven’t seen 
what this year’s crop insurance program is going to look like 
because this minister didn’t sign. He said he wasn’t able to get 
the federal government’s money until he finally signed that here 
earlier on this month. 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

So now farmers in this province are waiting for their details of 
crop insurance, so we really don’t know what it looks like. The 
province of Alberta, they announced their program back in 
January. It has all the enhancements, all the things that 
Saskatchewan farmers would like to have but never will have. 
 
Then he says . . . keeps telling us that the other mainstay of this 
area is NISA. Well, Mr. Speaker — and he says it’s going to be 
a super NISA — well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a super NISA. It 
has no resemblance to NISA. You know what it is? It’s AIDA 
with a premium, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I attended a workshop that SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities) had at their annual convention earlier 
this month and they brought out officials from Ag Canada to 
explain this super NISA. Well the reaction of the delegates and 
the farm members at that workshop, it was total, total disgust, 
Mr. Speaker. They rolled their eyes; they had no use; they 
didn’t understand it. 
 
And now what we’re hearing from this minister, Mr. Speaker, is 
that, well it’s a done deal; let’s get on with it, let’s explain the 
program to our producers, and we’ll just have to live with it. 
 
Well I . . . Before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing, 
one . . . a couple of things that I would like to read into the 
record. And I should just also say before I do that, is that the 
minister today said, well all the other ministers are saying we 
should sign it. Well that’s not in fact true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the recent article in The Western Producer, the Minister of 
Agriculture from Ontario said that she definitely is calling for 
this implementation to be delayed for a year. She says: 
 

By pushing (all) on this date (. . . agriculture minister Lyle 
Vanclief) will bring turmoil into the agriculture community 
and I don’t think that’s (a) good (thing). 
 

So we know where the minister from Ontario stands on this 
situation. 
 
I received an e-mail, Mr. Speaker, as other members of our 
caucus did yesterday, from a producer who was very concerned 
that this government takes their time to develop the plan 
properly, to explain it to the farmers of Saskatchewan, because 
it’s a long-term plan and we need to know what it’s about. And 
therefore it shouldn’t be rushed. In fact what he was saying is, 
delay it for a year. 
 
Now I think probably what sums it up the best, is this whole 
APF, and the feelings of Saskatchewan farmers is probably 
summarized in an article on March 12, in The StarPhoenix by 
Kevin Hursh. And I must say, Mr. Speaker, there are a number 
of times when I certainly don’t agree with everything that 
Kevin Hursh has to say or writes about, but this is one time I 
think he’s definitely right on. 
 
And I will quote what he said. He said and he’s referring to . . . 
His article was, “New farm safety net won’t be popular.” And 
his final two paragraphs, he says: 
 

As one farmer suggested this week, Saskatchewan should 
apply for the call centre that will handle all the questions 

from farmers and accountants once this wonderful 
expanded NISA is foisted upon us. 
 

And I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Vanclief and Serby may get lucky. Perhaps by the time this 
all gets ugly, they will no longer be our ministers of 
agriculture. 
 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that sums it up as to the way this Minister 
of Agriculture’s handling this program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will say that I will definitely be voting for 
the amendment and opposing the motion. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly my pleasure to enter into this Throne Speech debate 
on behalf of the constituents of Regina Northeast. And I’m sure, 
Mr. Speaker, you will agree with me, it doesn’t matter where 
you travel in Saskatchewan or what communities you may stop 
in, you meet nothing but fine, great people in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, there are no finer nor better 
people, nor greater people, than the people in Regina Northeast. 
And I believe I can say that with a degree of authority because I 
like to spend much of my summers out door knocking in my 
constituency, on the doorstep, visiting with my constituents. 
And I’m very pleased to say that I always get greeted so very 
warmly and very appreciative by the folks there. So I really 
appreciate having the opportunity to represent the fine people of 
Regina Northeast. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to welcome the 
new members to the legislature, the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview and the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. I’m sure 
that they will find this experience quite interesting, and I’m sure 
quite enjoyable. And I know that they will work very hard on 
behalf of their constituents representing them here in the 
legislature and on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. So I 
want to welcome them and congratulate them on their victories, 
and we’re looking forward to having their input into the process 
of the elected Assembly here. 
 
I too, Mr. Speaker, want to take this opportunity to congratulate 
my colleague from Cumberland who was the mover of the 
Throne Speech. I am always impressed when I hear my 
colleague speak. This speech was no less impressive. I think it 
clearly demonstrated his deep passion not only for the people of 
his constituency and for the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
but for Saskatchewan people as a whole. 
 
And I’ve gained, by watching him and listening to him and 
learning from him, an even deeper respect for his deep 
commitment to the democratic and the political process of this 
House. And I really appreciate that. 
 
I also want to take the opportunity to congratulate my seatmate, 
the member from Regina Wascana Plains. She seconded the 
Throne Speech. She too showed very clearly her compassion 
and her conviction to the political process and the democratic 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

 

process of this House. And as the Chair of the Regina caucus 
committee, I know that she clearly demonstrates on a regular 
basis her commitment to the city of Regina. And I know that, 
Mr. Speaker, because she’s forever scheduling meetings with 
the Regina caucus with various groups from the city of Regina 
here, and I much appreciate that. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this Throne Speech clearly, clearly sets out 
the very distinct difference between the opposition Sask Party 
and the NDP government on this side of the House. 
 
That difference, when you boil it all down, that difference is 
quite simple. The government on this side of the House has a 
proven plan to build and move Saskatchewan forward, but the 
Sask Party only has an unbelievable slogan. And, Mr. Speaker, 
our Throne Speech clearly outlines what this government sees 
for Saskatchewan — that is a vision of this province, a province 
where the opportunity is there for those who want to work hard, 
dream big, plan well, and succeed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the Government Co-Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Construction Panel, a couple of months ago I had 
the opportunity to have a conversation with one of the road 
builders in our province, a gentleman who has been in this 
province for a number of years now and a very successful road 
contractor. And he tells me that he was born in this province 
and as a young lad after receiving his high school education he 
decided he would try his opportunities, as they so may be, in 
Alberta. 
 
And he left Saskatchewan and went to Alberta and he spent six 
years there. And then he moved back here to Saskatchewan 
soon after he was married because he knew Saskatchewan was 
the best place in Canada to raise a family, the best place in 
Saskatchewan to start a business. He has done so and has a very 
successful road construction business. 
 
It was his suggestion that everybody, everybody inside 
Saskatchewan should be asked to look at the opportunities 
outside of Saskatchewan because they would appreciate 
Saskatchewan opportunities that much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget . . . our Throne Speech clearly outlined 
a vision of the expanding economy where no one is excluded, 
everyone is included, where everyone will have the opportunity 
to enjoy the opportunities and the prosperity of Saskatchewan. 
It’s a vision where the province . . . the children of our province 
will have the opportunity to grow up in healthy, safe, and secure 
communities and receive the very best of education and training 
and to be encouraged in turn to build successful families and 
careers right here at home. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, regardless of what the opposition says on an 
almost monotonous basis about young people leaving 
Saskatchewan, that is not true. And I can attest to that, Mr. 
Speaker, because I have two adult children and both of them 
have stayed here in Saskatchewan, are making their lives in 
Saskatchewan, and are building . . . raising their families right 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Harper: — The Saskatchewan economy is strong and it is 
expanding. It’s expanding through diversification. When we 
became government in this province in 1991, Mr. Speaker, 
much of the province’s economy was tied directly to 
agriculture. I believe somewhere in around at 60 per cent of our 
economy was a direct tie to agriculture. 
 
Through our efforts as the government of this province, we 
have moved the diversification framework of this province to 
where, today, 60 per cent of the economy is non-agriculture and 
40 per cent of the economy is agriculture. So we’ve moved that 
file a long way, Mr. Speaker, to the point where the 
employment in Saskatchewan has grown for the last 10 
consecutive months. Employment records have been set in six 
of those same months. Moving forward progressively in a 
positive way. That, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t happen; that only 
happens when you have a plan. 
 
The retail sales, business, and corporations, have both increased 
more than 7 per cent in the last year here in Saskatchewan. 
Growth has occurred in the potash sales, in the value of 
manufactured goods, and in the value of residential building 
permits, and in the average weekly earnings. Progress, Mr. 
Speaker. But that doesn’t just happen; it only happens with a 
plan. 
 
Capital investment in our province continues to grow. And in 
question period, our Minister of Justice answered that question 
very distinctly when he said Saskatchewan leads the way this 
year in capital investment in Canada. And we have done this, 
Mr. Speaker, all of this, in spite of experiencing two years of 
drought in Saskatchewan — two consecutive years of droughts. 
But nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, we have every reason and every 
confidence in our future to develop our rural economy. 
 
And last spring sitting of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, I had the 
honour and the opportunity to chair the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture and to sit in this very Assembly and receive the 
ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) report. And 
that ACRE report simply was a blueprint for the modernization 
of our agricultural economy in Saskatchewan and to create even 
greater benefits there within. 
 
Part of that strategy is the development of value-added industry 
here. And part of that, Mr. Speaker, is to make our farm land 
ownership more attractive to people from outside of 
Saskatchewan, and our government moved forward in the last 
session making those changes to The Farm Land Security Act 
to make all Canadian people eligible to buy Saskatchewan farm 
land. 
 
And interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, how things happen in 
one’s life. This January, when I had the opportunity to attend 
the Presiding Officers Conference in Toronto with yourself and 
the Deputy Speaker, I had the opportunity to have a 
conversation with Speaker Kowalski from Alberta. That’s the 
Alberta Kowalskis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it was interesting because just very soon after we shook 
hands and reacquainted ourselves, he says to me, what are you 
doing in Saskatchewan? And I said well, why? He said, because 
as you know, Ron, I represent a rural constituency in Alberta 
and he said I have lost a number of my constituents to 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

Saskatchewan. They’re young families who have taken the 
opportunity to look at Saskatchewan to expand their livestock 
operations. Some of them have sold out in Alberta and moved 
to Saskatchewan; others have expanded their operation here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I personally know of two of those families, Mr. Speaker, two 
young families that have moved from Alberta. They were 
involved in a ranching business industry there and have been 
for some time — I believe they were third or fourth generation, 
perhaps in there. They were prohibited because of land costs to 
be able to expand their ranching opportunities in Alberta. They 
looked at Saskatchewan, saw the Saskatchewan advantage. Two 
of those young families sold out their holdings in Alberta, 
moved lock, stock, and barrel with their families to 
Saskatchewan, and re-established themselves here in this 
province. 
 
Another case that I’m aware of, Mr. Speaker, is a three-brother 
operation that is experiencing the same difficulties in Alberta. 
They could not expand their operations. They were looking at 
the expansion obviously not available to them in Alberta. They 
looked at the Saskatchewan advantage and they have purchased 
land in the Endeavour area. And one brother and his family 
have moved here to run the operation in Saskatchewan, while 
two brothers stay in Alberta and run that operation. They’re 
now expanding their operations and they’re expanding it into 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, last fall — I can’t remember exactly which 
month it was — but I remember reading an article that was 
published in the Saskatchewan Hereford digest. There was an 
article about a young farm family that had moved from Alberta, 
and if I remember right they were a young family, had three 
children. They moved from Alberta. They moved to Saltcoats, 
Saskatchewan because of the Saskatchewan advantage. They 
sold off their farming operation in Alberta, moved to Saltcoats, 
bought farm land, moved much of their livestock herd, their 
cow . . . basic cow herd to Saltcoats and expanding that 
operation there. 
 
And the interesting part of the article, Mr. Speaker, and the 
writer of the article whose name escapes me . . . but what I 
really found interesting there was that as the author of the 
article was summing up the story, the author wrote the 
following, and I quote: 
 

Grass is always greener on the other side of the fence. And 
in this case Saskatchewan is the other side of the fence. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the home for 25 
per cent of Canada’s beef herd and this year our government is 
moving forward to expand that by releasing a 10-year beef 
production strategy. There is opportunity in our province to 
grow our beef herd. Our government has recognized that and 
our government is working hand in hand with the producers and 
producer organizations to see to it that it happens. 
 
Signs are already there, Mr. Speaker, that these things are 
happening. And if you ever have the opportunity to talk to 
hardware owners or hardware operators and hardware store 

managers, across the parkland area of Saskatchewan in 
particular, they will identify this. 
 
I had the opportunity here a few weeks ago to meet up with and 
discuss some of the issues in the area with some of the co-op 
hardware managers in the Canora, Sturgis, Norquay, Preeceville 
areas. 
 
And something that they indicated to me was that over the last 
five years they’ve noticed a progressive increase in sales of 
hardware for livestock — and that is barbed wire, fence posts, 
corral panellings, and so on and so forth — simply because 
they’ve recognized that the livestock, the basic livestock, basic 
cow herd in that area has been on the grow for the last four or 
five years. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, comes the opportunity — and our 
government has recognized that and has moved forthright on 
that — the opportunity to establish an ethanol industry here in 
this province. Ethanol, which certainly has its direct benefits to 
the rural economy, but also contributes not only in a direct way, 
but has the opportunity to contribute in spin-off opportunities 
and that is the by-product from the ethanol plants can be used in 
feedlots, feedlots that would support then the expansion of our 
basic cow herd in this province. 
 
And that’s just the industry spin-offs, Mr. Speaker. With that, of 
course, will come other spin-offs such as with a feedlot 
industry, of not only the direct jobs in the feedlot industry, but 
there will be the spin-off jobs in corral cleaning and silage 
production and jobs that will result as a result of the ethanol 
investment. So I think, Mr. Speaker, we’re well placed to move 
our economy very much forward in a long way. 
 
And I think also, Mr. Speaker, that this opportunity to build the 
industrial base of our province is also an opportunity for us to 
be able to expand the unionized part of our provincial 
workforce. Growth and the expansion of unionized part of our 
workforce has a very positive effect on our economy. It ensures 
that our working men and women of our province have the 
ability to earn a reasonable living. 
 
And I know that the opposition believes that unions are job 
killers, but that’s simply not true. When we look around our 
province, look around our country, across North America as a 
whole, you will see that those communities that have a strong 
union workforce also enjoy a strong, prosperous community. 
Unions are not job killers; unions are community builders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, small- and medium-sized 
business plays a major, major role and contributes in a major 
way to the expansion of the Saskatchewan economy. They 
provide goods and services; they foster the growth of tourism. 
 
Tourism is a real opportunity in this province. As those across 
this nation get to see our Saskatchewan wide open campaign, 
they start to recognize the quality of tourism, the beauty that we 
have in this province — not just the flat prairie land which has 
its own beauty, but it has the lakes and the forests and a certain 
attraction, Mr. Speaker. And there certainly is the opportunity 
to expand our tourism, and there certainly is the opportunity to 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

 

expand hunting and bringing in foreigners to enjoy not only our 
beauty, but to enjoy some of the sports of our wildlife hunting. 
 
Manufacturing has improved in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 
value-added products has been improving over a regular basis. 
And I just want to share with you, Mr. Speaker, one little 
example of what I think is a success story in value-added 
industries. 
 
There’s a little alfalfa plant called Western Alfalfa Milling 
Limited of Norquay, Saskatchewan. That plant started 
approximately 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker, and it started as a 
community initiative, and it has had some difficult times, this is 
true. But at the end of the day, the plant is there — physically 
there. Where 10 years ago there was nothing, today there’s an 
alfalfa processing plant there. 
 
Last year . . . and I had the opportunity this morning to speak to 
the general manager of that plant, and this is what he told me. 
He says, what that plant does for the area and for those 
communities within that area, it provides farmers the 
opportunity to produce an alternate cash crop. It creates jobs for 
the area, and all the product, all the product is exported outside 
the boundaries of Canada. So it brings in foreign currency. 
 
Last year that little plant there, Mr. Speaker, harvested between 
25 and 30,000 acres of alfalfa. It created 16 full-time jobs, 
another 65 seasonal jobs, which in other words, Mr. Speaker, 
gave the opportunity for many farmers in that area to enjoy 
some off-farm income, allowing them the ability to enjoy a 
proper and meaningful lifestyle while farming and working off 
the farm. 
 
That little plant, Mr. Speaker, had a payroll last year of a little 
over $1 million, and returned to producers in that area $1.3 
million. 
 
(15:00) 
 
That little operation, Mr. Speaker, plowed back into the 
Saskatchewan economy between 7 and $8 million and all of 
that money was generated by foreign currency, by export sales 
to lands other than Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — In order to enjoy and continue to enjoy the 
growth that we have in our economy, we have to continue to 
expand the infrastructure to maintain the ability for our 
industries to grow and to expand and to export their products 
internationally. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, we have done that. Saskatchewan’s 
massive highway improvement program will continue to be a 
part of a three-year program — $900 million committed in 
support of that program, in support of paving and reconstructing 
over some 150 kilometres of highways in Saskatchewan 
including accelerating the twinning of No. 1 and No. 16 
Highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is just a number of things that one could 
highlight in this budget but time wouldn’t permit for me to do 
that because I’m sure some of my other colleagues want to get 

in on this debate and I may cut them out of it and then they 
won’t talk to me or buy me coffee or anything like that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal of difference between the 
opposition and the government. We on this side, on the 
government side, have a tried and proven plan to support 
Saskatchewan and to continue to move Saskatchewan forward 
on the road of opportunity and prosperity. 
 
When I look at what the Sask Party is saying, I am reminded, 
Mr. Speaker, of a former colleague of mine who used to have a 
saying: if you don’t know where you’re going, you won’t know 
when you get there. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear to me, that on 
this side of the House — and the people of Saskatchewan — 
that the Sask Party has no plan to grow Saskatchewan. Their 
policies would only gut Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Regina Northeast, I will 
not be voting for the amendment but I will be voting for the 
main motion. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me pleasure to enter the debate today on the Speech from the 
Throne. If I recall correctly, this is the fourth one that I’ve had 
the privilege of participating in and I want to comment right off 
the top, Mr. Speaker, that the first one was rather exciting in 
some ways because it was a new venture for me. It was, you 
know, quite an exciting activity, an opportunity to speak on 
behalf of the people of Cypress Hills for the very first time in 
the legislature. And I remember that episode quite vividly. I 
recall also that I read the entire speech and I was complimented 
by so many members on the government side on what a fine job 
I did, and I hope they feel that way by the time I’m done this 
afternoon. 
 
I do know, Mr. Speaker, that in the intervening years, however, 
the quality of the Throne Speech has diminished considerably, 
whereas today we’re at a point where the Throne Speech said 
virtually nothing at all. And I hope that my response won’t be 
nearly as insipid as the Throne Speech itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first order of business today, I believe, should 
be to congratulate the two new members that have joined the 
House as a result of by-elections that happened just the day 
before the House reconvened. I’d like to congratulate and 
welcome to the House the new member for Fairview that is 
sitting on the government side and of course our own member 
from Battleford-Cut Knife who joined us with an overwhelming 
response from the elector . . . the electors of his constituency, 
and we’re glad to have him here as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I looked at quite a bit of the material. I’ve read the 
Throne Speech actually a couple of times; I sat through it. And I 
wanted to highlight some of the areas that I thought would be 
particularly impressive and areas that would show the vision 
and creativity of this government for the upcoming year and 
maybe into the years beyond as we start a whole new 
millennium. But, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t find that. 
 
And I searched for words that might best describe this particular 
speech. And if I was putting a title to it, Mr. Speaker, I think the 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

best title that I could possibly give it would be — and this is 
generous, Mr. Speaker — the title I would give this speech is, a 
longing, backward glance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to take my word for it. The 
members of the government don’t have to take my word for it. 
But I think we could look at the public record and some of the 
responses to this particular speech that showed up in the 
provincial media. And if I may be so indulged, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to just refer to a couple of those articles that showed up 
shortly after the Throne Speech was given. 
 
On Wednesday, March 19, in the Leader-Post, there’s a 
headline that reads, “Government outlines its plans.” And if I 
may, I’ll just read the first couple of paragraphs out of this 
story. It says here: 
 

The provincial government’s roadmap for the upcoming 
session looked more like a retrospective when Lt.-Gov. 
Lynda Haverstock read Tuesday’s speech from the throne. 
 
While the 55-minute speech was dominated by past 
accomplishments of the coalition government, mixed with 
already announced projects to be done in conjunction with 
the federal government . . . (it wasn’t much of a 
presentation.) 
 

Mr. Speaker, I looked at the Leader-Post in the editorial section 
and without going into a lot of detail here, it says as a heading, 
“Government lacks vision.” And just the final paragraph is 
rather telling, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

The throne speech is fiscally cautious, to be sure, but so 
much looking backward and reflecting on past initiatives 
suggests a kind of policy poverty. Is this really the kind of 
Throne Speech on which the government wants to fight an 
election? 

 
Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix was less complimentary, if I 
might put it that way. They say: 
 

Even by the milquetoast standards of throne speeches, 
anyone who bothers to look at the government’s offering 
would be disheartened by its vacuity. This isn’t a course of 
action; mostly it’s a rehash of existing programs, with what 
little it promises by way of a legislative agenda (it’s) so 
meaningless as to be laughable. 
 
The utter banality of the government’s plans outlined in 
Tuesday’s throne speech . . . leaves a distinct impression of 
a government that has run out of gas and doesn’t have the 
bodies or cash to refuel. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t regularly quote Murray Mandryk and I 
won’t go into any lengthy quote in this particular piece that he 
offered in the Leader-Post of March 19 but the heading here is, 
“Uninspired throne speech was a missed opportunity.” 

 
For Premier Lorne Calvert’s political sake, there better be 
something new in Finance Minister Jim Melenchuk’s 
budget speech. There sure hasn’t been much to inspire the 
voters of this province in what we’ve seen so far. 
 

I underlined a considerable amount of this particular piece by 
Murray Mandryk. And as I said, I’m not prone to quoting him 
and I won’t do that here today, but you know if the camera can 
move in on this particular paper I’m sure they’ll see the 
underlining at length in this particular editorial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter to the government what I think. 
You know the nature of our adversarial type of government, 
frankly, is that the government has their ideas and their agenda. 
The opposition have an agenda of its own and we have our 
ideas. And virtually, never the twain shall meet is the standard 
of the adversarial type of government we operate. That’s not 
necessarily the best way to operate but it’s the rules we’re given 
and the game we play in this particular House. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think it behooves the 
government to consider a little more seriously the comments of 
people who have written for the public record, the public 
response, the editorial response to the government’s Throne 
Speech this year. I think if they were serious about, about their 
plan and their objectives and their determination to rule 
interminably in this province, they really should come up with 
something of substance and this Throne Speech failed to deliver 
in that count. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only were the editorialists unimpressed; so 
was the Premier himself. You know I watched as he sat on the 
floor of the House while the Throne Speech was delivered. And 
even though the Lieutenant Governor did an admirable job of 
reading that very lengthy document, as I watched the Premier, I 
watched the countenance on his face. I watched the look of 
despair come over him. I watched him fidget and twist and turn 
in his chair. Mr. Speaker, that was not the countenance, that was 
not the posture of a man who was convinced that the speech he 
was hearing — the speech that had been written on behalf of his 
government — was one of conviction, one of promise, and one 
of vision. There was a man who looked defeated by his own 
speech. 
 
And I understand that the very next morning he walked into the 
cabinet room and slammed down his books on the table — that 
big oak table in the Premier’s office there — and laid down the 
law. And he said, look, if that’s the best my caucus and my 
cabinet can offer in terms of vision, we’re in trouble. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I concur. This government is in serious trouble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know normally on an auspicious occasion 
such as the Speech from the Throne, this Chamber is filled to 
the rafters with people, with friends, with invited guests. Mr. 
Speaker, an indication of how little respect and little future this 
government has is the fact that we could have gone out on the 
highways and byways and invited people to come in and we 
wouldn’t have filled this place. There were more empty seats 
than I’ve seen at most hockey teams that have a losing streak 
going on. This was a situation that was embarrassing, frankly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m on the opposite side of the House. I’m 
supposed to exalt in the foibles and the failures of this 
government. I was embarrassed for this government, frankly. 
They haven’t got enough friends to fill this Chamber. 
 
And it was so patently obvious that people have abandoned this 
government. They think there’s no future in this government, 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

 

and they’re heading for the door. They certainly won’t come 
through these doors to hear another Throne Speech like that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last few days we’ve been listening to 
speeches in support or in opposition to the Throne Speech. And 
I really found it interesting that so many of the government 
members spent their 20 minutes, or allotted time, not to address 
the Throne Speech, not to talk about the wonderful program that 
it had laid out and that they were going to advance as a 
government over the next 12 months or so. We didn’t hear any 
of that from the members on the government side. But we did 
hear a lot of time used to try and tie the opposition to a 
government that’s a couple of decades old. 
 
We had a modest recitation of poor statistics. We’ve had attacks 
on our members as though some small arrangement, some 
previous work experience, some tie with a government that’s 20 
years old might be an impediment to governance. But, Mr. 
Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, I listened to the minister of 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs. He took 20 
minutes . . . Mr. Speaker, the minister of GRAA (Government 
Relations and Aboriginal Affairs) took 20 minutes . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
point I’m trying to make is the minister took 20 minutes to try 
and tie eight people on this side to a two-decade-old 
government. What about the other 18 members on this side? 
What about the members on this side who have had no previous 
government experience, who’ve had no necessarily political ties 
previously? Does that not count for something? 
 
What about the people who came to the political process 
because they were offended by some of the excesses of the 
previous administration? What about those of us who felt that it 
was time for us to put our names forward to provide a service to 
our constituents, to provide public service without the baggage 
that the government wants to continually associate with us? 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, if I recall correctly, in the 1990 general 
election the then premier of the province, the leader of the 
government, Mr. Roy Romanow, at that time spent 
three-quarters of the election campaign calling this side of the 
House and the members on this side of the House 
Sask-a-Tories. Do you know when he quit, Mr. Speaker? When 
he found out the people of the province resented that. They 
were beyond that. That was the kind of political trash that the 
people of this province were not interested in hearing any more. 
 
And do you know, if the premier had persisted in that technique 
one more week, the NDP would have lost that election. 
Fortunately the premier had the sense to back off in the last 
week of the election and he quit using that term. 
 
You know the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the people on the 
government side are very slow learners because they almost lost 
the election in 1999 by that technique. Today, they’re trying to 
do the same thing over again. The vast majority of voters in this 
province don’t care. They don’t care a fig about whose political 
history is what. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m actually glad that they’re doing 

this. I’m very happy they’re doing it because it only gives more 
credibility to our campaign of good governance. That is seen as 
old-style politics. We need good governance in this province 
and the Saskatchewan Party is prepared to give it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the minister of Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs spent his 20 minutes doing that, the Minister 
of Social Services was trying to give us a lesson in democracy. 
Now I find that very interesting, Mr. Speaker, as though we 
could learn something about democracy from this party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just . . . let me quote again from the 
Leader-Post. This headline talks about Lorne Nystrom’s son 
seeking the NDP Party’s support in a newly constituted 
constituency. Let me quote from this, Mr. Speaker. Jason 
Nystrom is the 29-year-old son of Lorne Nystrom. He is an SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) employee and he thinks 
that it’s time for him to put his name forward for public service. 
 
(15:15) 
 
You know, if he represents . . . if what this quote here that I’m 
about to read represents the changing mentality in the younger 
NDP, I will welcome it, Mr. Speaker. Let me quote from this 
story: 
 

More will be expected of us (that’s the NDP) than . . . 
(tried) cries of indignation, shallow personal attacks, or 
trotting out bogeymen from the 1980s . . . 

 
That is a statement directly from Jason Nystrom’s letter to 
people who he’s asking to support him in the possible 
nomination race. 
 
And if it’s necessary, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the 
members opposite that lessons in democracy are learned by all 
sides of the House. And I refer to a 1999 episode that the 
governing party saw themselves embroiled in. I won’t use the 
name of the candidate, but I’m sure they will have their 
memories prodded when I mention that this individual beat 
prominent city councillor Kate Waygood and the NDP 
hierarchy has been agonizing over whether to let it stand for the 
past three weeks. 
 
That situation was resolved, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP 
executive confirmed a recommendation to the premier not to 
sign the candidate’s nomination papers for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. I believe we have a member in this House sitting, 
representing the constituency of Meewasin, who benefited from 
the NDP Executive Council’s decision not to allow this 
individual to run even though he had successfully and 
democratically won the nomination. This group of people, Mr. 
Speaker, cannot teach the opposition any lessons about 
democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that 
this particularly is a situation that enhances anybody’s image. 
But I don’t think anything is served by one party trying to do 
upmanship when it concerns another party’s problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear the member opposite asking what charges 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

did Grant Schmidt face, whether he’s found guilty or not. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not a road that I’m sure the government wants to 
go. Because I think with very little research we could probably 
find instances where people who wanted to run for the NDP 
were discouraged because of rumours and hearsay alleging 
illegal and/or immoral activities. And those rumours were 
completely unfounded, were unjustified, and yet the NDP 
insisted that the candidate not run just because of the rumours. 
We can’t learn anything about justice from these people either. 
They have their own skeletons in the closet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we have a number of other things that 
we need to dwell on today. Mr. Speaker, surely the government 
of the day really must have something positive to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, surely, surely instead of wasting 
so much time talking about ancient history, trying to teach us 
lessons that they have no right to teach us, surely this 
government must have had something positive to sell to the 
people of Saskatchewan, a real vision perhaps or a dream to 
help develop the vast human and social potential of this great 
province. Or maybe, just maybe the government had a plan. 
 
I wish they had had a plan because we haven’t seen any sign of 
it yet. To this day, Mr. Speaker, there’s been no evidence of a 
plan. And we certainly didn’t see any evidence of a plan in the 
Speech from the Throne in this particular session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party does have a plan. But 
more importantly, Mr. Speaker, our party has a goal. Mr. 
Speaker, I spent . . . I spent I’d say 25 or 30 years as a salesman. 
Most of my career was predicated on establishing a goal, 
working toward that goal, meeting that goal, and succeeding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think you’re aware of the statement that, if you 
fail to plan you plan to fail. If you don’t have a goal you’ll 
never achieve anything. Mr. Speaker, real success begins with 
establishing a goal. A goal is something we have enunciated 
clearly. 
 
Now because we’ve talked about our goal repeatedly and tried 
to make the public aware that the Official Opposition has a goal 
that we plan to achieve does not mean that we do not have a 
plan. But I’ll tell you what it does mean, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
not prepared to discuss our plan in public any longer. And I’ll 
tell you why. 
 
I have a list here of some of the things that we have talked 
about as part of our plan over the last three or four years. And I 
wonder if these things will sound familiar to the members of the 
government, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party plan included the 
development of an ethanol strategy. The Sask Party plan 
included tax reform, lowering personal income taxes. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party’s plan included extra spending for 
highway rejuvenation and a much reduced timetable for the 
twinning of the No. 1 Highway and the No. 16 Highway. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party plan included extending PST 
(Provincial Sales Tax) to off-reserve Aboriginal purchases. It 

included a reduction in small business income tax. It included 
the creation of a utility rate review committee. It included 
reducing the corporate capital tax. It included a call for the sex 
registry, which was mocked, Mr. Speaker, by this government, 
until last year when they finally endorsed it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s at least 10 points here that the 
Saskatchewan Party put forward as part of our plan. Guess who 
borrowed it? Guess who took it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is so bereft of their own ideas that 
they wait for the Saskatchewan Party to bring out a plan so they 
can use it. Mr. Speaker, what they have done in these areas has 
been insufficient. But I will give them credit for trying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatchewan Party becomes the next 
government of this province, we will implement our plan and 
the people of this province will benefit from it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment; I will be 
voting against the motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Before I start, I’d like to add my welcome 
to the two new members from Fairview and Battleford-Cut 
Knife. 
 
And I’d also like to take a moment to recognize those people in 
my life who have supported me throughout my career. Mr. 
Speaker, other members have spoken already about the unique 
duties of elected officials. I’ve always considered it a privilege 
and an honour to serve the people of Saskatchewan in this 
House. And I’d likewise always depended on the support of my 
family: my husband, Don, my parents, my sisters, and our many 
family and friends who . . . as I’ve carried out that service. 
 
Ours is not an easy job, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not one I would 
ever accomplish alone. My son, Sean, and my daughter, 
Heather, have also been a major source of support to me. But 
more than that, they are my inspiration. It’s for their future and 
the future of all young people that I continue to strive toward a 
better society for all. 
 
Finally, I’d like to compliment my constituency assistant, April 
Anderson. April is well known to the people of Saskatoon 
Eastview for her tireless efforts on their behalf. Her hard work 
and genuine care for the people of our neighbourhood are 
demonstrated every day in the excellent quality of her work. 
April is perhaps my greatest asset in meeting the needs of my 
constituents, and I thank you, April. 
 
It is with great pride that I rise today to address the 2003 Speech 
from the Throne. I can think of no better title for this speech 
than the one that it was given: “A Vision. A Plan. A Future 
Wide Open.” I know that the vision contained within this 
speech will have a terrific effect on my constituents, the people 
of Eastview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Eastview is a healthy constituency with 
many exciting new developments. Housing developments like 
our new condominiums and the addition to Ilarion seniors’ 
centre. Commercial developments like the addition to the STF 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

 

(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) Building, expansions in 
Eastview mall, the auto mall, and many new small businesses. 
And community developments like our innovative primary 
health centre at Scott/Forget Towers. The RCMP complex. And 
of special interest to me, 12 schools. 
 
It is from a first-hand experience with vibrant, diverse schools 
like those in Eastview that have strengthened my passionate 
interest in education. Each of these schools provides unique and 
vital services to the students they educate and to our 
community. I’m always pleased to see the students of Hugh 
Cairns in our gallery, and the members present will know that 
they are regular visitors. The Remembrance Day ceremonies at 
John Lake and Holy Cross are always a valuable if solemn 
occasion. And of course I have a special place in my heart for 
George Vanier, my own alma mater. 
 
But like our beautiful province, the constituency of Saskatoon 
Eastview is changing and the constituents have come to rely on 
this NDP government to change with them, meeting their 
diverse needs in new and innovative ways. 
 
Saskatoon Eastview is a community with deep roots, a fact to 
which our significant population of seniors can attest. Our plan 
recognizes the changing needs of these individuals and 
establishes the resources we need to meet those needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the seniors in Saskatoon Eastview know that only 
the NDP can be trusted to safeguard medicare. Our Action Plan 
for Saskatchewan Health Care will ensure that seniors have 
access to quality health services. We are innovators in health 
care reform, as evidenced by Canada’s first Health Quality 
Council. We are making money available to reduce waiting lists 
and this summer we will make access to vital health 
information even easier with the launch of a 24-hour advice 
line. 
 
Following through on our plan, we have established the 
Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network to better manage the 
surgical system. This network includes a province-wide registry 
and a surgical Web site, all designed to provide the best patient 
care possible. 
 
And through extensive recruitment and retention initiatives we 
are making sure that Saskatchewan has the best people 
providing that care — 40 new nursing seats announced in 
March, bringing our total seats up 65 per cent since 1999, with 
400 bursaries to students in various health disciplines. 
 
The NDP invented medicare, Mr. Speaker, and only this 
government can be trusted not to play games with the health of 
our citizens. 
 
As they move into a new phase in their lives, these few seniors 
can rest assured that the community around them will continue 
to blossom. They can enjoy these years, confident in the 
knowledge that the NDP is helping open opportunities for their 
children, their grandchildren, and their great grandchildren. 
Indeed, many of their children and grandchildren are already 
realizing these opportunities in this diverse constituency. 
 
I am proud to see new young families moving into my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. They are choosing to start their 

careers in Saskatchewan because of the many advantages our 
province has to offer. We have a lot to brag about here in 
Saskatchewan — record job growth, increases in retail sales, 
business incorporations, and average weekly earnings, capital 
investment growth. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker, but I know the Sask Party tends to 
get a little tired when we in the NDP talk about all the good 
news we have here in Saskatchewan. Suffice it to say that the 
young people in my constituency realize all the great things that 
this province has to offer and are putting down roots, buying 
homes, and starting their families. And as they pursue their 
career dreams, they can feel confident that we in the NDP have 
not forgotten the children of this province. 
 
This Throne Speech establishes our plan to protect 
Saskatchewan for our children and for those children not yet 
born, because we know that a strong economy and a secure 
future depend on protecting our delicate natural environment. 
 
It is for these people, Mr. Speaker, that we are addressing 
environmental hazards. We are undertaking a massive 
expansion in wind power generation; we are planting trees and 
watching them grow to a massive carbon sequestering project; 
and we are pioneering new techniques that will protect and 
enhance our economy and environment. And with a plan like 
this one, I know the people of Saskatoon Eastview can expect 
even more success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week’s Throne Speech was about vision. 
Saskatchewan and her people have many natural advantages 
which combine to create a bright future. But if we are to realize 
that future we must equip ourselves with the tools for success. 
Education is one of those tools; for many it is the most 
important tool. 
 
They say, Mr. Speaker, that education is not like filling a pail, it 
is rather like lighting a fire. I’m proud to say that our plan for 
education is lighting the fires of learning in minds across 
Saskatchewan, in people of all ages, of all backgrounds and 
aspirations, in cities, towns, and farms, and everywhere in 
between. 
 
Our innovative Kids First strategy targets the services like 
prenatal care, parental support, and at-home visits to vulnerable 
children and families. And in 2003 an additional 120 children 
will have advantage of this program. 
 
In the last year and a half we have almost doubled the number 
of pre-kindergarten classes in this province, and as the Throne 
Speech correctly points out, we’re not done yet. We’ve doubled 
the number of community schools. We’re pioneering the 
SchoolPLUS plan, an exciting approach that recognizes schools as 
the heart of the community where children learn. We’re forging 
new partnerships like the one I recently signed with the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), the first of its 
kind in Canada and a partnership with great potential for all 
Saskatchewan students. 
 
In the past five years, our K to 12 investment has risen by an 
average of 42 per cent per student and it’s paying off in 
indicators like the lowest high school dropout rate in Canada. 
Indicators like a recent study that showed Saskatchewan 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

students are first in the world in education equity. Indicators 
like our October public opinion poll in which the people of 
Saskatchewan overwhelmingly supported what we are doing in 
education. 
 
And after our students graduate from grade 12, the NDP plan 
will ensure they can pursue post-secondary training that will 
open even more doors of opportunity. Already 90,000 students 
are taking advantage of our network of universities, colleges, 
and technical institutes. They know education is a priority and 
this Throne Speech sets out a plan for post-secondary 
education. 
 
We are strengthening what is already North America’s greatest 
network of regional colleges. We are strengthening our 
technical institutes and universities by working with our 
post-secondary partners on growth and renewal. 
 
(15:30) 
 
At the University of Regina new construction includes the $30 
million Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, a $35 million 
student residence, a $31 million centre for kinesiology, health, 
and sport, and a $6 million greenhouse gas technology research 
centre. 
 
At the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon the work 
includes the $173 million synchrotron project, the largest 
science project in Canada in more than 30 years, which I’ve 
visited several times during the progress of its development, a 
$13 million chemical engineering extension, and a new $33 
million home for the College of Kinesiology. 
 
By working in partnership with industry and labour we are 
helping Saskatchewan’s adult learners get the skills they need to 
find and secure meaningful employment. The Throne Speech 
sets out our plan for students. We will ensure that our students, 
that more of them can access quality programs offered at our 
institutions. 
 
We will enhance student loans, provide training and 
apprenticeship bursaries, encourage the expansion of 
scholarships, develop new job opportunities for students during 
and after their education, and help more of our brightest and our 
best stay, build their careers, and realize their futures is in this 
province of almost limitless opportunity. 
 
This is a vision that encompasses the whole learner from early 
childhood to adulthood. This is a plan that focuses on the needs 
of the learner and meets them in innovative achievable ways. 
Ours is a future that burns with the fire of education, lit in 
schools, in colleges, and on-line across Saskatchewan — a 
future that truly is wide open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the great things about this job is witnessing 
the joy of learning burn in the eyes of our students. That joy 
was evident earlier in March when 240 mathletes in grades 8 to 
10 came from 22 towns and cities to compete in a mathematics 
or a math counts competition at the U of R (University of 
Regina). 
 
Looking at the Saskatchewan Party proposal so far, Mr. 
Speaker, I think some of the mathletes across the floor should 

consider some better training because even our grade 8 students 
could tell them that a 10 cent slogan and a billion dollar deficit 
add up not only to bad news for education in our province, but 
for all of our programs. 
 
That’s exactly what the Sask Party’s proposing. I was anxious 
to see the Sask Party plan for education, but at this rate I’ll 
probably be waiting a very long time. That’s because they don’t 
have a plan, Mr. Speaker, but a bunch of half-baked ideas. 
 
Like following the B.C. (British Columbia) model for education 
— black days for education according to the B.C. Teachers’ 
Federation. Like an extreme tax cut. How can we not expect 
this cut to be taken from our students when education is such a 
large part of the provincial budget? Like a bunch of hasty 
promises made without any thought to their cost, to 
implementation, or to consequence. They’ll say just about 
anything to get elected. 
 
Luckily, thanks in part to our great education system, 
Saskatchewan residents are some pretty smart people, and I 
know they’ll see the empty promises and rhetoric that we hear 
from the Sask Party for what it is — nothing but a desperate 
grab for power. And then, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province will send the members opposite right back to school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition say they’re ready to govern. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we are governing and we have 12 years of solid 
accomplishments — accomplishments in fiscal management, in 
social development, and of innovative programming — to prove 
it. We’re showing the Saskatchewan Party what governing is all 
about and maybe they should make like some of our bright 
young students and start taking notes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech represents a realistic vision, an 
attainable plan, and a wide open future — not only in education 
but across all government sectors, including the economy, the 
environment, health care, and our communities. This is a plan 
the people of Saskatchewan can trust. Not like the hasty 
promises from the Saskatchewan Party, promises that change 
depending on who they’re speaking to. This is a plan that builds 
on our strengths and focuses on our future. 
 
I will be voting against the amendment and in support of the 
Throne Speech on behalf of my constituents in Saskatoon 
Eastview. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the outset of my 
intervention in the Throne Speech debate, I’d like to thank the 
constituents of Swift Current for again another . . . the honour 
of another year of representing them in this legislature, and 
actually more specifically, Mr. Speaker, Swift Current and area, 
as my constituency includes the rural area to the south and to 
the north. 
 
This’ll be . . . may be the last session I have the good fortune to 
represent the area south of Swift Current. And that’s 
bittersweet. I do gain an area to the north and to the west, but 
the area that I lose to the south includes the community of 
Rhineland, which is a small Mennonite hamlet, really just a 
village now, that was where my father was born. So it’s a bit of 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

 

a hometown, I guess, for our Wall family and that area of the 
constituency will now go to Wood River, where I know my 
colleague and friend, the member for Wood River, will enjoy 
their support and input as well. 
 
And I’d also, Mr. Speaker, like to welcome the new members to 
the Assembly, from Saskatoon Fairview and our own new 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
At the outset too, Mr. Speaker, before I get specifically into the 
Throne Speech and into hopefully outlining the Crown 
corporation policy of the Saskatchewan Party, I would like to 
talk a little bit about the international events that are ongoing. 
I’ve heard other members talk about those events here in the 
Throne Speech debate and I too would like to . . . I too would 
like to add a few comments. 
 
The Premier stood in this Assembly not long ago and indicated 
that it was the position of the NDP government that they 
support the Prime Minister. They support the Prime Minister of 
Canada in his position that Canada should, in fact, not support 
the coalition allies — the United States, Australia, and Great 
Britain, to name three of the more active participants — rather 
that Canada would not participate in the war at all and join with 
its allies. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the concern that 
many of us have on this side of the House is the policy . . . is 
that the policy of the federal Government of Canada, and the 
policy of our provincial government is based on the proviso that 
the UN (United Nations) did not support . . . or rather a UN 
resolution was not passed to support the war. 
 
And as my colleagues have already said in the legislature here 
in the debate, and my friend from Cypress Hills has said as 
we’ve talked about this privately, and quite compellingly so, 
they’ve indicated that that perhaps is not the best way to arrive 
at foreign policy in Canada, to worry about whether the UN is 
providing cover for our position. 
 
A position is either just or it is not just. It’s either ethical or it’s 
not ethical. It’s either the right thing to do or not the right thing 
to do. And to base our foreign policy and the Premier’s position 
on what the UN may or may not have to say about any foreign 
affairs matter is an abdication of our responsibility as Canadians 
to make decisions on foreign policy based on what is right. 
 
And so all of us have to come to our conclusions, then, in that 
regard. If we think, for example, Mr. Speaker, that Saddam 
Hussein has weapons of mass destruction, that he’s used them 
in the past and would use them again, if we believe that they 
have terrorist training camps in Iraq — as we now know they 
do, based on the military events of just the last couple of days 
— if those are the things we believe, then the war to depose this 
Saddam Hussein and to get rid of that threat to world peace and 
to that terrorist threat to innocent people all over the world, then 
the war against that is compelling and is just. 
 
And more importantly, regardless of that question, we also have 
to wrestle with the fact that our closest ally, that our best friend 
in international relations, the United States of America, and 
Great Britain and Australia, have taken the measures they’ve 
taken. They’ve committed to the war. 

And so for those reasons, for those reasons many, many people 
in Swift Current who are talking about this war are very 
discouraged by the position that has been taken by not only the 
federal Liberals, but by the NDP here in the province of 
Saskatchewan on this international incident. 
 
And I would also say this. I think it’s certainly fair and 
reasonable that members of the House have brought to the 
Legislative Assembly’s attention the plight of innocents in Iraq 
who have been harmed by collateral damage or by any other 
indirect or direct activity of the war. That’s reasonable and 
that’s fair and that’s compelling. 
 
But so too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the plight of 3 to 5,000 
Kurds and their family who were gassed by their own leader, by 
Mr. Hussein. And I don’t hear anybody, I haven’t heard 
anybody in this Legislative Assembly speak to their cause and 
speak to the fact that they were butchered by this Saddam 
Hussein. I haven’t heard a word about them. 
 
Where is the outrage about the rape and the torture by this 
leader of Iraq? Where is the outrage about the fact that 
yesterday the British reported that Iraqi troops were firing on 
their own people to put down an uprising in Basra? Where is 
the outrage about the Iraqi paramilitary feigning surrender, only 
to attack coalition troops, Mr. Deputy Speaker? And where is 
the outrage by the Canadian Left and by the Saskatchewan NDP 
that American soldiers were apparently killed, execution style, 
in attack just a few days ago? 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a couple of days ago I, like 
many other people were . . . I’m sure were watching CNN’s 
(Cable News Network) coverage of the war and there was one 
embedded reporter with the United States Marine Corps Marine 
Expeditionary Unit and the 15th Artillery and his name was 
Jason Bellini I believe and he was at Umm Qasr and detailing 
some of the activities that had happened there. And he detailed 
an event that happened there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s very 
disturbing, where Marines and the 15th Artillery unit were 
taking fire from a building. And they returned that fire, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And soon after they had returned the fire, an ambulance pulled 
up and several men got into the ambulance. And it seemed to 
me from the coverage that the Marine Corps was concerned that 
the men that were getting into the ambulance were the ones that 
had been firing. But the ambulance left and the Marine Corps 
did not fire on the ambulance; it left. And out from the building 
under a white flag came women and children, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and the reporter reported that the Marine Corps troops 
were . . . knew, knew for a fact it had not been the women and 
children that had been firing on them but rather the men who 
had escaped the building, perhaps in the ambulance, perhaps 
otherwise. 
 
Where is the outrage of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? If we are 
going to have solid foreign policy in our country, we must do so 
based on the merits of each particular issue. And we haven’t 
done that in this case in this country. We’ve abdicated our 
authority in this regard to the United Nations of all 
organizations, whose record, frankly, recently is not that good. 
And you only need to look at Rwanda to find proof of that. 
 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I listened to the Throne Speech 
presented here a few days ago, I tried to listen to it from the 
perspective of one of my constituents, someone from Swift 
Current and area. And I wondered what they would think as 
they heard the Throne Speech. Because Swift Current, like 
many other communities on the west side of the province, have 
suffered greatly under the policies of this government and 
they’ve suffered especially from out-migration. 
 
We’re about an hour and 50 minutes, if you drive the speed 
limit marginally, from Medicine Hat. And members will know 
that I’ve said on several occasions that Medicine Hat provides a 
great deal of pressure on our economy and contributes to the 
out-migration of our young people in our area. 
 
And certainly that’s got to be their number one priority in Swift 
Current. Certainly the input I get from constituents is that is the 
number one priority — out-migration and the economy. 
 
So I listened carefully to the Throne Speech to find out what 
this government was prepared to do about it. And what I heard 
was a sad recitation of past policies of the government. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the people in Swift Current will be very, very 
disappointed by the fact that the Throne Speech, which should 
map out a broad and general vision for the future, rather focused 
on the past. 
 
The past policies, by the way, which have in fact caused the 
problem — the out-migration and the economic damage to 
southwest Saskatchewan — that’s what they heard. Far from a 
new vision for the province that would give them some hope, 
they simply heard a tired, old recitation of policies past. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think specifically what they 
were . . . what Swift Current people would be looking for was a 
solid plan, a detailed plan that would map out the road to 
growth, that would send a signal to Swift Current and the entire 
province that our government understands that out-migration — 
that quarter after quarter after quarter of record out-migration 
— is unacceptable and that the government was prepared to do 
something about it. But they heard nothing of the sort in the 
Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker; they heard nothing of the 
sort. 
 
They did hear a little bit about health care perhaps, some 
general statements about health care. And I wonder how that 
would resonate with the constituents of Swift Current based on 
the fact that for these last four years they have been begging — 
and longer, arguably — they have been begging this 
government to ensure that Swift Current has a truly regional 
health care facility. 
 
That they would have a regional health care facility in which 
the sewer system doesn’t back up as regularly as it does. That 
they could have a regional hospital in Swift Current whose 
ceiling parts don’t fall on patients, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you 
can believe it. That they could have a regional hospital facility 
in Swift Current, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that isn’t filled with 
mould; so much mould that they had to close down an entire 
floor of the hospital this summer; so much mould that I think 
there’s over 11 workers’ compensation cases of front line health 
care workers who have mould-related health care problems that 
they got — where? — from the hospital that they work in. From 

the regional hospital that the NDP expect front line workers, 
nurses and doctors, to provide health care to patients. They’re 
getting sick from the facility, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The budget is going to be announced this week and I know that 
the people of Swift Current and area will be holding this 
government to account because they have been forced to beg, to 
line up their share of the funding and then, cap in hand, beg for 
the government for what should be a slam dunk — the most 
compelling case that could possibly be made for a new regional 
health care facility. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ve heard from several of my 
colleagues who have taken the opportunity to highlight the fact 
that the Throne Speech was really devoid of any new ideas, but 
then to go on and in detail explain the Saskatchewan Party’s 
plan to grow the province by 100,000 people in 10 years. And 
I’d like to do that as well in my own critic area if I may, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the critic area of Crown corporations. 
 
You know, unfortunately over the last couple of years since I 
was afforded this . . . these critic opportunities, I’ve been just 
too busy. And the reason I’ve been too busy is because of the 
ubiquitous nature of the Crown sector in our economy. And that 
is obviously . . . that’s one of the problems. That’s one of the 
problems with our economy. 
 
You can’t swing a dead cat in the economy without hitting 
either a Crown corporation or a Crown investment, one that’s 
either competing with existing business men and women in the 
province of Saskatchewan, or perhaps losing millions of dollars 
in places like Atlanta, Georgia or Newcastle, Australia or 
Nashville, Tennessee or Chile or Mexico — or right here in the 
province through things like SPUDCO. 
 
And so it’s been far too busy. I mean there just . . . there simply 
shouldn’t be this much work for . . . in the year 2003, for 
anybody in politics charged with Crown corporation critic 
duties. And the reason is that this is . . . there shouldn’t be as 
many Crown corporations as there are, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
80-plus — 80-plus Crown corporation and Crown investments. 
That’s how many there are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so a year ago in a meeting with the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce we were able to detail our Crown corporation policy 
and I’d like to highlight some of that if I can in the minutes 
remaining. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’ve said is that we 
need to focus our major Crown corporations on the task at hand. 
Let’s focus them on their core competencies and on their market 
here at home. 
 
And we have said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the record, that 
when the Crowns do this they’re quite successful. And SaskTel 
may be the best example. I remember last year prior to the 
annual report from SaskTel being tabled, the president, the 
hand-picked NDP president of SaskTel, clearly indicated that 
the only reason they were able to hand over such a substantial 
dividend to the Minister of Finance was because of their core 
function. In fact, had they not been involved in all these other 
international schemes, they would have been able to hand over 
a lot more. And that forms the basis for our position that we 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

 

want to focus our Crowns on Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve said we’d place a moratorium on all international 
investments by the major Crowns in Saskatchewan, pending a 
review of those investments. And we have said unequivocally 
that we will put an end — an absolute end — to the practice of 
Crown corporations competing with Saskatchewan business 
men and women with their own tax dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve also said quite clearly that we 
think the process for appointing the board members of Crown 
corporations should change, that those candidates should come 
to the Crown Corporations Committee, or whatever might 
follow that committee, for approval so that the legislature has 
some say. And that too is a pragmatic change in the board and 
in the governance of Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also been pretty clear about what we are 
terming non-core Crown investments. And what we mean by 
those are the investments under the portfolio called CIC III 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan Industrial 
Interests Inc.), and this is everything from meat plants to swine 
genetics companies to you name it. Not the major Crowns, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but all these other investments that the 
government has made that have in fact chased away private 
venture capital in the province, and for the most part, lost 
money. And we’ve been quite clear about that. 
 
We have said we’re going to get the taxpayers out of those 
deals for the best possible value we can. We’re going to get the 
taxpayers out of those deals, take the proceeds and apply them 
to the debt that has grown under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. The 
debt of the province has grown under this government and we 
have said that the proceeds from those sales should be applied 
to the debt. 
 
There’s one exception in that group. STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) is in that group, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and we have said quite clearly that we also would like to get the 
taxpayers out of that money-losing proposition, but only when 
we can be assured that the private sector or community-based 
initiatives can replace the service. 
 
That brings us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the major Crowns. And 
in addition to focusing them on their core function here in the 
province, in addition to a moratorium on these wild 
international investments, and in addition to stopping them from 
competing with Saskatchewan businesses, we said they ought to 
be reviewed. That there ought to be a terms of reference for this 
review, and the terms of reference for this review would include 
the service that those Crowns provide in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the return on investment that taxpayers should 
be expecting from those huge investments, as well as the 
economic impact of any changes, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And what we have also clearly said is that this side of the 
Assembly is not ideologically bound either way. We’re not 
opposed to continued government ownership and neither, 
neither are we opposed to changes. Neither are we opposed, for 
example, to partnerships. 

Now we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government had 
an opportunity for a joint venture with one of its Crowns, a joint 
venture that would have resulted in a brand new company, head 
officed here in Regina and some attendant west side 
development. We know this. We sent a message last April to 
the government that if the deal was as we thought it was, as was 
explained to us, we would support it. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the deal involved a 
joint venture and a partnership, and that’s a form of 
privatization, Even though the joint venture would result in a 
new head office here in Regina, it’s a form of privatization. 
 
And we knew that this proposal was going forward on the 
government’s side and we encouraged them. We said, if it 
makes sense, if it helps grow the province, then put the Regina 
Manifesto down for just a second and approve the deal. Do the 
right thing. 
 
It looks like that deal is dead, Mr. Speaker. It looks like 
ideology took primacy and priority over what could help grow 
our economy. We know that, Mr. Speaker, now because it 
hasn’t come forward. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House are interested 
first and foremost in growing the province of Saskatchewan. 
That’s our goal. That’s our plan. And if we can pursue 
arrangements with the Crown corporations — partnerships, 
continued government ownership, whatever it may be — to 
help facilitate that growth, that is exactly what we intend to do 
when we take the seats on that side of the House after the next 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the next election campaign the NDP are going 
to be no doubt making up the position of the Saskatchewan 
Party as it relates to Crowns. They’ve already done it now — 
spreading misinformation. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it used to be, it used to be that the big 
scare was mediscare. Remember that, Mr. Speaker? That’s what 
they used to scare people with — senior citizens — that any 
other party other than the NDP would gut health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Well they won’t be using that tactic 
any more, Mr. Speaker, because the people of the province 
understand completely that it is this NDP socialist government 
that has gutted health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So the new scare, the new scare will be about 
Crown corporations. And we welcome the debate. We welcome 
the debate because they will come into the campaign with a 
tired, old ideology that’s been rejected worldwide. They’ll 
come to the campaign armed only with that. 
 
And we’re going to come to the campaign with ideas for 
growing the province of Saskatchewan. We already have. We’re 
going to come to the campaign with an open mind and the 
priority of increasing our population, so places like Swift 
Current can start to win the battle against Medicine Hat. You 
know there’s only an imaginary line that separate the two. Both 
have a powerful oil and gas sector waiting to grow — Medicine 
Hat’s developed more. Both have a strong agricultural base — 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

Medicine Hat a little more cattle and Swift Current a little more 
grain perhaps but still only an imaginary line separates them. 
And only a few decades ago the cities were the same size and 
now Medicine Hat is three or fourfold times the size of Swift 
Current. 
 
So we’ll go to the campaign armed with the plan that says to the 
people of Swift Current we know that you can compete with 
Medicine Hat if a government in Regina finally understands 
what it is we need to do in the province of Saskatchewan to 
grow it. And we look forward to that campaign, not only in 
Swift Current but in Regina and Saskatoon and across the 
province. 
 
And so for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment, Mr. Speaker, and voting against the Throne 
Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
certainly a pleasure and an honour to rise in support of the 
motion of the member for Cumberland and against the 
amendment put forth by the short-sighted Leader of the 
Opposition. Now, Mr. Speaker, I say short-sighted because 
following the re-election of a New Democratic Party 
government, the Leader of the Opposition is bound to change. 
By his wishful thinking and urging an early election, I’m afraid 
that he’s just cutting his own career quite short. 
 
In the short time that each of us has to rise in the Throne Speech 
debate, I want to take a little bit of time to thank the 
constituents of Saskatoon Meewasin for their continuing 
support, for their ideas and their suggestions, and for the 
opportunity to be of assistance to them as they go about their 
daily lives and when they encounter occasional problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the most gratifying part of being 
elected as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) is 
the opportunity to serve and the opportunity to influence, if 
even in only some small way, the development and the 
implementation of public policy. 
 
And for the information of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what governments do. We don’t skate back and forth across the 
centre line with a stick whacking away at those who don’t quite 
fit the mold as they did with their duly nominated candidate and 
former Tory, Grant Schmidt. A government’s job of course is to 
design and implement public policy and programs and to 
deliver them in the very best interests of all of the people of this 
great province. 
 
On the government side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we have 
done this, and we will continue to do this. And we will be 
continuing to do this long, long past the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to restate the vision which is so clearly laid 
out in the Speech from the Throne. And it says: 
 

Our government’s vision is a province of opportunity, 
where the future is wide open to all those prepared to 
dream big, plan well and work hard. 
 

It is a vision of an expanding economy from which no one 
is excluded. 
 
It is a vision of a province where all children will have the 
opportunity to grow up healthy, in safe secure 
communities, receive the very best in education and 
training, and be encouraged in turn, to build successful 
families and careers here at home. 
 
(It’s) a vision of a green Saskatchewan, where exciting new 
breakthroughs in renewable energy, environmental 
technology and energy conservation support a growing 
economy in harmony with our natural environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when our government talks about expanding the 
economy, we do it in a very inclusive way — ensuring that 
business interests are in balance with those of workers; ensuring 
that adequate risk management measures are in place to provide 
stability for agricultural producers; ensuring that all small- and 
medium-sized businesses, the energy sector, forestry, mining, 
oil and gas, and tourism, and arts all have the opportunity to 
thrive in this wonderful province that we live in. 
 
Now the Sask Party has one answer, possibly two, well maybe 
even three. And it goes like this — cut taxes, gut labour 
legislation, and sell the Crowns. And in spite of the recent 
speech, there is plenty in writing and plenty in the policy 
manual to show us and to show the people of Saskatchewan 
what the plans of the Sask Party are for our Crown corporations 
in this province. 
 
They have no strategy for increasing the involvement of Métis 
and First Nations. There is no strategy on their side for 
investing in infrastructure. No investment in IT (information 
technology) expansion, which is the lifeblood of growing 
industry and learning opportunities for Saskatchewan children 
and businesses. They have no plans for health and investment in 
health and education. In fact, as we’ve heard in their . . . other 
previous sessions that we’ve had here in our legislature, they 
advocated spending all of . . . or freezing all of their spending at 
zero in those fields. 
 
(16:00) 
 
They have no plan for investing in training and employment 
opportunities that would help people to move to productive and 
satisfying lives. And our government has a very, very proud 
record of moving people off of social assistance and into 
satisfying jobs — many months of straight decreases in the 
number of people on social assistance and the very . . . nine 
very impressive, impressive months of job gains in our 
province. 
 
Their motto is, just leave it alone. Leave it alone, they say, and 
it will all turn out and everything will be fine. However when it 
comes to the balance between business and labour, then they 
say, they say, and I quote the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone and now the newly minted opposition Labour 
critic, who I quote from Hansard, July 12, 2000, where he says, 
quote: 
 

. . . I really think that a fair labour policy is letting the 
market take care of itself . . . 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

 

On March 24 this year he confirms, he confirms the Sask Party 
agenda to change labour legislation. He talks about democratic 
unionism. And as the Minister of Labour and I were discussing 
earlier, who from your . . . who from their party, the Sask Party, 
can claim the talk . . . the right to talk about democratic 
anything? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not like the Sask Party Labour critic is 
alone in his views. To quote some of his colleagues, on June 14, 
2000 in Hansard, the member for Kelvington-Wadena just 
heaped praise on the success of right-to-work states, but failed 
to mention that Saskatchewan’s growth in the non-agricultural 
sector exceeded that of the right-to-work states. 
 
The former Labour critic for the Sask Party, the member for 
Redberry Lake who was even more critical of organized labour 
when he stated, and I quote: 
 

I’d like to remind the minister that the alliance (which is 
the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth) 
represents three-quarters of all businesses in Saskatchewan. 
They are . . . job creators. Why don’t you pick up the phone 
and talk to them instead of your union leader friends who 
are job killers. 

 
That was in Hansard, June 12 of 2000. And then he said that he 
wouldn’t apologize, and his leader said that he shouldn’t have 
to say that he’s sorry. And I find that really, really shameful that 
you would call union leaders job killers. 
 
The Sask Party leader was anxious to jump on the anti-labour 
bandwagon when he asked in Hansard on May 30 of 2000, and 
I quote: 
 

Why are you trying to turn Saskatchewan into Cuba North, 
a labour dictatorship? 

 
The Sask Party member for Humboldt advocated for no 
minimum wage on June 26, 2000. 
 
The Sask Party member for Watrous and the one for Wood 
River were very opposed to bringing the employees of the hog 
industry under the minimum standards of The Labour Standards 
Act. Mr. Speaker, these are minimum standards — the very 
bottom that everybody in this province should be entitled to — 
and they opposed that. And their statements that I just referred 
to can be found in Hansard of June 13, 2002 and July 3, 2002, 
respectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they may have changed the face of the critic to a 
prettier one, but the message is as ugly as ever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I come to this House with a proud record of 
working to advance the rights and lives of working people. I 
dedicated myself to the labour movement for 23 years in 
volunteer, paid, elected, and appointed positions. And I’m 
proud of my efforts on behalf of working people. There is much 
to be gained as a society when governments advance the 
position of all members of that society. 
 
I would ask the Sask Party this: if they . . . and I’m using you, 
Mr. Speaker, but I’m saying if you have two equal people in 
equal circumstances and you reduce the position of one, does 

that improve the position of the other? No, Mr. Speaker, the 
other is no better off than he was, but the first is worse off. 
 
We have to move forward together, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
helpful to advance the interests of business at the expense of 
workers or at the expense of the environment or at the expense 
of First Nations, but nor is the opposite true. We can only thrive 
if all interests are advanced at the same time. That is the sign of 
a just and civilized society. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, speaking of just and civilized societies, I 
want to comment on the current war in Iraq. No nation can 
claim to be just and civilized if they’re not prepared to be bound 
by international law. And I join with those who condemn 
unilateral action against a nation in the absence of a United 
Nations resolution. 
 
And I make this observation for the benefit of those who take 
the position of the member for Kindersley and others that we’ve 
heard today, Mr. Speaker, who support unilateral action of the 
US, Great Britain, and Australia. If you are not prepared to 
abide by the law, how can you ever hope to be trusted to make 
the laws? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, my heart goes out to all people 
involved in this war. I fervently hope that they will be spared 
from loss of life and that peace will be restored as soon as 
possible. 
 
The Speech from the Throne details a vision, a plan, and a 
future wide open. It has been criticized for its length and its 
detail. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is because we have a plan and 
it’s working. The Sask Party has no plan; they have a slogan. 
And if they do have a plan, they’re afraid to reveal it because it 
would destroy this province. 
 
Compare the Speech from the Throne to the comments of the 
Sask Party member for Wood River, who said on March 21, in 
response to the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety who 
said it would be very helpful if the opposition would state what 
their policy is, and I quote: 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the member . . . if 
the minister would like to know our policy, it’s very 
simple. Call an election and you’ll find out. 

 
So what are they hiding, Mr. Speaker? They refused to share 
their policy with the electors. Why? Because it would destroy 
this province. 
 
I imagine what their Throne Speech would look like if they ever 
formed government, which they won’t. You could write it on 
one square of a certain tissue that comes on a roll — cut taxes, 
gut labour laws, sell the Crowns. A short and simple recipe for 
disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion in favour of the 
Speech from the Throne. and opposing the amendment. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to rise today and to 
speak on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
Weyburn-Big Muddy is a great constituency. And sadly though, 
with the boundary changes, the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy is losing the great constituency . . . or the great town of 
Radville and the RM (rural municipality) of Laurier and part of 
the RM of Griffin and the town of Griffin. But I am confident 
that the member from Estevan and the member from 
Cannington will serve these constituents very well after the next 
election. 
 
And I’m very happy to have added to the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, parts of RMs along the northern part of 
the constituency and also on the west side, including Coronach 
and Willow Bunch and the town of Yellow Grass. So I’m 
looking forward to working with these people in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome the new members from 
Battleford-Cut Knife and Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been extensive reference to the war in Iraq 
in the last few days since we’ve been in the legislature, and I 
would just like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to lend my 
support to the United States of America, a country that is 
standing for freedom in a world that is threatened by the 
terrorist regime of Saddam Hussein. 
 
Throughout my life, Mr. Speaker, I have had the opportunity to 
travel to the United States and I have numerous friends and 
relatives also that live in the United States, and I count the 
United States of America and the people of the United States of 
America as my friend. 
 
What other country in the world, other than Canada, would not 
be more than happy and count themselves blessed to have 
United States as their first neighbour and friend and share a 
border with them? 
 
And yet we find ourselves in a most unique situation, Mr. 
Speaker — in actually an unbelievable situation — where we 
have the Government of Canada and the NDP government in 
Saskatchewan that are turning their backs on the United States. 
 
As the Ambassador from the United States said, Mr. Speaker, if 
Canada needed us to come alongside of them we would be there 
for them in a minute. And as the President of the United States 
said some time ago, if you are not with us then you are against 
us. So I ask the Government of Saskatchewan and I ask the 
Government of Canada, if you’re not with the United States 
then do you support Iraq? Mr. Speaker, quite frankly I’m 
embarrassed by the stand of the federal government and by the 
Government of Saskatchewan that they have turned their backs 
on our friend and neighbours, the United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again in the Throne Speech from the NDP 
government that we heard last week, we have seen that they are 
devoid of any new ideas and answers for the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, and for the province, and they have once 
again chosen to turn their backs on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, not only have they turned their back on 
rural Saskatchewan, they’ve actually attacked rural 
Saskatchewan. We’ve seen another huge announcement of an 

increase in crop insurance premiums, something that the 
farmers of Saskatchewan simply cannot afford. We have heard 
from the NDP that they’re going to hike the phone rates in rural 
Saskatchewan for rural businesses. We’re heard that they’ve 
announced that they are asking for an increase in SaskEnergy 
fees. They’ve also, Mr. Speaker, continued to not show that 
there is a great need in rural Saskatchewan for adequate cell 
coverage. Mr. Speaker, in my constituency there are many, 
many areas where we do not have adequate cell coverage. And 
where do we need it more, Mr. Speaker, than in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
In fact this government has chosen in many areas to overlay 
where they had analog cell coverage already. They’ve chosen to 
overlay it with digital where in other parts of the province — 
and especially in Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency — we do 
not have any type of cell coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can drive 20 miles south of Regina and there 
is a gap where there isn’t any cell coverage. You can go east, 
Mr. Speaker, between here and Sedley and Francis and down 
that line, and it’s often before you’re within 10 . . . it’s 10 miles 
before you get to Weyburn before you have any cell coverage. 
Mr. Speaker, down in the Big Muddy area just recently the 
NDP put up four new towers. I wonder what kind of frequency 
they put on those towers because there still is not adequate cell 
coverage. 
 
I was in Bengough about a month ago, Mr. Speaker, and when I 
arrived in Bengough I had cell coverage, spent the day out in 
the constituency, went to Big Beaver, to Coronach, to Willow 
Bunch, and back to Bengough and did not have cell coverage 
till I was back in Bengough. And yet the NDP and SaskTel have 
told us that they have put in new towers throughout that region, 
and yet there still isn’t any better cell coverage. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I really question where the NDP’s concerns are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we also have a huge concern about the lack 
of high-speed Internet in rural Saskatchewan. I’ve recently been 
approached by the town of Yellow Grass which is in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency — which will be in Weyburn-Big 
Muddy following the next election — that they are concerned 
because they do not have high-speed Internet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the town of Ogema — one of the towns in this 
province that is moving ahead — they have taken the initiative 
and they have said, in spite of this government, in spite of all 
the things that have been thrown at us in rural Saskatchewan, 
we are going to move ahead in our community. And they are 
moving ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But do you know what, Mr. Speaker? They have applied over 
and over and over again to this government to have high-speed 
Internet, and they have been ignored. They are touted as one of 
the best and the brightest growing communities in 
Saskatchewan, and they don’t have high-speed Internet. They 
need high-speed Internet to compete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy have highways that are deplorable. Last year the NDP 
government made a commitment to fix the highway, Highway 
13 west of Ogema. After one delay after another after another 
after another, it never did happen. They have been promised 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

 

this. This highway is not safe. I’ve had people that live in 
Ogema that tell me that when tourists come to Ogema and 
they’re planning on going further west, that they discourage 
them from doing so because of the condition of the highway. 
That is absolutely unacceptable. 
 
(16:15) 
 
There is unlimited opportunity, Mr. Speaker, in the south part of 
my constituency, in the Weyburn . . . in the Big Muddy area. 
Mr. Speaker, there is a tourism mecca there that is what I often 
refer to as the best-kept secret in Saskatchewan. But there is no 
way that the people in that area are going to be able to develop 
the tourism industry in the Big Muddy until the highways are 
improved in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also experienced in the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency, the threat of school closure in the last 
year. And thankfully, because of Pangman and the community 
and their determination to keep their school open — and they 
fought hard for that, Mr. Speaker — they showed where there 
was a need for that school. And they also showed that if we are 
going to revitalize our communities, if we’re going to revitalize 
rural Saskatchewan, we must have a school. We must have 
those important infrastructures in our communities. 
 
And through hard work and resilience and determination, they 
put forth their message to the district school board and they 
convinced them that we need the school, and we will do what 
we have to to make our community vibrant. 
 
And actually, Mr. Speaker, to show you the seriousness of the 
issue around schools and keeping them open and the threat of 
closure, just because of the threat of the closure of the Pangman 
school, three families chose to leave that community because 
they did not want to be in a community that did not have a 
school. So we need to seriously look at this whole issue and 
realize the importance of keeping schools in communities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
On Monday night I attended a meeting in Ogema where they’re 
talking about the amalgamation of schools. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
there is serious concern around this whole issue of 
amalgamation and what it’s going to mean to smaller schools 
and mean to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But the most disappointing thing about the meeting that I was at 
in Ogema the other night was that the consultants that came — 
and speaking on behalf of the numbers from the Government of 
Saskatchewan — told the people in that community that they 
had to plan for a decline in their enrolment. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m happy to say that in the town of Ogema they actually have 
an increase in their population in their school because they have 
things happening in their community. 
 
And yet we have a provincial government that is running 
around and telling local school boards and district boards that 
you have to manage to decline . . . for the decline in enrolment. 
You have to manage and you have to figure out how you’re 
going to either support the schools you have with less students 
or what you’re going to have to do, if you’re going to have to 
close schools. 
 

I find this deplorable, Mr. Speaker, that there is no enthusiasm 
coming from this government but yet they’re talking about how 
we’re going to manage the decline in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issue that I’d like to speak about is the 
whole issue of health care in rural Saskatchewan. And 
yesterday the member from Melfort-Tisdale spoke at great 
length about the health issues in Saskatchewan and how they 
are failing the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, we 
now only have 30 acute care beds in the whole constituency 
because the NDP chose to close the other hospitals. They closed 
Bengough; they closed Radville; they closed Pangman. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today in the town of Radville we have two 
excellent doctors, doctors that could do far more than they are 
able . . . or far more than they are allowed to do by this 
government. They would like to be able to provide palliative 
care; they would like to be able to deliver children in the 
hospital. In fact this winter, Mr. Speaker, they actually had a 
delivery in their hospital because the mother could not make it 
to Regina. 
 
This doctor — it’s a man and a wife — they love Radville, 
they’re great in the community, they want to stay there, but they 
want to be able to provide more services so that people can stay 
in their local town and provide the services there. 
 
And it only makes common sense, Mr. Speaker, because then it 
would free up beds in Regina and Saskatoon that could be used 
for more specialized care. It’s also very important in smaller 
communities to have access to a doctor and have access to 
being able to go into the hospital for minor issues because it 
keeps our seniors in their local community. If they do not have 
access to health care then they have to look at moving 
elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this government that has committed 
more and more money to health care but we have the worst 
health care that we have ever had in this province. So my 
question is and has been for five years, where is the money 
going? What is this government doing with $2.4 billion and yet 
at the same time we have the longest waiting lists in Canada? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is deplorable and what we need is a 
Saskatchewan Party government that’s going to take control of 
this issue, find out where the problems are, manage this system, 
and give the people of Saskatchewan the excellence in health 
care that they deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to speak for a moment about 
agriculture and the way the government has turned their back 
on agriculture in this province. And you know the farmers of 
this province ask for very little. 
 
I was recently on a talk show in Weyburn and the host of the 
show said, you know, I’m sure you get a lot of calls to your 
office about agriculture. And, Mr. Speaker, I had to say to the 
host, actually no, I don’t; farmers do not phone and complain to 
my office. All farmers ask is a fair price for their product, 
something that this Government of Saskatchewan has failed to 
negotiate on their behalf. They’ve failed them over and over 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2003 

 

and over again by not being at the table and not speaking on 
their behalf when federal programs are being put in place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the sad part about all the things that I’ve 
talked about today is that we continue to lose people from our 
communities and people from this province. Mr. Speaker, the 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy has seen a decline of 
population of 1,200 people since the 1999 election. Mr. 
Speaker, these people are leaving our province because they are 
fed up with the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was in Kayville about a month ago — just 
to give you an example of a small town in Saskatchewan and 
how the people are leaving and how the Government of 
Saskatchewan has isolated them by turning their back on them 
because of the lack of services — Mr. Speaker, in the town of 
Kayville they only have five street lights left in the town 
because that is all that they can afford to turn on because of the 
fee that they have to pay to SaskPower. 
 
They do not have a public phone in Kayville, Mr. Speaker, 
because they cannot afford the rent. They do not have one in 
their town hall. They do not have one in their senior centre. Mr. 
Speaker, they do not have any cell coverage in Kayville. 
Although they’re supposed to have, they don’t have any cell 
coverage in Kayville. And the 911 service is very, very poor, 
and they live in an area where they have to drive on Highway 
334, which is absolutely deplorable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is committed to change 
and to improving this province of Saskatchewan. And one of 
the ways that we plan to do that is by first and foremost looking 
at all departments and avenues of government and all Crowns 
of government. 
 
And one of the Crowns of government is Liquor and Gaming. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is our intention to look at the whole issue 
of liquor and gaming and with a full efficiency review because 
the people of Saskatchewan are demanding that liquor and 
gaming — whether it be on the gaming side or the liquor side 
— that it be accountable to the people of Saskatchewan, and 
that they are ensured that the dollars that are flowing from 
gaming actually are going to where they’re supposed to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been talking in the last few days about 
Dutch Lerat and SIGA and that whole issue. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan are outraged. The First Nations people 
especially are outraged and they have every right to be because 
the dollars that flow from gaming in this province are dollars 
that belong to them and are to be used for programs for them. 
And they want to know where the $800,000 went to; they want 
to know who is accountable for that, who allowed it to happen. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we are calling on the government to allow 
us to go into Public Accounts and ask these questions of the 
officials and of the minister so we can get answers for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue around . . . that is involved with 
liquor and gaming is the whole issue of addictions. And 
although it is administrated under the Health department, it 
certainly does pertain to liquor and gaming. And, Mr. Speaker, 
last year there was $320 million generated through liquor and 
gaming in this province, and yet only $2.5 million was actually 

spent towards addictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the whole study that came out about 
addictions in Saskatchewan, about gambling addictions. And in 
that study it showed that VLTs (video lottery terminal) were the 
most addictive form of gambling that we have in Saskatchewan. 
And yet this government within two weeks of the study coming 
out decided, they made the decision to add — to add, Mr. 
Speaker — 400 more VLTs, 10 per cent more VLTs, right after 
they had received the study that they commissioned that told 
them that VLTs were the most addictive form of gambling. 
 
And just to put this in a little bit of perspective, Mr. Speaker. In 
the province of Alberta there are 3-million-plus people and they 
have 6,000 VLTs. In the province of Saskatchewan we have 
just around 1 million people but we have 4,000 VLTs. Mr. 
Speaker, we have far more percentage of VLTs in relation to 
population than any other province that I’m aware of, in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to address these issues. Mr. Speaker, 
there is nothing in this Throne Speech that will reverse the trend 
of the last 12 years. We continue to see people leaving, farm 
families facing hardships, longest waiting lists in the country, 
we have a government that has totally lost its way. 
 
And I would just like to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that about 
a year ago I had a meeting and there was a gentleman there 
from Indian Head-Milestone, and we were talking to him about 
people coming back to Saskatchewan. And so I said to him, 
would you . . . you’ve lived in Alberta and you’re from 
Saskatchewan originally; you came back here. Is it true that 
people that live in Alberta would really like to come back here 
if they had a reason? If there was a change in government and 
they had a reason to come back here, they could see a future, 
would they want to come back? 
 
And he said, I’ll tell you what. If you took all the ex-Saskies 
that live in Alberta and put them in McMahon Stadium and said 
to them, who wants to go home, that 90 per cent of the people 
in the stadium would stand up and say, me. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Saskatchewan Party is all 
about. We are going to turn this province around. We are going 
to give the people that have left this province a reason to come 
home. We’re going to give the people that live here a reason to 
stay here. And we are going to be number one in Canada 
because that is where the Saskatchewan Party’s direction is, and 
that’s what we are going to do for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the Throne Speech. I will 
be supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 16:29 until 16:39. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 
Hermanson Toth Heppner 
Krawetz Gantefoer Bjornerud 



March 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

 

Elhard Wakefield  
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 
would ask all members to not interfere with the voting process 
so, with all members, votes can be clearly heard. 
 
Harpauer Eagles McMorris 
D’Autremont Bakken Wall 
Huyghebaert Dearborn Brkich 
Weekes Lorenz Hart 
Allchurch Hillson  
 

Nays — 29 
 
Addley Crofford Hagel 
Lautermilch Serby Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Osika 
Lorjé Kasperski Goulet 
Van Mulligen Prebble Belanger 
Thomson Junor Nilson 
Atkinson Hamilton Harper 
Forbes Jones Higgins 
Trew Wartman Yates 
McCall Iwanchuk  
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with a great deal of pleasure that I rise to join debate on the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
I’d first off like to welcome the new members from Saskatoon 
Fairview and Battleford-Cut Knife to the Assembly. I’m sure 
they will make some wonderful contributions over this next 
session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I see time is drawing late and I have a fair 
number of comments to make on the Speech from the Throne, I 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:44. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................175 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................175 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................175 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................176 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................176 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 War in Iraq 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................176 
 Car Thefts in Regina 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................176 
 Achievements of Moosomin Moose Hockey Team 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................176 
 Additional Seats for Northern Nursing Program 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................177 
 North Saskatoon Business Association Honours Businesses 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................177 
 Balfour Senior Girls Basketball Team Captures Sixth City Title 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................177 
 Katimavik Project at Eastend 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................177 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Provincial Population Decline 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................178 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................178 
 Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................179 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................179 
 Agricultural Policy Framework Agreement 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................180 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................180 
 Genetically Modified Potatoes 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................181 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................181 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry Act 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................182 
 Bill No. 7 — The Occupational Therapists Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................182 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................183 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................186 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................189 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................192 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................194 
  Jones...........................................................................................................................................................................................198 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................200 
 Recorded Division (amendment) .................................................................................................................................................202 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................203 


