















































Hansard: March 25, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 145 
 March 25, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of citizens and 
Crown grazing leaseholders in the southwest part of the 
province. They’re concerned about the government’s intention 
with their refusal to renew leases on a long-term basis. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by producers from 
Maple Creek, Fox Valley, Abbey, and the town of Beechy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 58 between Chaplin and 
Shamrock. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Shamrock and Bateman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents of the Southwest who understand the importance of 
the cattle industry to agriculture and indeed to the province’s 
economy. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and as in duty bound, your petitioners will 
ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the community of 
Cabri near Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition with 
citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to Davidson 
and Craik health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at its current level of service at 
a minimum, 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctor 
services available, as well as lab services, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services, available to users 
from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Moose Jaw, 
Bladworth, and Rosthern, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed 
by citizens in Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s agreements to deal with the Crown land leases. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land leases maintain their first option to renew those 
leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning renewal of Crown land leases; and 
 
Another petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 47 
South; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 4, 5, and 10. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT,  

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Van Mulligen presents 
the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, in a moment I’ll move that 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be concurred in. May I just say that the 
committee’s work is current. There are a few outstanding items 
before the committee, which are under review by others and 
will come back to the committee in due course. And we look 
forward to the next set of annual reports for the committee to 
review. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all of those 
who have been instrumental in helping the committee 
throughout the course of its deliberations, the least not being the 
Clerk’s office and our committee Clerk, Viktor Kaczkowski, 
and all those who helped the committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And having said that, I move, seconded by the member for 
Swift Current: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 10 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much money did the 
province of Saskatchewan receive from the 600 million 
transition fund announced by the federal government in 
2002? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon it gives me great pleasure to introduce several of my 
constituents, most of whom are ranchers from the Cypress of 
. . . sorry, the constituency of Cypress Hills. And these are the 
kind of people, Mr. Speaker, that historically were called salt of 
the earth. It’s a long time since we’ve heard that kind of 
description but today it gives me great pleasure to introduce 
members of the Saskatchewan landowners and lessee rights 
group. 
 
And the chairman of that group is Raeburn Jahnke, from the 
Tompkins area; Ross Beierbach, from south of the Cypress 
Hills; Rob Oldhaver, from the Abbey-Cabri area; Howard 
Eiserman, from Maple Creek; and Dustin Fyke, from south of 
Sceptre, right in the heart of the Sand Hills. 
 
Accompanying those gentlemen — who are all my constituents 
— is Orin Balas from the community of Ponteix and George 
O’Bertos, who is a long-time civil servant, has served the 
provincial government over about 30 years, I believe, in the 
area of land. And I would like the Assembly to welcome these 
very important constituents and friends to this constituency . . . 
I’m sorry, to this House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to join with the member from Cypress to welcome the 
ranchers from the landowners and lessees organization that are 
here today. 
 
I met with them earlier this morning and had an opportunity to 
have a conversation with them around the importance of the 
treaty land entitlement and the impact that it has on them as 
ranchers. And we had a wonderful discussion this morning. 
 
I had one question of them only, and that was about the strength 
of their MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), and they 
refused to answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d ask all members of the Assembly to enjoy with me their 
presence in the Assembly this afternoon. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to draw to your attention and that of the 
members, a group who’s seated in your west gallery. This is a 
group of six grade 11 and 12 students from Miller High School 
in the constituency of Regina Victoria. They are accompanied 
here today by their teacher, Mark Balon, and their associate 
teacher, Brian Norton. They’re here to view the question period, 
to have a tour of the Legislative Building, and I’m looking 
forward to an opportunity to meet with them shortly thereafter. 
 
At this point, I would ask you and all the members to please 
welcome them to our legislature today. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Provincial Men’s Lacrosse Teams National Champions 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to inform the Assembly about an incredible accomplishment by 
our provincial lacrosse community. Saskatchewan sends a 
provincial junior and senior men’s lacrosse team to compete in 
the Canadian championship every year. 
 
Like many other Saskatchewan teams, our lacrosse teams were 
extremely successful this past year. Last October our 
Saskatchewan senior men’s field lacrosse team won the national 
championship in Lennoxville, Quebec. Team Saskatchewan had 
three players named to the first all-star team and three to the 
second all-star team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the third year in a row that Saskatchewan 
has won the national championship and the fourth in the last 
five years. In fact the team has not lost a game at nationals since 
1997. Additionally, the senior men’s team was nominated for 
the Saskatchewan Sport Team of the Year at the Sask Sport 
annual banquet held last week. 
 
Team Saskatchewan’s success does not end there though, Mr. 
Speaker. Our junior men’s field lacrosse team also won its 
national championship, the First Nations Trophy, in Kelowna 
this past September. This is the first time that Saskatchewan has 
won the junior men’s title. Four players were named to the 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

 

all-star team and two positional tournament MVPs (most 
valuable player) were named. This is only the second time that 
the senior men’s champions and the junior men’s champions 
have been from the same province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan legislative intern, Bill Cooper, 
who I’m working with, was a member of the senior team for 
three of those four teams and coach of the juniors’ team. By the 
way, I challenged the member from Swift Current for a pick-up 
game of lacrosse at least until Bill goes and works with him. 
 
So would all members please join me in congratulating the 
outstanding achievement. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Country Gospel Singer, 
Lorraine Hartsook, of Eston 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
applaud the achievements of Ms. Lorraine Hartsook of Eston. 
 
Lorraine was born and raised a country girl and always had a 
passion for singing and performing. She’s now recognized as an 
international artist, bringing her talents to Europe, the United 
States of America, and Canada. She’s released five CDs 
(compact disc) and has been acknowledged in her field, 
winning Christian Entertainer of the Year in 1997 by the 
American Country Gospel Association for the American 
Country Gospel Association Northwest Region, and recently by 
the Saskatchewan Country Music Association with Country 
Gospel Album of the Year for her latest release, Be Real. 
 
Among numerous nominations in the past was one by the 
Canadian Gospel Music Association in November 2002, again 
for Be Real as the Best Country Gospel Album of the Year. 
 
I also travelled with Ms. Hartsook in 1993 to Colorado to visit 
Pope John Paul II. Now we didn’t speak with him personally 
but she was very entertaining on the ride down with her guitar 
and she continues to be endearing to her whole community. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Lorraine and wishing her 
continued success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Aboriginal Business Summit 
Held in Saskatoon 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening in 
Saskatoon our Premier had the honour of making opening 
remarks to several hundred people attending the opening of the 
first Western Aboriginal Business Summit to ever be held in 
Western Canada. 
 
People attending the Western Aboriginal Business Summit are 
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal business people, government 
officials from all the Western provinces and territories, and 
political leaders such as Yukon Premier Dennis Fentie and 
Northwest Territories Deputy Premier Jim Antoine, as well as 
representatives from all of the Western provinces and 
territories. 

This summit, including a trade show, will be a companion event 
to the National Business Summit, a two-day event held on 
February 19 and 20 in Toronto. The objective of the Western 
Aboriginal Business Summit is to facilitate the development of 
meaningful partnerships between Aboriginal business and 
non-Aboriginal private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this summit will also centre on best practices, 
networking, and development of the four key strategic sectors 
of the economy, namely resources development, emerging 
economies, forestry, tourism, and tradition economies. 
 
It will also have a strong how-to component, addressing issues 
such as access to capital, labour force planning and, Mr. 
Speaker, get this, long-term sustainability — something the 
members opposite might want to listen to, not unrealistic 
promises and tax breaks like the members opposite propose. 
But I see nothing here of slogans, only good, long-term, 
sustainable, economic planning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Coming Home Campaign 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members, last session I had the pleasure of telling you about the 
kickoff for the Coming Home Campaign. This campaign was 
organized to raise funds to equip and furnish our new Parkland 
Place, 105-bed, long-term care facility. 
 
On the kickoff day, 700,000 of their $1 million goal was 
already in place. Today, just four short months later, I’m even 
more pleased to tell you that the Coming Home Campaign has 
already met and surpassed their goal by raising $1.13 million. 
 
This goal was reached because of an extremely competent 
committee and generous community support and faith in this 
project. With the donations that are still coming in, the 
campaign committee is satisfied they’ll be able to meet all of 
the furnishing and equipment requirements for the new 
Parkland Place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once more I’d like to ask the members of this 
legislature to join me in congratulating the fundraising 
committee and the people of our district. On behalf of our 
district, I would also like to express the thanks to the current — 
and previous — Minister of Health for their support and belief 
in the needs of providing long-term care in our community. We 
all look forward to the completion of this project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan’s Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
few facts for the members opposite to consider, and after they 
hear them I hope they will decide to scrap their policy of selling 
the Crown corporations. 
 
First fact, Mr. Speaker. Our Crown corporations have 
buy-Saskatchewan policies and spend about $2 billion in our 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

province every year on goods and services and employee 
earnings. 
 
Second fact. Our Crown corporations are important customers 
for over 12,000 Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Third fact. Over 9,000 Saskatchewan people work at our Crown 
corporations; half are located in head offices in this province 
and half are located in communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Fourth fact. Saskatchewan’s four major Crown corporations 
partner with over 600 local dealers and brokers to deliver 
telecommunications, insurance, power, and natural gas services 
all across the province. 
 
Fact five. Crown corporations were established many years ago 
to provide utility and insurance services at affordable rates to 
people throughout the province, and that remains their number 
one job. 
 
Facts six and seven, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party has empty 
slogans, but we have a plan and it’s working. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Organic Producers’ Seminar 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 14 and 15 
I attended a seminar in Maymont hall, in Maymont, 
Saskatchewan, concerning marketing organic products. Mr. 
Speaker, this seminar was sponsored by the northwest 
Saskatchewan Organic Producers Inc., and the OCIA (Organic 
Crop Improvement Association) Chapter No. 2. 
 
The seminar, Mr. Speaker, explored several areas. The 
experience of other farmers with marketing their organic crops, 
problems and opportunities in marketing organic beef, problems 
and opportunities in marketing other locally produced organic 
products — as an example, chicken, eggs, homemade products 
— the opportunities co-operatives in the future and what can be 
done to improve the marketing of organic products in 
Saskatchewan’s Northwest. One of the sponsors of this seminar 
was the Northwest Organic Communities Mills Co-operative 
Limited. 
 
In April 2002 some organic farmers and other supporters of 
organic agriculture purchased the old school building in 
Maymont, Saskatchewan to establish a processing plant for 
organic fuel crops. By March of 2003 they had invested 
$75,000 in cash and time. In February 2003 the business was 
incorporated as a new generation co-operative. Building 
modifications, equipment repairs, and installation are 
progressing. The plant will have a processing capability of 
500,000 bushels per year. 
 
The board of directors has established several principles — low 
capital investment. Detailed planning has been completed. 
Services offered: cleaning, marketing, finding buyers, shipping, 
documentation, collection, and value adding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating the Northwest 

Organic Community Mills Co-operative Limited initiative and 
also the organizers of the marketing organic products seminar. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Emergency Medical Services Response Teams 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Not knowing what situations the day will bring 
is part of the job of paramedics, firefighting units, physicians, 
nurses, and other staff members of our emergency response 
units throughout the province. 
 
Last Thursday morning a thick fog in the Saskatoon area made 
driving conditions treacherous. Four separate vehicle accidents 
occurred on four separate highways at approximately the same 
time. One accident involved a school bus with a number of 
children on board. 
 
These four accidents meant that 21 people required quick injury 
assessment at the scene. Those 21, and we, should be pleased 
with the efficiency and quick thinking demonstrated on that 
morning by emergency response teams. 
 
From the EMTs (emergency medical technician) first on the 
scene to the ambulance drivers, to the nurses and doctors at the 
emergency, victims were quickly but thoroughly assessed, 
delivered to hospital and treated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in total 21 people required injury assessment, 14 
victims were discharged, and three were admitted to hospital. 
Most were treated at the Royal University Hospital, some at 
City Hospital. 
 
Fortunately, on this day only one student on the school bus 
sustained serious injuries but I understand is doing well now. A 
paramedic from Humboldt and firefighters from Viscount took 
close to an hour to free the boy on the bus. 
 
Even an excessively busy day like this one is all in a day’s work 
for our excellently trained emergency response teams. Our 
health care providers offered excellent care to the 21 people 
involved in these accidents, as they do on a daily basis. 
 
Saskatchewan can certainly have pride and confidence in them. 
And I am pleased to give them this small amount of recognition 
today. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, once again hundreds of 
thousands of dollars of public money has disappeared and no 
one is held accountable. This is money that was supposed to go 
to improve the lives of First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 
Instead, the former CEO (chief executive officer) of SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) misspent $800,000 
on trips around the world, on luxury vehicles, on golf, and 
numerous other personal expenses. 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

 

There’s been a three-year investigation and what’s being done 
about it? Absolutely nothing. No charges will be laid. The 
government has no plan to recover this money. Just like 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company), public money is lost and no one is held accountable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who is responsible for the loss of this money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, there is a long-standing 
tradition in parliamentary democracies that the Attorney 
General of the day will not decide whether to charge a citizen 
with a crime, but will leave that determination to the police and 
the law officers of the Crown. It is the constitutional duty of the 
Attorney General, going back hundreds of years, to uphold the 
independence of the police and the law officers of the Crown, 
regardless of political considerations. 
 
In this instance, Mr. Speaker, I’m advised that the police 
investigators and law officers have determined that there was no 
evidence of fraud because there was no effort to conceal or 
mislead. They have determined that whatever else may be said 
about the conduct, there is no evidence that it was fraudulent 
and charges cannot be sustained. 
 
As Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, I support the police and the 
law officers’ right to make that determination with respect to 
the citizen in question and all other citizens who are equally 
entitled to an independent justice system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Dutch Lerat admits to spending 
hundreds of thousands of dollars on personal expenses but he’s 
not being charged because, according to the Justice department, 
there was no evidence of concealment. Everybody knew he was 
spending this money. According to Dutch Lerat, that includes 
SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) and the 
provincial government. Dutch Lerat said: 
 

I believe SLGA had a clear idea of the money flowing 
through my hands. I believe the province had a clear idea of 
the money flowing through my hands. 

 
Dutch Lerat said he is not guilty of fraud because everybody 
knew he was spending the money. And today’s decision by 
Justice appears to back up that claim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who in this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government is responsible for allowing Dutch Lerat to 
misspend $800,000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I welcome 
the question that the hon. member asks. And for the hon. 
member from Gravelbourg and that part of the country, I do 
appreciate the question because I want to give you the answer, 
that there were issues and when they were discovered through 
an audit process, there was action taken on those issues. There 
were auditors brought in. There was an investigation. We 
immediately turned it over for an investigation, Mr. Speaker. 

All the efforts were put in place to make sure that those issues 
were addressed, and they have been. 
 
And since 2000, the fall of 2000, with the help and the 
constructive criticism of our esteemed auditor, Provincial 
Auditor, we have been able to arrive at strengthening all the 
control measures that now have made SIGA a very responsible 
agency in this particular province and a good partnership for 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Once again, once again, Mr. Speaker, no one 
in the NDP takes responsibility. Dutch Lerat will not be charged 
because the SIGA board knew about his expenses. And SIGA 
operates under the casino agreement it signed with the 
government and the government is responsible for ensuring 
money is spent properly within the terms of this agreement. 
 
So my question is this: who in the government was responsible 
for ensuring SIGA money was properly spent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, there were issues as I 
mentioned and those issues have been addressed. 
 
The member opposite once again does not have all the facts. 
There hasn’t been hundreds of thousands of dollars lost; $1.36 
million of government money has been recovered. It’s back in 
provincial coffers. So I would hope that that hon. member 
would do the honourable thing and get the facts right before 
reporting to the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Since we determined that there were some 
problems, we worked together with the board. We have a new 
board that’s managing SIGA. We have new management in 
SLGA, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We work closely with these people and I would like to just 
point out some of the issues that we addressed as a result, as I 
said, of the constructive criticism of our Provincial Auditor. We 
have made significant changes, adopted new board structures 
and compositions. The internal auditor has been selected 
through a tendering process where SLGA’s involved, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I’m going to go on and on and table this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the people on the Yellow Quill 
First Nations near Kelvington have been boiling their water for 
eight years — eight years without a proper supply of drinking 
water. Eight hundred thousand dollars could have gone a long 
way in addressing this problem. Instead it was spent on luxury 
cars and trips around the world and according to the Justice 
department, everybody knew about it. 
 
According to Murray Brown of public prosecutions branch . . . 
 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to Murray 
Brown of public prosecutions branch, there wasn’t apparently 
any effort by SIGA to hide anything from anybody. Mr. 
Speaker, that means the government must have known and if 
they didn’t, they should have known. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how did this happen? Who was responsible for 
overseeing these expenditures? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, there was an independent 
auditor that was in fact hired to look at the affairs of SIGA. 
When there were some discrepancies found, they were reported 
to us. We immediately engaged our esteemed Provincial 
Auditor and as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, we suspended 
negotiations for a new gaming agreement. We put all kinds of 
benchmarks in place at the suggestion of our Provincial 
Auditor. Those benchmarks, the majority, a lot of them have 
been met to this point in time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, just . . . as a result of that I just want to point 
out that since that time, Mr. Speaker, the expenses of SIGA 
have been cut dramatically and the profits, which will benefit 
all First Nations people and communities and this great 
province of ours, have been nearly doubled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Murray Brown of the public prosecutions 
branch said fraud could only occur if SIGA was 
misrepresenting these expenses to SLGA, but there’s no 
evidence they were doing that. He said and I quote: 
 

The Provincial Auditor picked up this information when he 
did a simple audit of the relationship between SIGA and 
SLGA.  

 
(14:00) 
 
That’s why there were no charges — because there was no 
evidence of concealment. The government must have known 
what was going on and at the very least they should have 
known what was going on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who was responsible for overseeing SIGA’s 
spending? Who allowed this to happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, once again as I pointed out, 
and there’s no denial of fact that there were issues; they were 
addressed. There was an auditor that brought to our attention 
the fact that there was some concerns. It was brought to our 
attention; we immediately responded and we acted. 
 
And as I pointed out, expenses have been cut because . . . And 
I’ve tabled the document that has indicated all the details of 
adding . . . adopting policies. We’re working with SIGA, 
SLGA. We’re strengthening our relationship and we’re 
strengthening the commitment that the . . . both SIGA board, 

SIGA management, and SLGA are working towards, and 
continuing to respond to the auditor’s requests. 
 
You know, I wonder, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting back to where 
we were some time ago where there is not much respect for 
what First Nations is attempting to do. So I just want to remind 
what Mr. Hermanson said, the Leader of the Opposition, and I 
quote — to the FSIN — Hermanson . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor laid it all 
out in great detail. Luxury vehicles, trips on the Concorde to 
places like London and Paris, green fees, fishing equipment, all 
bought using money that was supposed to go to First Nations 
people. 
 
The Provincial Auditor, doing a simple audit, found $811,906 
of misspending by Dutch Lerat. But the NDP government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, $811,906. But the NDP 
government apparently missed it or they chose to look the other 
way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could this happen? Who is responsible for 
allowing Dutch Lerat to get away with this, with this flagrant 
abuse of public money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I can very much appreciate 
why the member and those members opposite constantly dwell 
on the negative aspects. They do not wish to look at the 
progress that’s been made in the last two years. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, SIGA has significantly, since 
that time because of the measures put in place working with our 
Provincial Auditor, who by the way has indicated that progress 
is being made on this issue . . . In the past two years, Mr. 
Speaker, expenses at SIGA have decreased by $9.3 million. The 
net income, Mr. Speaker, in 1999-2000 went from 13.4 million 
to 24.8 million — money that will go to communities around 
this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that working with SLGA 
and with SIGA, I have a great deal of respect for those people 
that want the very best of everything in our relationship for the 
people of this province. Obviously those members don’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I find it alarming, I find it 
alarming that the minister of the Crown thinks that $800,000 
gone missing is not serious and that we are somehow being 
negative. I think the people of Saskatchewan will judge whether 
$800,000 gone missing . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister refuses to answer the 
question so I’m going to ask the Premier. Mr. Speaker, after six 
long years the Premier was finally forced to admit the 
government messed up with SPUDCO. He ordered a review 
and admitted his . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Premier admitted his government had 
misled the people of Saskatchewan over the SPUDCO issue. 
 
Once again today we see an NDP government trying to cover its 
tracks, and we see evidence that the NDP should have known 
about the abuse of public money by Dutch Lerat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier going to do to get to the 
bottom of this? Will the Premier order an investigation to 
determine how his government allowed this flagrant misuse of 
public money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, once again I just want to 
quote what the Leader of the Official Opposition in a speech to 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) said last 
February. In his speech, the Leader of the Opposition said, he 
believes, and I quote: 
 

. . . the financial success of the . . . (SIGA) is one of the 
great and largely untold business success stories in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
You said that, Mr. Leader. 
 

. . . I am impressed with the direct and business-like 
approach both SIGA and FSIN have taken in addressing the 
governance challenges . . . 

 
And that’s what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. We’ve addressed 
those and we’ve made a commitment to continue to do that. 
We’re working together, not against, First Nations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister must know that it is Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
that is responsible to oversee the spending of public money that 
is generated from SIGA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before the Premier entered politics, he used to 
campaign against casino gaming even coming to Saskatchewan. 
But now he runs a government that is . . . that is dependent on 
gambling revenue; a government that is willing to turn a blind 
eye when it sees this money being misspent. 
 
Why is the Premier refusing to take responsibility? Will he 
order an investigation into who is responsible for allowing this 
abuse of public money by Dutch Lerat? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess my answers 
have not been heard by that member because they don’t want to 
hear the good facts. They don’t want to hear the good success 
and progress that’s been made despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, 
once again the Leader of the Official Opposition stands before 

the chiefs of the First Nations of Saskatchewan and he says — 
The StarPhoenix reporting on his speech Mr. Hermanson 
delivered, and I quote: 
 

Hermanson praised the FSIN for running a successful 
gaming business and complimented it for addressing 
“governance challenges” at SIGA . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Leader of the Opposition said. 
Now the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy is being critical of 
all the efforts that have been made both by SLGA and SIGA — 
the good people at SIGA, their management and their board — 
to do something good for this great province and for all our 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
doesn’t understand the severity of the situation so I address my 
question to the Premier. Hopefully he’ll be a little more 
attentive. 
 
The people of the Yellow Quill Reserve cannot turn their tap 
. . . water tap on without the fear of insects coming out the 
water faucet. Eight hundred thousand dollars would have went a 
long ways to fix that water problem. 
 
One of his ministers, a minister in the NDP government, knew 
that money was being misspent that was supposed to go to the 
Indian people of Saskatchewan. They knew that, because as the 
Minister of Justice has said, no fraud was committed. That 
means that this was public knowledge, knowledge of one of the 
ministers on that side of the House who allowed the $800,000 
to be spent unchecked, who did not raise the red flag, and as a 
consequence, First Nations people in Saskatchewan can’t even 
trust their drinking water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier which of his ministers should be 
accountable for this tragedy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
assure you that what I say in this House is what I say at the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, is what I say when 
I’m in the community — unlike the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he wants to talk about, he wants to talk about 
involvement with the First Nations people of Saskatchewan. Let 
me tell him about involvement. 
 
We have developed with . . . in partnership with First Nations in 
Saskatchewan, a development plan for education and economy. 
Last night I spoke to the Aboriginal Business Summit in 
Saskatoon. I reported to them last night, Mr. Speaker, that today 
in Saskatchewan high schools 13.5 per cent of the students are 
Aboriginal students — that’s a tremendous gain from 10 years 
ago. In our universities, that’s 13.5. In our technical institutes 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

it’s 18.5 — that’s a tremendous advance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This man, this Leader of the Opposition stood up, stood up and 
praised the work of SIGA at the FSIN. He comes into this 
House, he goes on to other platforms and criticizes, and at his 
member. He’s the fellow that needs to be . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Treaty Land Entitlement Claims 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning several ranchers and Crown leaseholders from 
southwest Saskatchewan met with the Minister of Agriculture 
to discuss the issue of Crown land lease renewal, and I’d like to 
thank the minister for making some time in his schedule 
available for my constituents. 
 
According to the existing lands Act legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
Crown land leases are to be renewed if the leaseholder has met 
all of the conditions of the lease. However there have been a 
number of specific cases in the southwest where leaseholders 
have applied for renewal but decisions have been delayed. 
 
In one specific case, Mr. Speaker, application was made in May 
2002 and to this date no renewal has been granted. Instead the 
leaseholders who have met all the requirements have been 
granted one-year permits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the NDP is not 
following its own established policy for lease renewal and is 
leaving these leaseholders unable to make long-term plans for 
the future viability of their ranches? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I rise again to answer the question. This 
has now been I think the third occasion that the members 
opposite have asked me about this question — the member 
from Cypress and the member from Humboldt asked me this 
same question a couple of days ago. And I say to the member 
again, I understand the sensitivity around the treaty land 
entitlement, and the land selection piece, and the lease 
arrangements that the Department of Agriculture has with 
ranchers in Saskatchewan. 
 
We intend, Mr. Speaker, to continue to work through the 
process. We’ve frozen the TLE (treaty land entitlement) 
selections. We’ve frozen them, Mr. Speaker, for the past year 
because we want to find a resolution, Mr. Speaker, between 
those lands that have been selected by First Nations people and 
ranchers. 
 
I’ve said on many occasions, Mr. Speaker, that ranchers have 
been tremendous stewards of the lands. I’ve said on many 
occasions, Mr. Speaker, that our ranchers in Saskatchewan 
require the farm land in order to retain their economic viability 
as producers, Mr. Speaker. And it will continue to be my 
objective to find winners on this case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, many of 

the Crown leases that have not been renewed were actually 
named in treaty land entitlement claims recently. Now the TLE 
process, which by the way is nothing new to this province and 
has really worked quite well for all the parties involved over the 
last 10 years, includes provisions to resolve third party interests, 
which includes the compensation of leaseholders. 
 
Now the NDP’s current approach of not renewing leases 
abrogates the leaseholder’s right to participate in the TLE 
process, as outlined in the documents that this government 
negotiated and signed. These leaseholders have a right to be 
compensated according to that agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain for us why the NDP is 
changing the rules now and messing up this process after 10 
years of successful TLE negotiations and settlements in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Cypress knows the answer to his question, Mr. Speaker, he 
knows the answer. And that is this, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
today First Nations that have selected lands that are under the 
lease of the Crown . . . that are under the lease with the Crown 
to ranchers. We have asked for third parties, Mr. Speaker, to 
resolve that on their own, and they have been unsuccessful in 
renegotiating some of those on their own. 
 
So what we’ve said, Mr. Speaker, is that we put together today 
a interdepartmental committee of Intergovernmental Affairs, of 
Agriculture, of Environment, and of Government Relations to 
see if we can find a compromise solution in order to deal with 
First Nations and ranchers, Mr. Speaker, because on this side of 
the House that’s how we deal with differences, Mr. Speaker. 
We deal with them, Mr. Speaker, trying to resolve the issues 
that stay in place before . . . to make it better for both sides. 
That’s how we do things on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, there has to be some security of 
tenure on behalf of the leaseholders in order for them to 
completely and clearly negotiate their own third party interests. 
They are losing those interests every time this government 
sticks its nose in the process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week in the Throne Speech the NDP 
discussed a 10-year beef production strategy for the province. 
Presumably it’s a strategy designed to promote and increase 
beef production here in Saskatchewan. That’s a good thing. But 
at the same time the government is making its intentions 
known, many long-term cattle ranchers in the Southwest are 
either not getting answers regarding their land lease renewals or 
are being told that their leases are part of a government review 
and their future is uncertain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a good percentage of Crown land leaseholders are 
beef producers and would have a pivotal role in any strategy to 
increase beef production in this province. Many of these leases 
have been held by ranchers for several generations. Mr. 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

 

Speaker, why is the NDP undermining its own plans for 
increasing beef production in this province by sending a shock 
wave of uncertainty through the whole industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no doubt 
that the ranchers in Saskatchewan today are contributing to the 
growth of the beef industry. There’s no doubt about that, and 
they will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. And we have people 
who are moving to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who are 
helping us grow the industry in our province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have First Nations people today in 
Saskatchewan who are buying land, who are buying livestock, 
who are establishing ranching operations in Saskatchewan 
because they too, Mr. Speaker, are interested in growing the 
livestock industry. 
 
And when I say, Mr. Speaker, that what we’re doing is that 
we’re trying to mediate a solution, what does the Leader of the 
Opposition from his seat call out? He says, Mr. Speaker, that 
that mediation process doesn’t work, is what he hollers out from 
his seat, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that on this side of the House 
we’re going to work with ranchers, and First Nations people, 
and communities to make a difference, Mr. Speaker, and rural 
municipalities — which is different from what they do on their 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. That’s different. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, before I begin my formal remarks in support of the 
Throne Speech, I do want to note that we are meeting here 
today in this legislature against the backdrop of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order, order, order. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 
we are meeting here today against the backdrop of war. And I 
would remind all members of this House on both sides that 
however much fun their acrimonious debate and banter back 
and forth amongst each other is, there is something more 
important happening today in this world. There are people who 
are in danger of losing their lives, Mr. Speaker, and I think it is 

important that we acknowledge the international situation. 
 
Like the member from Saskatoon Greystone and many other 
members in this House, I’m sure, on all sides — Liberal, 
Saskatchewan Party, and New Democratic Party — I strongly 
endorse and respect the Prime Minister of Canada’s position 
with respect to this war. 
 
However, now that war has started, we have to look to the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very wise young woman, 23 or 24 years old, 
said this. She said, it is far, it is far too complicated . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. Order. I would ask the member from Wood River 
to pay attention to the Speaker when the Speaker has risen, and 
not to interrupt. 
 
Members have been interrupting the person who is speaking, 
the member from Saskatoon Southeast, and I found it very 
difficult to hear her remarks. And I would ask members to 
respect each other’s right to speak in this House without being 
impeded. 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your 
courtesy and for the courtesy of many other members in this 
House, and I hope it has an exemplary effect on those few who 
are not listening. 
 
I do want to say and I want to quote this very wise young 
woman, who said, it is far too complicated, the situation in Iraq, 
to have a simple for or against position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can you imagine holding a child in your arms, 
hearing the bombs dropping, and knowing that those that you 
hold so dear will soon disappear from this world? 
 
Can you imagine being an American soldier, struggling in a gas 
mask and protective gear and watching your comrades die? Can 
you imagine, Mr. Speaker, hearing the cries of fear from 
civilians and from military personnel alike and knowing that 
you’re unable to do anything about it? 
 
These are the pictures that we see daily on our television 
screens, Mr. Speaker. We cannot possibly understand what it 
was like to live under the Saddam Hussein’s regime. And we 
also, Mr. Speaker, cannot imagine what it is like right now to 
live under this new circumstance, this new reality of shock and 
awe, bombs and battles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to understand that it is not about winning 
a war. It is about winning peace in this world. And we have to 
understand that that peace will only be attained with sensitivity 
to the Iraqi people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we sit here in this legislature, we sit here in the 
comfort of this province, and we feel powerless. But I have to 
say there are things that we can do. We can react to this war by 
having a solid discussion about peace measures that we can 
take. 
 
That’s why, for instance, Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech we 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

have indicated that we will introduce legislation so that 
Saskatchewan authorities can respond quickly to public security 
threats. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we have consistently over the 
last two decades always had money in our budget for the 
Saskatchewan Council on International Cooperation — 
$375,000 of taxpayers’ money goes to support international 
co-operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have within our government people who have 
been travelling to Moscow, Johannesburg, to other African 
nations helping to assist in terms of building and rebuilding a 
strong governance system. 
 
We have our universities opening their doors to foreign 
students. And indeed, I would hope that they would go a little 
further, and for the Iraqi students perhaps provide extra 
scholarships rather than extra tuition for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, finally we all as individual citizens can and must 
support humanitarian efforts — not only with our thoughts and 
our prayers, but with our cash donations. As we know, in 
Saskatchewan we have a strong and proud reputation for 
charitable giving, and I hope that we will find it in our hearts to 
think kindly of the Iraqi people at this time. And finally, I 
strongly urge us all to support the United Nations in their 
humanitarian rebuilding efforts that will and must occur when 
this conflict is over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I started yesterday by commenting 
on the speech made by the new member for Battlefords-Cut 
Knife. As I said, I thought it was eloquent and fluent. He talked 
about the importance of business. I talked briefly yesterday 
about the importance for balance, for having a strong role for 
government in public education, public health care, public 
transportation, and public environmental stewardship. 
 
I did this, Mr. Speaker, because I am a market social democrat. 
I believe very strongly in the market economy and at the same 
time I believe very strongly in sound public policies. The 
opposition would have us say that governments should not be in 
business. On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we say 
business cannot and should not run government. We cannot 
have public services being operated for the profit motive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to work in co-operation and we have to 
find a balance. In that sense, Mr. Speaker, I am a very strong 
proponent of our government’s position vis-à-vis uranium 
mining. Mr. Speaker, uranium mining in northern 
Saskatchewan is fraught with difficulties, as the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone noted yesterday. At the same time, it is 
also a solid economic and employment opportunity for First 
Nations and Métis people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is also, despite the dangers — the very real 
dangers which I totally acknowledge — it is also a much more 
environmentally sustainable energy alternative than is, for 
instance, flooding northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have travelled to the mountains of Kashmir and 
watched people chopping down the wood on the trees that they 
need to sustain their lives, but chopping the trees down so that 

they can heat their homes. I have been on the plains of 
Peshawar, just outside the borders of Afghanistan, and I have 
watched people trying to feed their families and not having any 
electricity. So in that sense I am a proponent of uranium mining 
for energy purposes solely. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a bit not only about what’s in 
the Throne Speech, but what is not there because as the poet, 
and I believe it was Robert Frost, said, “But I have miles to go 
before I sleep.” I still have dreams. 
 
I think that this is a fine, fine Throne Speech, full of an 
incredible amount of detail and a very active and aggressive 
campaign of action. And I still want to see more. 
 
I am for instance concerned that we have not seen an increase in 
social assistance rates for 16 years in this province. I’m talking 
about the basic adult allowance of $195 per month. It is a little 
known fact, Mr. Speaker, but over 50 per cent of the people 
who are on social assistance caseloads are there because they 
are deemed unemployable. They are permanently disabled. 
They have no alternative but social assistance. And they’re 
living as adults, single adults, on $195 a month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other 50 per cent of the people who are on 
social assistance are there for less than six months. And I do not 
think that the people of Saskatchewan are so hard-hearted that 
they would begrudge a small increase in social assistance rates 
for these people to give them a hand up, an extra edge to get 
back on their feet again. 
 
I also believe very strongly, Mr. Speaker, that we need to have 
proper, perpetual protection for the Great Sand Hills. 
 
We need to have solid action on education on the property tax. 
 
And like the member for Rosthern said yesterday, we need to 
have, Mr. Speaker, high-speed Internet hook-ups for all 
communities in this province, including the communities of 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
I also would like to see us move on increasing the sufficiency of 
the Victim Services Fund. I’d like an expansion to the child tax 
credit, and I very definitely want a beefed-up immigration 
attraction program. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this Throne 
Speech and supporting this government in the coming election 
because, as I said, we have miles to go before we sleep. We’ve 
done an awful lot of work, but there still is work that’s undone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I started out by talking about war and it is a truism 
that in war one of the first casualties is truth. Unfortunately it 
also appears to hold for provincial politics, at least on the 
opposition side. They go about doing vicious personal attacks, 
perpetuating falsehoods, and spreading doom and gloom. All so 
that they can convince people to vote for them. For what? For 
straight power? Do they have any kind of a plan to improve this 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have been going out and deliberately creating 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

 

low self-esteem amongst Saskatchewan citizens on the basis 
that if they repeat some negativity often enough that people will 
believe it. Well it’s working. Even the Saskatchewan Chamber 
of Commerce has had to develop a program to counteract their 
negativity. 
 
They keep talking about the plan, but what is it? They change it 
almost weekly. As far as I can see they have two steps to their 
plan. One is to lower personal income taxes and two is to lower 
corporate taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would remind the members opposite, and time 
does not permit me to outline all the things that we have done, 
but we have lowered taxes, Mr. Speaker. We have lowered 
personal income taxes and we have lowered corporate income 
taxes. 
 
So they have a two-step plan, and what do we have? We have a 
10-step plan. We know you have to build on your strengths, on 
your natural resources like oil and gas and minerals and forests. 
You have to encourage co-operation and team-building. 
 
The third thing you have to do, Mr. Speaker, is you have to 
build economic development skills in local communities. 
Fourth, you have to have a plan to provide skills training and 
the ability to access opportunity. 
 
Fifth part of our plan is a plan to fight poverty and to encourage 
inclusion of all citizens. The sixth part of our plan is to 
encourage venture capital. Number seven, we have . . . 
providing infrastructure, both the traditional infrastructure like 
roads and highways, and information technology. 
 
Number eight is to support innovation and research like the 
synchrotron in Saskatoon. Number nine to provide quality of 
life and essentials like health care. 
 
And the tenth part of our plan is to develop a positive attitude in 
Saskatchewan about Saskatchewan — the greatest province in 
the greatest country in which to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s our plan. It’s a ten-point plan, unlike the 
members opposite who have a two-step slogan: lower taxes — 
lower personal taxes, lower corporate taxes. A two-step slogan 
contrasted with a ten-step plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to remind the members opposite you need 
more than simplistic slogans. If that’s all you have for a plan, 
you have nothing. 
 
Saskatchewan has a lot going for it, Mr. Speaker. We have the 
third or fourth lowest personal taxes. We are the third largest 
producers of minerals. We are second when it comes to oil. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are first in visionary and progressive 
government for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
replying to the Throne Speech, I would like to first of all 
welcome and congratulate the two new members to this House, 

the member from Battleford-Cut Knife, and the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. It’s always a singular honour to be chosen 
by your peers and constituents to represent them in this 
Legislative Assembly, and I remember well the first opportunity 
that I had to speak in this legislature and it was with a lot more 
nervousness seven or eight years ago than it is today. 
 
However, I also recognize that it has been a singular honour 
over this past seven or eight years since 1995 to represent the 
constituency of Melfort-Tisdale. And whenever the next general 
provincial election is held, as everyone knows, the constituency 
boundaries are going to change. And I look forward to 
representing the new constituency but it is also a bit of a 
bittersweet change in that I’m going to miss representing many 
wonderful communities and people that it has been my great 
and singular honour to represent over these past seven years. 
And so in looking forward to the future I also would like to 
express my deep thanks to the communities that will no longer 
be part of the constituency that I seek to represent. 
 
I also would like to say that the limitations of time preclude the 
opportunity to really speak a great deal about the constituency 
that I do represent, because I’ve had many opportunities in the 
past to speak specifically and encouragingly about the people in 
the Northeast from Melfort-Tisdale constituency. But suffice it 
to say that I continue to believe that all Saskatchewan people 
are incredibly endowed with the gifts of the fruits of their 
labour, of the ability to work and to find solutions to raise their 
families, to build a caring and compassionate society. And all of 
us now get to a stage where, when I was first elected, I couldn’t 
singularly take the honour of grandfather; now I can. And it’s a 
great pleasure that all of our grandchildren are in Saskatchewan 
as I speak and that the three grandchildren from Calgary have 
come home to visit for a week. 
 
And that is always a bittersweet moment because it’s delightful 
when they come home and invigorate you and tire you and 
challenge you for all of the attention that they deserve, but it is 
also a very nostalgic, poignant moment when you have to wave 
goodbye to them, as many other people in Saskatchewan wave 
goodbye to their grandchildren because their children have had 
to seek opportunities somewhere else in this province because 
of the lack of the opportunities here. And so while I am pleased 
that the grandchildren are home, I know I will have a tear in my 
eye on Sunday when they have to leave to go back to Calgary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I would like to take the time I’m allocated to 
do though is to speak more specifically about the health care 
system that I am responsible and honoured to be the critic of in 
this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people rightly and 
properly deserve to have the very best health care system in the 
world. We should never ever think that we cannot have the very 
best. We should never have to decide that we have to accept a 
level other than that level of excellence that should be envied 
around the world, not only in Canada but in North America and 
everywhere. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, while we have been looked to in the past 
for creating the publicly funded, publicly administered health 
care system going back to the days of Mr. Douglas, we can’t 
look back on the last decade of NDP administration with quite 
the same optimistic kind of an approach. Because while the 
current government seems to think that they are the only 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

custodians of a health care system, the reality is, is that over the 
last decade our health care system has really deteriorated to a 
significant extent. 
 
Some of it is because of the federal Liberal government’s 
off-loading in the first and second and third Martin budgets 
when, in order to deal with the federal deficit problems, they 
decided that they were going to remove themselves from their 
responsibilities to the people of this country and unload the 
health care system solely and entirely, basically, on the 
provinces. And going from a shared funding system that 
initially was 50/50 dollars, 50-cent dollars, we went down to as 
low as 13 or 14 cents on the dollar of the federal contribution to 
health care. 
 
And even now after all the hoopla that has come out of the 
accord about health care, we still, I don’t believe, will reach 20 
per cent as a federal contribution. Mr. Romanow in his report 
recommended a fixed, steady, stable, predictable 25 per cent 
and we’re certainly not going to attain that. 
 
And so there are a lot of problems that have been created in 
every province because of the federal Liberal government’s 
decisions. 
 
But we’ve also been the masters of our own destiny to a large 
measure and we’ve made some very, very poor decisions. We 
promised that we were going to cut waiting lists . . . the NDP 
government promised that they were going to cut waiting lists 
in the last election by 30 per cent. And the reality is in the 
intervening time they’ve doubled. 
 
They promised that they would hire 500 new nurses in 
Saskatchewan, but the reality is we lost about 1,200 of them. 
We promised that . . . they promised that they were going to 
deal with the issue of educational training seats for health care 
professionals. And when you look back, it used to be a time 
when we’d graduate 500-odd nurses in this province a year. In 
the ’90s they cut the seats available for education down to 80 
from that level. Right now we’re finally moving up slowly and 
almost grudgingly by this government to 260 seats right now, 
and there’s going to be another 40 seats that have just been 
recently announced for the North program to get us to 300 
seats. That’s a far cry from the number of seats that we used to 
have. 
 
We failed to address the workplace issues for nurses and in 
reality in 1999 we had to order them back to work in order to 
force the health care system not to be brought to its knees 
because nursing conditions were deteriorated to a large extent. 
 
The current Learning minister, when she was the president of 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, would have rallied against 
the decisions that this government is making in regard to the 
nursing profession. But she sits strangely quiet when her 
colleagues are saying that the current situation is unacceptable 
and untenable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the shortage of medical personnel and nurses in 
particular are resulting in some very clear specific problems. 
We’re seeing heath centres like Foam Lake and Gull Lake who 
can no longer offer the services on the same basis as they used 
to because it’s impossible to recruit and replace RNs (registered 

nurse) who are retiring. 
 
In Regina, operating rooms are closing and hospital beds 
remain closed because they’re short of nurses. In April of 2002 
there were over 600 vacant registered nurse and registered 
psychiatric nurse positions that were unfilled in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The current president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, 
Rosalee Longmoore, is quoted as saying, “Saskatchewan is 
experiencing its worst nursing shortage in its history.” And 
when you look at it, it is absolutely amazing to me that this 
government seems to be sleepwalking through its responsibility 
and its approach to this fundamental issue. 
 
The SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) and 
SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) released a document a 
short time ago that estimated that 38 per cent of the current 
nurse workforce is going to be retiring by 2007. That’s only 
five years from now, Mr. Speaker. And that means that in five 
years we potentially are going to have people eligible for 
retirement of the magnitude of over 3,000 nurses — over five 
years — that’s over 600 nurses a year. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And in response to that statistic we currently are at 260 
educational seats, increased now with the 40 northern allowance 
to 300. If we retain every single one of those graduates, we’d 
only be meeting the challenge or replacement of these retirees at 
a level of 50 per cent — 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
currently 600 short and we’re going to replace nurses at a level 
of 50 per cent over the next five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t rocket science. It’s going to create a 
huge problem. It’s going to be difficult. It’s going to be difficult 
in all of the rural outlying areas, but it’s also going to be 
difficult in Saskatoon and Regina and Prince Albert and Moose 
Jaw and the major centres as increasing pressure and demands 
of that shortage reality is going to impact on the health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s simply intolerable, and it speaks to the very 
fundamental problem that has not and is not being addressed in 
the health care system. Mr. Speaker, we can talk about the 
government’s initiative to sort of quantify and codify and 
reorganize surgical waiting lists. There’s nothing wrong with 
that. But if you have no one to do the job and provide the 
service, what’s the point? It’ll continue to get double or triple 
the length, but at least we’ll know where we are. And so people 
are sitting here waiting for needed surgeries and hip 
replacements, in pain and agony, and getting prescribed 
morphine or whatever painkiller for two years and longer. 
 
And if we think it’s bad now with this government’s lack of 
direction and commitment and action to replacing medical 
personnel, it’s simply going to get worse. 
 
And I use nurses as an example, but the same situation exists in 
technologists — laboratory and radiology technologists. We 
probably are only educating about a third of what we need. We 
educate 70 pharmacists a year and only half of them stay in the 
province. And the pharmacists of the province will tell you 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

 

there are over 100 positions unfilled. 
 
I mean you can go through the whole piece — our medical 
doctors. Our family physicians are worked, and long hours in 
many cases in single or dual practices where their on-call 
requirements are brutal, and yet there is no choice if we’re 
going to provide these services. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe that what needs to be done, is a 
concrete plan has to be developed to provide a new direction for 
health care into the future that doesn’t just simply deal with 
these sort of busywork exercises of reorganizing the lists, or 
studying this, or studying that. I heard on the radio today that 
the Department of Health has announced today that it’s going to 
study how many nurses that they’re short, and they hope to 
have a report by June. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been telling them this for the last three 
years — this is not new — and so here we go, announce another 
group of people to study an obvious problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fundamental problem that we have is to 
provide required medical personnel in this province. And to that 
end we have to make a commitment today to increase the 
educational seats where they’re required. In nursing — in my 
opinion, and in the opinion of the College of Nursing, and in the 
opinion of the SUN and the SRNA — we need over 400 seats 
this next year. We need probably 450 to 500 permanent 
commitment seats to replace what we’re doing just to get into 
the game. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we made that commitment today, it’s 
going to take five or six years before we have someone 
graduating from that commitment because you have to hire 
faculty, you have to have a place to have these people educated, 
you need the infrastructure commitment, and it’s not being 
made. So we are creating a problem for the future that is going 
to be very, very serious. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to build a health care system that’s 
looked on with envy and pride in this province, we’ve got to get 
the piece together. We’ve got to make sure we provide the 
necessary health care professionals. 
 
In order to do that we need to attract people who will work in a 
faculty. And faculty members always look for sort of a 
threefold approach to their profession. They want to do the 
teaching of the profession, they want to do research, and they 
want to do clinical work. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that 
we provide the atmosphere and build on the opportunity to do 
the research so we can get first class faculty members here who 
are attracted to providing health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
To that end, the Saskatchewan Party committed three years ago 
to doing its part to build an integrated health sciences facility at 
the University of Saskatchewan to be that magnet, to bring all 
the medical professionals together, and provide adequate 
facilities so that we can provide the necessary education seats. 
 
We also said it’s important that they come together to study all 
of the medical disciplines under one facility, as much as 
possible, because if we believe in primary health care teams 
where professionals are going to work together, what better way 

to start that culture of working together than learning and being 
educated together. So we think that that’s important. 
 
We’ve also said that we completely support the creation of a 
dedicated medical light beam at the Canadian Light Source to 
provide that opportunity for research excellence that will attract 
the very best people in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t going to be enough if we only provide 
more education seats and we don’t do everything we can to 
make sure that people working in the system now are willing to 
look at their futures and say, I think we will stay in the system 
maybe a little longer, a year or two longer. We have to have a 
good retention program that’s built on quality workplaces. And 
the idea of having the people engaged in deciding what’s 
problematic in their system is very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that we not only retain 
people working in the system and that we educate people, 
we’ve got to tell people that have gone to Texas in the layoffs 
of the early ’90s when they were cut dramatically . . . that have 
gone to Texas, have gone to Alberta, have gone to BC (British 
Columbia), have gone to other provinces, that there’s a place 
for them here at home; come back to their roots and the 
province that will make a place for them and value their 
contribution to the medical system. So we need all of those 
things happening, not just for nurses but for doctors, 
physiotherapists, pharmacists, all of the medical professionals 
that we need to make this province grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important that we bring together a real 
strategy for the personnel that we’re desperately short of so they 
can feel empowered and enthused about their job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other area that . . . another couple of areas I 
want to touch on briefly is the area of how can we deliver 
services in this province? Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to 
state right upfront that if we’re going to have service delivery in 
the face of increasing shortages of personnel, we’re going to 
have to find new and enthusiastic ways to develop these kinds 
of relationships. And we support the concept of primary health 
care teams, and we have to work with the medical professionals 
to work out the operational relationships between all of the 
participants in the teams. 
 
You know what we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is we have to 
challenge each of these medical professionals to operate at the 
top of their scope of practice rather than arguing about where 
these scopes of practice overlap; that we challenge them to be 
the best they can be and to feel good about the decisions they 
are making, and to feel as if their job and their profession and 
their opportunity to participate in it is valued and important and 
appreciated by the province of Saskatchewan. So we need to do 
that sort of work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have to do everything we can to try to 
enhance regional services so that everything isn’t poured onto 
the tertiary centres, and the demands and the expectations are 
simply greater than they’re able to meet and make commitments 
to. 
 
And I think what we’ve got to look is how we can provide 
greater diagnostic and imaging services out in the regional 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

centres, perhaps with the support of the medical professionals 
operating with using new technologies of being able to transmit 
images over the Internet and in an enhanced electronic 
environment so that everybody doesn’t have to physically be in 
these regional centres. But a lot of the work can be done there 
so everybody isn’t transported into the tertiary centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other reality of life is going to be is we can 
deal with a lot of the predictable health care conditions with 
primary health care teams and regional centres, but we also got 
to understand that not everything in health care is predictable. 
Traumas happen, accidents happen, very acute incidents happen 
in an unpredictable way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have to look at and invigorate and make 
very complete our emergency measure system and, working 
with them, we have to not only provide a better ground 
ambulance dispatch and co-ordination system, I absolutely 
believe that we have to have a helicopter-base response system 
similar to the STARS (Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society) 
program in Alberta that can provide that emergency blanket of 
protection for all of our citizens in Saskatchewan. And so that 
people not only living in rural or remote areas but those people 
travelling through them, going to the lake on the weekends or 
visiting family, will also be able to be protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also believe that there has to be an 
accountability segment to how we operate. Three years ago 
when I made the presentation to the Fyke Commission, I said I 
really believe that the time has come where the health care 
system and the Government of Saskatchewan has to build a 
relationship and build a commitment with the people of 
Saskatchewan as embodied in a health care bill of rights and 
responsibilities. We have to understand what each’s 
responsibility is to the health care system and the system to the 
citizens. 
 
I think we’ve got to build that image and vision for what the 
health care system is and should be in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that to give teeth and life to this in a 
non-partisan way, we need a health care commissioner, that can 
act in an independent way responsible to this Assembly, to 
oversee the commitments and the relationships we embodied in 
a health care bill of rights. 
 
I also believe that the newly announced Quality Council that 
has been announced in this province could be dovetailed into 
this commitment under the health care bill of rights, and it 
would be possible to make this relationship work in a very good 
way. And it would provide the transparency and the 
accountability that’s going to be required where our citizens 
understand and expect and respect what the health care system 
is expected to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are some of the brief overview directions 
that our health care system under a Sask Party government will 
take. They’re pragmatic, they’re principled, and they’re going 
to provide fundamental change where it’s fundamentally needed 
so that we can build a health care system addressing the issues 
that are so fundamentally important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan deserves the best. We should never 
settle for less than that because we’ve missed an opportunity to 

get it right. To get the health care system re-earning the respect 
of its citizens, we have to make these fundamental steps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my disappointment with the Speech from the 
Throne is, while it talks about some nice platitudes and 
initiatives — and they’re well and good in themselves — but 
they don’t deal with the core problem and the core deficiency 
that we have in health care. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I certainly cannot support the Speech 
from the Throne. I believe that it’s time for the people of this 
province to make a clear choice about the vision of practical, 
principled pragmatism that the Sask Party’s talking about, and 
addressing the real issues of health care, and the only way that I 
can express that is to support the amendment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to rise in my place to offer some comments 
with respect to the Speech from the Throne. And I want to start 
off by thanking the people of my constituency and home 
community in Saskatoon for allowing me the privilege of 
representing them in the legislature. 
 
And I want to also congratulate the two newest members of the 
Legislative Assembly who are my colleague, the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview which is also a neighbouring constituency, 
and also the new member in the opposition from Battleford-Cut 
Knife who I have worked with before in his capacity as the . . . 
a local mayor in his community and I have met him in my 
former capacity as Minister of Health and Minister of Finance. 
 
And I want to say that both of these gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, 
have been entrusted with the responsibility of representing their 
neighbours and I hope that they enjoy it as much as I do, and I 
hope that they find it to be as much of an honour and a privilege 
as I do and I know the rest of my colleagues do as well. 
 
I want to say first of all, Mr. Speaker, you know I am quite an 
optimistic person actually and I must say that sometimes when I 
listen to the doom and gloom that comes from some of the 
members opposite about how everything is bad in this province, 
even I start to get a bit depressed. 
 
(15:00) 
 
But then I like to put things in perspective, Mr. Speaker. And 
one of the things that I do, and I think we should all do, is to 
consider what is going on in the world today. And we watch the 
television; we see some of the violence and terrorism and war 
going on in the world. 
 
And I think all of us in this House and the people of our 
province realize that, as we look at our problems and the things 
we have to complain about, we also should count our blessings, 
Mr. Speaker, because we are very, very fortunate to live in this 
land of Canada and to live in our beautiful province of 
Saskatchewan. I feel privileged just to have been born here. 
 
And with that in mind and putting things in that kind of 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, that we’re all very fortunate to be 
here and our differences are not nearly as great as they would be 
in parts of the world where people are shooting at each other, 
Mr. Speaker, I do however want to examine some of the 
comments made by some of my colleagues in the House on the 
opposition side and in particular some of the comments of the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
And my first observation with respect to the Leader of the 
Opposition’s comments the other day, Mr. Speaker, is I thought 
that it was unfortunate that the Leader of the Opposition made 
the observation that he thought the Liberals and the NDP could 
not find good candidates in the by-elections. 
 
I’m hoping that it was completely in jest because in fact I think 
that all of the parties — the opposition party, the New 
Democratic Party, which I represent, and the Liberal Party — 
all have very fine members and fine people that represent them 
in elections. And certainly the by-elections were no exception. 
 
I think the candidates for both the New Democratic Party and 
the Liberals, to which the Leader of the Opposition referred, 
were very fine and accomplished citizens. And there can only 
be one winner, but I think we’re all winners when we have 
people participating for the various political parties in our 
democracy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But I want to talk about what I see as a lack 
of a coherent plan from the Leader of the Opposition. And it is 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that he tries to make the case that they 
have some kind of a blueprint for the future that consists of 
more than just slogans. 
 
And I want to analyze what he has said because I think he has 
failed to make that case when you really examine what the 
Leader of the Opposition has said. Of course he says that he 
wants to increase the population of the province by 100,000 
people. Well who would disagree with that? That’s fine. But the 
question is: do you have a plan to achieve it, Mr. Speaker? And 
I say they do not have a plan and . . . or at least they do not have 
a plan that makes any sense. 
 
And I start by looking at the promises of the Leader of the 
Opposition with respect to tax cuts. First he says that he is 
going to raise the personal credit level, and he implies that 
we’re going to move to a personal income tax regime that will 
be similar to Alberta’s. That’s what they like to say because 
they’ll never admit anything good happens in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker; everything good is always in Alberta. They never 
mention the young people that have to spend $5,000 insuring 
their vehicles, they don’t mention the health care premiums, but 
they mention the parts they disagree with in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to say that one promise alone that he’s making — to 
change the income tax system — would cost $400 million, Mr. 
Speaker. And the Leader of the Opposition should come clean 
about that and say it’s $400 million. 
 
Then he says he’s going to eliminate the small business income 
tax. We’ve already cut it by 40 per cent but he says: oh, that’s 
not good enough, he’s going to eliminate it. That would cost 

$60 million per year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But he’s not quite satisfied with $460 million, no. He says he’s 
going to cut the corporate capital tax in half. A lot of tax cuts 
for big business in the Sask Party plan I think. But that’s 
another $180 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the plan so far that he’s talking about, when he gets up and 
makes all his promises, so far, $640 million a year, every year. 
But he doesn’t stop there because he’s going to decrease all the 
revenues by . . . That’s about 10 per cent of the province’s 
revenue, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition says he’s 
going to cut. 
 
But no, no, he doesn’t stop there. Then he tells people he’s 
going to raise all the spending. He’s going to increase the 
provincial share of education funding for K to 12 (kindergarten 
to grade 12) education to 50 per cent — a very laudable goal, 
no question about it — but it’s . . . it costs $100 million in 
increased spending. 
 
So somehow the member from Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of 
the Opposition, is going to cut all the revenue to government 
but he’s going to have the government spending more. It sounds 
familiar and somebody says it sounds like Grant Devine. I think 
there are parallels there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we’re up to $740 million that the Leader of the Opposition 
says he’s going to commit every year. And then people ask him, 
well how are you going to do that? How are you going to get 
less money to government because you’re going to cut all the 
taxes to your rich friends, but you say you’re going to give 
more money to the schools and the farmers and the 
municipalities. How does that work? 
 
And of course what he says is well, he’s going to do something 
about the Crown corporations. Maybe he’s going to sell them 
off and spend that money. That’s a bit like selling the farm, to 
most people, Mr. Speaker. And I think most people don’t want 
to sell SaskTel, which is our telephone company — one of the 
few, by the way, in North America that makes any money these 
days. They never hear that from the opposition. 
 
He’s going to sell the Crown corporations. Well I’m not sure 
that’s such a good idea because actually if you analyze it, Mr. 
Speaker, they make a lot of money for the province and the 
people of the province, and we have among the lowest utility 
rates in the country. But never mind that because they are 
ideologically hidebound, right wing, and fairly extreme when it 
comes to some of this, Mr. Speaker. And they want to sell off 
the public assets. That’s what they want to do. 
 
Now it doesn’t seem very logical to say you’re going to promise 
$740 million in goodies and then lead people to believe that 
you’re going to fix the surgical waiting lists that the member 
from Melfort was just talking about, hire more health 
professionals that he was just talking about, and build a new 
health sciences facility that they’ve talked about, and give more 
money to the farmers and more money to the municipalities 
which they’ve talked about. 
 
How are you going to do that when you have gutted the public 
treasury by giving tax breaks to the rich and large corporations 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

and selling off the Crown corporations? They haven’t explained 
that, Mr. Speaker, because it doesn’t make any sense. 
 
And I think . . . I would say this to anyone in this province . . . 
And I admit there are some, Mr. Speaker, who believe that you 
can cut taxes massively and increase spending massively, and 
somehow this is all going to work. I would just repeat what I 
said in this House last year which is this, if it sounds too good 
to be true, it probably is. If it sounds too good to be true, it 
probably is. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the problem with what the Leader 
of the Opposition and the Saskatchewan Party say is it’s too 
good to be true. It’s too good to be true. Because what they’re 
trying to say to people is, you’re not going to have to pay any 
taxes under us, but we’re going to fix everything and give you a 
bunch of money. Well life doesn’t work that way, Mr. Speaker, 
and I think most people know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I just want to comment on some of the 
other things that the Leader of the Opposition says. 
 
You know they use a lot of buzz words and phrases, Mr. 
Speaker, like, we’re always hearing that they’re going to change 
the labour laws but they never quite explain what they mean by 
changing the labour laws. And I hope they don’t think they’re 
fooling anybody, Mr. Speaker. Just because they won’t 
elaborate on what they mean, they shouldn’t think that people 
don’t know what they want to do because when parties of a 
right wing sort like the party opposite talks about changing the 
labour laws, Mr. Speaker, they are talking about stripping away 
the rights of working people. That is what they are talking about 
and nobody should be mistaken about it. 
 
So let them tell us what it is they mean. Are they talking about 
making it harder to organize employees into unions? Is that 
what they’re talking about? Are they talking about removing 
protection that employees have from unfair treatment? Are they 
talking about removing health and safety provisions, Mr. 
Speaker? Do they want to get rid of provisions for overtime 
pay? Are they talking about lowering the minimum wage? 
 
Yes, I think they are, and I want to say on that one, Mr. 
Speaker, that every time this government has raised the 
minimum wage for the lowest paid people in this province, 
people who are not usually represented by unions, people who 
do not have a lot of benefits, all we ever hear — and I just heard 
another one from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker — are 
complaints. All you ever hear are complaints when you raise the 
minimum wage. Every time the minimum wage has been raised, 
which hasn’t been that many times, I think it’s been about three 
times in the last five years, every time we do that you’d think 
the world was going to come to an end. 
 
But if it comes to something like a tax break for the very 
wealthy, Mr. Speaker, they will be right there supporting that. 
And I think there’s something wrong with that picture, Mr. 
Speaker; I think that there is something wrong with that picture. 
 
But I want to say, going back to their promises, Mr. Speaker, 
that what we have when we listen to them talk about all their 

tax promises — on the one hand they’re going to cut the taxes 
and all their spending increases — what we have is not a plan, it 
is a wish list. 
 
It’s a wish list and of course they’re all good things, cut all the 
taxes and give everybody more money. And anybody in this 
House can sit down and come up with that kind of wish list, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a very easy thing to do if you don’t live in the real 
world and money is no object. It’s a lot like those people whose 
retirement planning consists of buying lottery tickets. That’s 
what it’s like, Mr. Speaker. It’s not a plan; it’s a wish that they 
have. And just how is this wish list supposed to add up? Well 
they tell us you can have 640-some million dollars in tax cuts, 
and hundreds of millions more in spending. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition, I must say, has said a few 
words about how he would achieve this. And the words he uses 
— and these should be noted carefully, Mr. Speaker — he uses 
the words, program review. But just like he doesn’t say what 
the . . . changing the labour laws really means, he doesn’t say 
what the review . . . program review really means, except once 
in a while he slips up. And when he was talking to a meeting in 
Saskatoon last year he said, well it means what the government 
in British Columbia is doing. 
 
Now I want the people to note that, Mr. Speaker. He said: what 
we want to do is to do what Premier Campbell in British 
Columbia is doing. That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s his idea of program review. 
 
Well I want to give some advice to the members opposite, aside 
from the Leader of the Opposition. When their leader talks 
about program review, they should know that some of their 
cousins in British Columbia who are part of the right-wing 
government of Gordon Campbell are not really enjoying the 
program review, because what it means is real consequences for 
real people. 
 
And when you support that kind of thing, you have to explain to 
your constituents why you’re cutting their services. You have to 
talk to the parents of disabled children who are losing services 
in British Columbia. You have to talk to people who rely on 
ferries to get to work whose ferry service is being cut back. You 
have to talk to local school boards whose funding is being 
reduced. You have to talk to health workers. You have to talk to 
local governments. And then when you talk to them you’ll 
understand the kind of program review that is being advocated 
by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, I believe, is not a plan that the people of 
Saskatchewan want. That is not a plan that the people of 
Saskatchewan want. And I say to the Leader of the Opposition, 
Mr. Speaker, he should come clean with the people of this 
province. And he should tell us what he really would like to do 
when he talks about cutting taxes for the rich, when he talks 
about changing the labour legislation, when he talks about 
program review like the Government of British Columbia. He 
should come clean with the people and explain what the 
consequences of those policies really are, Mr. Speaker, and he’s 
not doing that. 
 
(15:15) 
 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

 

Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that their so-called plan, which 
is not a plan, pretends that all of our problems have simple 
answers. It’s a plan that uses code words to avoid discussion 
about what they really would like to do and where their 
proposals really would take this province. 
 
And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard a lot in the 
Throne Speech debate including from the members opposite, 
they have said — and I think this is important — they have said 
they don’t like the Throne Speech, some have said, because it 
contains too much detail; it goes on and on with all kinds of 
detail. 
 
And I guess I would say, Mr. Speaker, the problem is for some 
people, fantasy is more important than reality. That’s the 
problem. We are talking about what we are actually doing as 
government; we’re talking about actual results. We’re talking 
about real plans; they’re talking about a fantasy world, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to say that we have a plan. We have a plan that has 
brought in a new royalty structure for oil and gas that is 
resulting in record oil and gas drilling in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and employing thousands of people. 
 
We have a plan in forestry that in the last number of years has 
brought almost a billion dollars of private sector investment and 
is employing about 8,000 more people in forestry than a small 
number of years ago. 
 
We have a plan for new royalties in mining that is leading to 
more exploration and exciting possibilities in things like 
diamond mining, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to be moving 
forward with that plan. 
 
We have a plan for jobs that has resulted, Mr. Speaker, in 
10,000 more people working in Saskatchewan today than were 
working in Saskatchewan a year ago. 
 
We have a plan, Mr. Speaker, for tax reform that has brought 
our personal taxes from the second highest in Canada to the 
third or fourth lowest, Mr. Speaker. We’ve delivered on that. 
 
We have a health plan to preserve private medicare. I’m not so 
sure that’s what they want to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have an innovative plan to bring more research to our 
universities, the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) and the U 
of R (University of Regina), which have record amounts of 
research dollars coming into them today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a plan to reform the welfare system that has taken 
thousands of families off of social assistance and into the 
workforce. And I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that the number 
of people on social assistance in this province has gone down 
each year for the last eight years, Mr. Speaker. That is what is 
happening. And there are more people working and there are 
fewer people on social assistance, Mr. Speaker. That is what is 
happening and that is the reality you will never hear from the 
members opposite because all they ever do is preach doom and 
gloom. 
 
And I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by saying we have a plan. 

They have an empty slogan, that’s what they have. 
 
And I want to say also in closing, Mr. Speaker, that I and the 
men and women that sit on this side of the House are proud of 
our province. We are proud of the hard-working men and 
women across this province that get up and make things happen 
every single day. 
 
We’re proud of the world-class things we have here such as 
Canada’s only synchrotron, such as the third largest mining 
industry, such as the second largest oil industry, such as the 
third largest gas industry. 
 
We’re proud of the fact that more people are working. We’re 
proud of the fact that our tax system has been reformed. We’re 
proud of the fact that there are few people . . . fewer people on 
welfare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re proud of the world-class OSB (oriented strand board) 
plant being built at Meadow Lake. We’re proud of the OSB 
plant at Hudson Bay. We’re proud of the 8,000 new people 
working in forestry. We’re proud of the oil and gas workers. 
We’re proud of the prospects in mining. We’re proud of the fact 
that we’re the world leaders in potash and uranium. 
 
And they can get up, Mr. Speaker, and they can preach their 
doom and gloom day in and day out, but we’re not going to be 
pessimistic. We are going to be proud of our province and what 
is happening in our province. We love Saskatchewan. We love 
living in Saskatchewan. We don’t want to leave Saskatchewan. 
That’s the vision that we have of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
not a vision of constantly complaining about everything going 
on in this province. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, when the 
people of this province have a choice between substance — 
which I say this government is delivering to people — and 
empty slogans and non-existent plans, Mr. Speaker, at the end 
of the day when the people have the opportunity to judge and 
choose between those two options, I predict, Mr. Speaker, that 
they will resoundingly choose to re-elect this government. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support the Speech 
from the Throne. I am going to vote against the amendment put 
forward by the opposition, and thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I make my 
comments on the Speech from the Throne, I think it is 
appropriate that we acknowledge the fact that as we gather in 
this democratic institution, once more the world finds itself at 
war, a war that nobody wanted but which is now inflicting 
death and destruction on the soldiers of our allies and upon the 
innocent people of Iraq. 
 
It is sad to acknowledge that in the 21st century we still have 
not found a way to resolve our conflicts in a peaceful manner 
and in a manner that does not result in the senseless slaughter of 
innocent civilians. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that as Canadians we all have a certain 
sense of unease that we are not with our traditional allies on this 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

war, the soldiers of the United Kingdom and the United States. 
 
I think we must all acknowledge that Saddam Hussein is a 
criminal thug whose removal from office should be a cause for 
celebration by us all. But I think we also must acknowledge that 
this invasion of Iraq is a response to the events of 9/11, but that 
the connection between Iraq and Saddam Hussein with the 
attack on the World Trade towers is at best tenuous. 
 
It also has to be acknowledged that this attack has not been 
sanctioned by the United Nations and if we are to move into a 
new world order that resolves human conflict without slaughter, 
it must be through a world body such as the United Nations and 
it must be through institutions such as the International Court of 
Justice which, for the record, the American government 
opposed. But I wish to state that if Saddam Hussein is brought 
before the International Court of Justice, I for one will be very 
pleased. And I think the United States should review its 
opposition to that important body for international law. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I think it has to be acknowledged that 
the doctrine of pre-emptive strike — that is the doctrine that we 
have to attack first because they might wish to attack at some 
time later — that is a very dangerous doctrine because it is one 
that if we can use that as a justification, there will no doubt be 
dictators and tyrants around the globe who will seize on that 
justification to do whatever they want. And so I think the 
doctrine of pre-emptive strike is a very dangerous one and one 
that we should avoid. 
 
On balance, I commend Prime Minister Chrétien for his 
decision to keep Canada out of this conflict. This is a decision 
that represents the overwhelming desire of Canadians to resolve 
international disputes under the auspices of the United Nations. 
Mr. Speaker, it is appropriate that we as Canadians offer thanks 
for the peace and liberty we enjoy, and that our prayers go out 
both to the soldiers of the United States and United Kingdom, 
and also to the civilians of Iraq that the peace which we enjoy 
they will also enjoy in the very near future — that Iraq will be 
rebuilt and that the troops will come home. I hope for a 
mercifully short war with as few casualties as possible. 
 
I now wish, first of all, on behalf of myself and the entire 
Liberal caucus, to welcome our two new members to the 
legislature. I’m sorry they’re not sitting with me, but I’m sure 
after the general election I am going to be swamped with 
colleagues, Mr. Speaker. But I want to welcome the new 
member for Battleford-Cut Knife, the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview, and I wish them a happy and productive term of 
service to their constituents. And I congratulate them on their 
by-election wins. 
 
I also want to congratulate the member from Cumberland who 
moved the motion on the Speech from the Throne. This is 
probably one of the last times we will have the pleasure of 
listening to the member for Cumberland, and I think he has 
graced this Assembly very well for the past 17 years. And I 
want to say publicly that I think that his commitment as well to 
the Cree language has been important in making the message, 
sending out the message, that this Assembly is a forum 
representing all of the people of Saskatchewan, and that 
Aboriginal peoples and Cree speakers as well should look to 
this Assembly as representing them and that they also have a 

role here and a place here. And the member for Cumberland has 
done that eloquently, and I salute him in what may be his last 
intervention in debate in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to speak for just a 
moment on the purpose of the Speech from the Throne. My 
understanding is that historically, centuries ago in England, the 
Throne Speech was the time for the king to address parliament 
and tell the members why he had called them into assembly. 
Then over the years that was transformed. The Speech from the 
Throne was still delivered by the Crown but it was now written 
by the government. But it continued, Mr. Speaker, to be a 
document which would set out the legislative agenda of the 
government. It still served the purpose of telling the members 
why they had been called into session. 
 
In more recent years the Speech from the Throne has been the 
vision statement, the mission statement of the government, to 
explain its dream for the country, its program, its mission, what 
it wishes to accomplish in the next session. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately we heard no vision, we received no road map 
outlining in broad terms the government’s proposed direction 
for this session. We heard a lot of words strung together. 
 
A Throne Speech should enable the citizens of the province to 
understand the philosophy and rationale of the government for 
what it is proposing and why. A Throne Speech should clearly 
outline a government’s priorities and the reasons for their 
selection. Instead, Mr. Speaker, we heard a rambling laundry 
list. I believe we were 30 minutes into the speech before I heard 
the first concrete suggestion, and that was that the government 
was going to revamp the standing committees of this 
legislature. 
 
Another 30 minutes into the morass and we were told that the 
Department of Social Services is going to change its name to 
the department of community resources and employment, 
resulting in unnecessary expenditures in changing stationery, 
logos, business cards, etc. Is this why we have been called into 
session? Is this the most the government can come up with as 
an agenda? Is this all they can say about their vision, their 
dreams for Saskatchewan? 
 
If it is, it’s a pretty thin agenda we’ve got before us, Mr. 
Speaker, and the catcalls of my colleagues in the Saskatchewan 
Party may be all we’ll have to listen to this session, unless the 
government can find its own purpose and reason for calling this 
session, its purpose for governing, and set out before us 
something more than we heard in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one thing that we all agree on is the need to 
give more hope and more opportunities to our young people. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The government says that things are booming. I have to tell 
them that my constituents . . . that’s not what they are 
experiencing, that’s not what they’re telling me, that’s not what 
the people of Saskatchewan are saying. And I think the 
government should be just a little less satisfied with just how 
this province is booming and how marvellous things are going, 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

 

because that’s not how the people out there feel. 
 
And I also think the government should be slow to call people 
traitors because they don’t think the province is booming. You 
know I don’t know why love of Saskatchewan is bound up in 
their minds with deluding ourselves into thinking things are 
good when they’re not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been said that there are two great tragedies 
in our province. The first is when we educate young people who 
leave; and the second is when we fail to educate young people 
who stay. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that too many of our young people 
have been trained and educated and have had to leave. We also 
know that with the aging of the baby boomers, we are facing the 
threat of serious labour shortage in this province. In some 
sectors we already are. We also know that we also have high 
unemployment in some sectors of our population, especially the 
Aboriginal sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is crucial that Aboriginal young people be 
trained, educated, and ready to enter the workforce. This is not 
merely justice for Aboriginal people, it is a question of 
economic survival for us all. 
 
We have all heard the figure that 35 per cent of our population 
is expected to be Aboriginal by the middle of this century. If 
Aboriginal people, by the middle of this century, are 
participating in the economy and the workforce to the fullest 
extent that they deserve, then that is a good thing. And that 
answers the labour deficit in our province. If Aboriginal people 
continue to be marginalized and outside of this economy, then 
this province, which is already unable to keep up with its 
neighbours, is facing even greater crises in the future. We need 
to bring Aboriginal young people into the economic 
mainstream. 
 
You know, a couple of years ago I debated Jim Pankiw at the 
University of Saskatchewan. And at that time it was pointed out 
that virtually none of the workforce at the University of 
Saskatchewan was Aboriginal, and Mr. Pankiw said, I don’t 
have a problem with that. Well I do; I have a serious problem 
with that. 
 
And it came out that Mr. Pankiw does not want to support 
Aboriginal people on welfare. The next point is he doesn’t want 
them to be working. What does he want? And I think we, as 
citizens of this province, all have to answer that question. If 
they’re not to be on welfare, and they’re not to be working, well 
then where are they supposed to be? 
 
Well Mr. Pankiw gave us some small glimpse of that when he 
published a pamphlet entitled Stop Indian Crime. And my 
question for Mr. Pankiw, when he says he wants to stop Indian 
crime, is what kind of crime does he support? What kind of 
crime does he advocate? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do not want Aboriginal people in our prison 
systems and they should not be to any greater extent than the 
general population. I salute the people of this province, 
especially in the Battlefords, who are working with young 
people so that they will be educated, so they’ll have recreation 

opportunities, so that they will be . . . so that they will have role 
models, and so that they will not be falling into crime. 
 
I say with regret that the Battlefords does have a significant 
crime problem. We need to keep our young people out of jail. 
And the way we do that is not by an increasingly punitive 
prison system, but by making sure that those young people are 
involved in some of the recreation, at-school activities that give 
them positive experiences, and make sure that they will be on 
the right path to become responsible and contributing members 
of our society. Nothing can be more important for us and for 
our future. And again I say, this isn’t merely fairness to them, 
this is about our survival as a society as well. And I 
congratulate the teachers and the leaders who are working with 
our young people in this very, very important step, in this very 
important mission. 
 
Well I understand that Mr. Pankiw’s constituency assistant now 
aspires to be in this Assembly. He has said he does not believe 
in the same things that his former boss believes, and I accept 
that. And if he does arrive in this Assembly, if he does become 
a member of this Assembly, I hope that he will reject the racial 
bad feeling that has been engendered by his former boss and 
that he will work with us to build a better future for all the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said that I want Aboriginal people to 
take their rightful place. But that is something which I have to 
admit cuts both ways. As you know, urban reserves are being 
established throughout the province and this includes the 
Battlefords. These urban reserves offer cut-rate cigarettes and 
gasoline. And we have convenience store and gas bar owners, 
service station owners in the Battlefords who say that this is 
unfair. They say that it is not fair competition when urban 
reserve gas bars are able to offer cigarettes and gasoline at half 
their wholesale price. 
 
They say it is not fair when people are able to drive on our 
roads with not contributing to their upkeep. They say that if 35 
per cent of our population is going to be using public services 
without contributing to their maintenance, that it is very 
difficult to see how the math will come out and how we as a 
province will be able to support the infrastructure and the 
services we’ve all come to rely on. 
 
I think these are issues that we will need to sit down with First 
Nations leaders and discuss in a respectful and responsible 
manner, but I think these are issues that indeed are going to 
have to be addressed if we can move forward. But there’s one 
aspect of them I want to specifically mention today in my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, and that is the question of cheap 
cigarettes to Aboriginal young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the guise of assisting Aboriginal people we 
have made some ghastly mistakes in times past. The residential 
schools, for example, were motivated by a desire to integrate 
First Nations people into the mainstream. I think there were 
some very well-intentioned people who came up with the idea 
of residential schools, however, as we all know, that policy was 
a failed policy and had ghastly and tragic consequences. 
 
Well I submit, Mr. Speaker, that providing cheap cigarettes to 
Aboriginal young people is in the same category. In the guise of 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

respecting treaty rights, in the guise of respecting Aboriginal 
rights, we are pushing at Aboriginal young people cigarettes 
that we know are harmful to their health. They are taking them. 
Aboriginal young people are smoking at twice the rate of young 
people in general. So we say we are so open, we are so 
respectful, that we are encouraging Aboriginal young people to 
smoke at twice the rate of the general population when we 
know perfectly good and well that that is . . . that’s a disastrous 
policy which can only lead to tragedy and bad health and 
sickness down the road. 
 
So here is another case of where in the guise of helping 
Aboriginal people, we are in fact harming them, and we embark 
on a policy that is very, very damaging to Aboriginal people 
and their health. I say we have to re-examine this. This is not a 
policy that is respectful for Aboriginal people. It is in fact a 
very, very harmful and damaging policy that we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the provincial government’s publicity 
policy now saying our future is wide open. Well the doors are 
wide open and many of our young people are walking through 
them. The government says that the opposition Saskatchewan 
Party is a collection of slogans, and yet tragically the 
government has chose to counteract those slogans by its own 
slogan campaign. 
 
We need to grow our economy. We need to grow opportunities. 
However, I would remind, I would remind you, Mr. Speaker, 
that this government was initially elected to clean up the 
scandals and the mess and the loss of public confidence in 
government left over by the Devine administration. 
 
Now what is left of the moral authority of that government to 
continue in office when it stands up and says, we misled the 
people of this province for six years. I want to talk about that 
this afternoon. The Premier told us that for six years the 
government said that with the SPUDCO investment, it was a 
public-private partnership, when the truth was there was no 
private partner, there was no shared risk. 
 
Now the Premier says that this misleading of the people of 
Saskatchewan was on a narrow issue. And it seemed as if he 
was arguing that because the people of Saskatchewan were 
misled on a narrow issue, it really wasn’t that important. 
 
Well my question for the Premier is: if misleading the people of 
Saskatchewan into saying that there’s a private investor when 
there is no private investor — this is a phony investor who 
doesn’t exist — if that is a narrow issue, if that’s a narrow issue, 
would the Premier please tell us what he would consider a 
major issue on which to deceive the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well the minister in charge of that communications strategy 
remains in cabinet, again signalling that this misleading of the 
people of Saskatchewan was not a big issue, was not a biggie. 
So the minister can remain in cabinet because it wasn’t a big 
thing in which to mislead the people, and in any event it only 
went on for six years. 
 
Well my question again for the Premier is: if misleading the 
people of Saskatchewan for six years is not grounds for 
dismissing a minister, then how long would he have to mislead 
the people of Saskatchewan before he would have to ask for his 

resignation? Would it be 8 years? Would it be 10 years? Would 
it be 20 years? What would the Premier consider to be a serious 
misleading of the people of Saskatchewan? How long — if six 
years isn’t long enough — how long of misleading the people 
of Saskatchewan would he think disqualifies a cabinet minister 
to continue in his cabinet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well so . . . and if speaking about a phony 
partner who doesn’t exist is not grounds for dismissing a 
minister, then what is? 
 
Well we also have found recently that the former minister, the 
former minister Carol Teichrob had warned against this 
investment she had said was getting in trouble. And we also of 
course found out last year that the other former minister Janice 
MacKinnon was warning against the Information Services 
Corporation. That’s the one that’s gone from 20 million to over 
100 million. So Janice MacKinnon, she thought things were not 
right in Information Services as the budget was going out of 
sight 500 per cent. Well of course Janice MacKinnon is gone 
from cabinet. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Carol Teichrob, who said this potato thing doesn’t smell good; 
she had a fight, she says, with the other minister in charge and 
of course what’s the end result? The end result is that Carol 
Teichrob is out of cabinet and the minister who insisted on 
barging ahead, he’s still in cabinet. 
 
So my suggestion, my suggestion to the Premier is: why don’t 
you bring back Carol, why don’t you bring back Janice, and 
why don’t you punt some of the people who have been 
responsible for these enormous losses and for you having to 
suffer the embarrassment and humiliation of admitting that your 
government has misled the people for six years? 
 
Well as I said, the moral authority of the government has been 
seriously compromised by what has happened this spring. I 
severely am sorry about it; I think it’s unfortunate. 
 
I have been proud for the last seven years to represent a 
constituency including some rural area with the villages of 
Cochin and Meota. I am proud to call them constituents. 
However in the new Assembly, North Battleford and Battleford 
will again be joined; the people of the Battlefords are proud and 
happy to be one constituency again. 
 
I hear someone calling, am I going to retire? I thought of that 
but I knew if I did you’d all be bored to tears in here so I’m 
going to be running again. And I’m sorry that I will not be 
representing the good people of Cochin and Meota, but I’d like 
to say that the people of the Battlefords are very, very pleased 
that we will again be one constituency, the best part of the 
province. I’m proud to call it home and I will be proud to be 
putting my name forward in the general election for the people 
of the Battlefords and to be back in this Assembly next session 
as the MLA for the Battlefords. 
 
I will . . . With that, I don’t know why the Saskatchewan Party 
is heckling me because I was about to announce that I’m going 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

 

to vote for their amendment but, you know, now I’ll have to 
re-think that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment. I will not be 
supporting the motion on the Speech from the Throne. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure and enthusiasm about 
the future of our province that I enter into debate on the Speech 
from the Throne. And let me make it very clear right up front, 
Mr. Speaker, that I will be voting clearly in favour of the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, let me extend congratulations to 
the hon. member for Cumberland, the mover of the speech, and 
the hon. member for Regina Wascana Plains, the seconder, for 
having the honour of being the mover and the seconder of this 
important speech. 
 
If I could just acknowledge the hon. member from Cumberland 
who, when I first entered the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and sat at 
a desk on that side, with whom I served as the bench mate. And 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, one of my proudest and clearest 
memories of serving that first term as a bench mate with the 
hon. member of Cumberland was being there I think for every 
one of his speeches in which he spoke with great enthusiasm 
and pride in the native Cree tongue, Mr. Speaker, and did that 
so as to be able to include the people from his constituency in 
the proceedings of the Assembly. And it was there that I very 
proudly learned that encouraging support for the speaker in the 
Cree language in this Assembly . . . (Cree) . . . which is one of 
my happy memories. And so I say to the member from 
Cumberland for your speech as you addressed, as you led off 
the debate . . . (Cree) . . . to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say welcome to the 
Assembly to the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview as well 
as the hon. member for Battleford-Cut Knife and to wish them 
satisfying political careers, and to wish them the satisfaction of 
being able to go home and say that they served their 
constituents well. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, before proceeding to the 
substance of my remarks on the debate, I want to say thanks to 
the good people of Moose Jaw North who it has been my 
pleasure to serve for the past, some 16, 17 years. And I’m very 
proud, Mr. Speaker, that my party has nominated me to run 
again in the next provincial election with the prospects of 
serving my constituents yet again and I look forward to that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ll come back . . . One of the hon. 
member’s comments about the democratic process of the 
nomination, and I would say, Mr. Speaker, that I am very proud 
that in the nomination that I had, in fact most votes did win. 
And we’ll come back to that subject just a tad bit later in my 
remarks. 
 
I’d like to very briefly, Mr. Speaker, in the time that I have 

available to me express my support for the big picture. This is a 
speech, Mr. Speaker, which covers a comprehensive plan for 
building the future of our great province. I want to touch on 
some of the highlights and then I want to focus particularly on 
the social agenda, Mr. Speaker, and make some comments 
particularly as they relate to the department of community 
resources and employment and things related to that matter. 
 
But I do want to come back to the important subject of 
democracy before I take my place. Mr. Speaker, first of all, the 
title of the speech, “A Vision. A Plan. A Future . . . ” is 
obviously one, Mr. Speaker, which is a source of not only 
inspiration but a great deal of information as to how we will 
build for the future. 
 
The vision, in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, that it says in the speech, 
a province of opportunity in which people who are prepared to 
dream big, plan well, and work hard, can build their futures. A 
vision of an expanding economy. A vision where all children 
will have the opportunity to grow up healthy in safe, secure 
communities, receive the best of education and training, then 
build their families here in our province. And a vision as well, 
Mr. Speaker, of a green Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the plans that are outlined in 
the Speech from the Throne, there are five key areas, and let me 
just touch on, very, very briefly, on the first four, and a little 
more detail on the fifth. 
 
First of all, the expansion of our economy. I point out with a 
great deal of pride that in our province here for the last 10 
straight months, Mr. Speaker, 10 consecutive months, we have 
had significant job growth, year . . . month over month, year 
over year. And in fact, of those past 10 months, several of them 
have been record job growth years, record job numbers. 
 
Included in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, a 10-year 
beef production strategy plan, and also a notation of the 
high-speed Internet which is now available to some 74 per cent 
of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting here in our 
Saskatchewan, our rural Saskatchewan in which CommunityNet 
has brought high-speed Internet to, very soon, Mr. Speaker, 366 
communities, that the fact of the matter is that in many parts of 
small town, rural Saskatchewan there is high-speed Internet 
when in fact, when in fact, Mr. Speaker, there are many parts of 
the city of Toronto that do not have high-speed Internet, many 
parts of the city of New York that do not have high-speed 
Internet. 
 
And why is it, Mr. Speaker, that the province of Saskatchewan 
can have high-speed Internet in small town Saskatchewan when 
you can’t have it in all of Toronto, Ontario, or in New York, 
New York? And, Mr. Speaker, the answer is very simple. 
Because here in Saskatchewan we have SaskTel. We have Sask 
. . . There is no SaskTel in Toronto and there is no SaskTel in 
New York. Mr. Speaker, let us remember that there is an 
instrument of Crown corporation which is a very, very 
important part of bringing high-speed Internet to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I hear the hon. member mumbling from his seat on the other 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

side, Mr. Speaker, and I know he finds it rather troubling that 
there should be acknowledgement of the good work that Crown 
corporations do in this province to build our economy to 
support the quality of life of people of Saskatchewan. It’s a 
defining difference between this side of the House and that side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker, and I predict for decades to come 
Crown corporations will be a part of building the future of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in addition to building 
the economy, we’re going to work in protecting medicare. And 
we all recognize that in this great Canadian nation of ours, 
medicare was born in this province under the direction of a 
CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party) government, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going 
to continue to build and protect medicare and the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Canada would expect no less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hot on the heels of the Romanow report for health 
care and building on the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health 
Care, the health care agenda will move forward. We’ve also 
said in the Speech from the Throne that there will be some 300 
first year nursing training positions. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
another exciting element — and I know this is just a smattering 
of a wide range — 24-hour health phone advice will be 
available this year. 
 
We’re going to be touching in the world of education, building 
on our commitments to K to 12 education, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
worth noting that over the last five years, over the last five 
years, on a per student basis, on a per student basis, funding for 
K to 12 education has increased by 42 per cent — 42 per cent 
per student — over the last five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is also the province where we have Campus 
Saskatchewan — using the Internet and modern technology to 
bring post-secondary education, accessible post-secondary 
education, to students across the province including many parts 
of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne touches on the 
sustainable future of the environment, the ethanol industry, the 
green power, the wind power, and all those important matters. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to now turn to the social agenda, Mr. 
Speaker, and included in the speech is reference that the 
Department of Social Services is changing its name to the 
department of community resources and employment. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a change that’s taking place after having had the 
same name for the department for 31 years. It’s been a long 
time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the change in name — from my point of 
view — is simply the name catching up to the department 
because the department has changed significantly in the way 
that it brings support to Saskatchewan people to build their 
greatest amount of independence, and the confidence and the 
enthusiasm with which they can build their own futures here in 
our province. The department is much more than its traditional 
role of income security or welfare and the child protection or 
child welfare roles that were originally part of the department. 

It’s also true, Mr. Speaker, that within the umbrella of the 
department as it has grown and become shaped, that services 
are delivered by over 900 community-based organizations 
which are a very, very important part of the delivery of our 
services to the people of Saskatchewan in order to build their 
futures. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also note for many . . . of interest to 
volunteers and board members of those community-based 
organizations, the Speech from the Throne refers to legislation 
regarding liability that will be of particular interest to CBO 
(community-based organization) volunteers and boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the department of community resources and 
employment, we are going to continue our strategy of building 
on our very successful Building Independence program. And I 
remind the House, Mr. Speaker, that this is a program 
introduced back in 1997-98 which has had significant results 
supporting low-income parents to be attached to the best form 
of income security possible, and that’s the world of work, Mr. 
Speaker, and to support them being able to successfully build 
their own independence and to build their own futures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was because in this province we said we’re 
going to get serious. We’re going to take focus. We’re going to 
take aim at a very important social issues called child poverty 
and we recognize that in the real world children don’t grow up 
in poverty in isolation. In the real world poor kids grow up in 
homes in which their parent or parents are poor. And if you 
want to do something to change that picture — and we do and 
we’ve done that — then you introduce programs which will 
support that attachment to the labour market for low-income 
families. 
 
And so we introduced the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, the family health 
benefit, the provincial training allowance — all of which are 
assisting and, Mr. Speaker, the results have been dramatic. 
 
Because of a number of changes being made since the 
introduction of the Building Independence program, today in 
the province of Saskatchewan there are more than 6,000 fewer 
families who are living on social assistance. And what’s most 
exciting of all, Mr. Speaker, is that in Saskatchewan today there 
are more than 13,000 fewer kids growing up on welfare than 
just five years ago. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s success and most importantly 
it’s success measured through the eyes of those people — 
low-income families — who have attached themselves to the 
world of work and are getting on with building their futures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the world of child and family services, which is 
also part of the department, in the Speech from the Throne 
there’s a reference to the fact that we’re introducing legislation 
to support kinship care. I introduced that legislation just a 
couple of days ago, or it was just yesterday and we’ll say more 
about that in much more detail later on, Mr. Speaker, but I think 
the thing that’s important to note is that again it’s supporting 
vulnerable kids as close to home as we possibly can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also within the department then, when we look at 
what is covered in the community resource and employment 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

 

department is child care is part of the responsibility of the 
department. And in the Speech from the Throne it’s noted that 
there are going to be announced some increases, not only in 
spaces — child care spaces here in the province of 
Saskatchewan — but also subsidies to support the families, Mr. 
Speaker, so that the parents of Saskatchewan can count on 
having good, reliable, quality child care while they’re involved 
in the world of work or training as part of building their futures 
for their families and their communities in our Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that the Kids 
First program, which was introduced in the province here a 
couple of years ago, is expanding by 120, services to 120 
children, the most vulnerable of kids in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, to give the support that’s necessary, to give hopes to 
kids who have started out with disadvantage and as they engage 
in the early childhood development that is so critical to them 
shaping their futures as individuals and growing up to be strong 
adults and strong citizens in our province. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the department of community resources and 
employment, we’ve brought the whole career and employment 
services delivery system into the department to support all 
Saskatchewan people, all Saskatchewan people, in their desire 
to find employment, to shape their careers, to connect the world 
of work and the needs of employers with the world of 
employees and the need to work, and as well as to provide the 
counselling advice and access to supports. That entire system, 
Mr. Speaker, is part of the department of community resources 
and employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the department there’s also our social housing 
programs supporting already, Mr. Speaker, some 31,000 
households in the province of Saskatchewan today in some 
way, shape, or form in terms of access to good quality, decent 
housing in which to live and to raise families and to . . . in 
which to retire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne it is also 
announced that we will be carrying on with our program to 
introduce, over the course of the next four years, some 1,400 
additional affordable housing units here in the province of 
Saskatchewan to help moderate- and low-income families and 
individuals again find the security in which they can build their 
future in our great province as part of this vision for the future 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, also within the department are supports for 
people with disabilities. And I want to take just a moment to 
concentrate on that because as we’ve looked at our supports for 
families with young children and made the successes we had in 
the Building Independence program, I’d say that the next focus 
that we must have in the world of policy is to support those with 
disabilities. The fact of the matter is, because as numbers of 
people requiring social assistance income security have 
decreased, the percentage of those who require income security, 
Mr. Speaker, who have disabilities, has been increasing. 
 
And we’re going to take advantage, we’re going to take 
advantage of the dynamics of the labour market, the tightening 
of the labour market, to assist those who have lived outside the 

mainstream of employment for too long, to become a part of the 
mainstream of employment, to become full citizens, full 
participating citizens in our Saskatchewan. And that’s a part of 
the challenges of the department of community resources and 
employment. Mr. Speaker, I know it’s an industrious initiative, 
a combination of initiatives that we’re taking, but it’s one that 
I’m confident will contribute to the quality of life of citizens in 
our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, I cannot sit down 
without commenting on the state of democracy in our province, 
without a comment about the state of democracy in our 
province. Because if there is anything that unites us in this 
room, it has to be a respect for the principles of democracy. 
Surely there is nothing more sacred to the men and women who 
serve in this room than the honouring of the principles of 
democracy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What are those basic principles? It comes down to two things. 
There are two basic principles to the . . . to democracy, Mr. 
Speaker — that the minority will have their say and the 
majority will have their way. You get to say what you think and 
most votes wins — most votes wins. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not . . . This is not a new concept. My hon. 
colleague says new concept. There will be some in this House 
who thinks this is a new concept, who think that this is a 
non-negotiable concept, who think that democracy is . . . it’s 
democracy when convenient — it’s democracy when 
convenient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are nations in this world . . . There are 
nations in this world, and far too many of them developing 
nations, at which decisions of the electorate are made on the 
basis of democracy when convenient. And when the result is 
not the wish of those who have the greatest amount of power, 
that the election is cancelled. And we will cry out with 
indignation, Mr. Speaker, but there are nations in the world 
that’ll treat their citizens that way. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when we look at how political parties in this 
province will treat their own . . . will treat their own in respect 
of the principles of democracy, we should be very, very nervous 
about how they would treat those who are not their own. And I 
point specifically to the Leader of the Opposition who, in 
explaining how his party is getting rid of Grant Schmidt — 
Grant Schmidt, poor old Grant Schmidt, poor old Grant 
Schmidt, that right-wing . . . I mean, I was critic of Grant 
Schmidt; he’s a right winger, boy, in anybody’s definition. Poor 
old Grant Schmidt. He worked for five years as constituency 
president, Mr. Speaker, for the Sask Party, won a nomination 
fair and square, most votes, and then the Leader of the Sask 
Party gets up and what does he say? He says, we can’t have Mr. 
Schmidt in our caucus any more; we can’t have him. Why? He 
says . . . In the Leader-Post of March 10, he says: 
 

Hermanson said he heard concerns that Schmidt doesn’t 
support the Sask Party’s position on government 
investment in the economy. In interviews, he has said the 
party shouldn’t rule out government investment entirely. 
 

That’s Grant Schmidt’s sin. 
 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, do you know what you just heard? You just heard 
the Leader of the Sask Party say they can’t have Grant Schmidt 
because he’s too far a left-winger. That’s what they said. Grant 
Schmidt’s a left-winger. Only the Sask Party would say, Grant 
Schmidt’s a left-winger; he doesn’t fit in our caucus. The rest of 
the world thinks Grant Schmidt’s one rabid right-wing fellow, 
Mr. Speaker, but in the Sask Party, he’s a left-winger and they 
can’t have him. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if it’s democracy when convenient, if 
they’re willing to eat their own in the pursuit of power, then I 
say to the people of Saskatchewan: beware, beware, beware. If 
you can’t trust them on the principles of democracy, what can 
you trust them on? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we go through the session, Mr. Speaker, the 
great debate will be about the vision for the future of 
Saskatchewan. On this side is a vision of hope and optimism 
building on our strengths and confidence. And we’ll move into 
our second century proud of our first century, building on our 
systems of co-operation and community, Mr. Speaker, and 
building futures that will be strong for our people. 
 
On that side is doom and gloom and people who do not 
understand, or if they do understand, will not support the 
principles of democracy. Mr. Speaker, it’s a pretty clear 
question. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is in support of this plan with a vision 
for the future of Saskatchewan, and in opposition to the 
principles that will be betrayed so easily, those principles of 
democracy, that I will stand proudly in support of this Speech 
from the Throne. And I’ll be voting in favour of the motion. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — It’s with pride today that I stand to address 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
As no longer the newest member of the House, I’d like to first 
take the opportunity to welcome our new members from 
Saskatoon Fairview and from Battleford-Cut Knife. The former 
— the member rather from Saskatoon Idylwyld, who was the 
rookie before myself — said some very kind words to me when 
I got started. And he said he found it a very fulfilling 
occupation to be in, and that we’d have many good experiences, 
and I hope that the same can be said for the two new members 
today. 
 
It is with great pride that I represent the constituency of 
Kindersley. Although I’ve only been at it for about six months, 
I’ve really grown to enjoy the company of many of the 
constituents in all our communities. I’m sad to be losing some 
of the communities such as Eston, and Dodsland, and Plato — 
Dodsland and Plenty, rather — but under the new boundaries I 
will be running again and look forward to holding the support 
that the member from Battleford-Cut Knife, in the Unity, 
Macklin communities. 
 
Today with regards to addressing the Speech from the Throne, I 
want to talk about the very different outlook that we have for 

the province. I thought that this Speech from the Throne was 
possibly visionary in the 1930s but nothing’s really changed 
since that point. And the reason . . . maybe it’s been the two 
successive years of drought that the members opposite feel that 
history’s repeating itself. 
 
But it essentially gets down to this: we have a problem. We 
believe in free enterprise on this side of the House. The other 
side of the House believes in having a centrally planned 
economy. And this is not going to work. It was thought in the 
1930s that this could work and there was great disasters in the 
social experiments around the world with what we saw in 
Germany and what we saw in the Soviet Union. But since the 
1990s, the early 1990s when the Wall came down, we see that 
centrally planned economies don’t work anywhere else in the 
world and they certainly don’t work here. 
 
There’s been a real problem with the beginning of our province 
seeing massive growth in population through the teens and the 
twenties up to a million people, but then when we hit the dirty 
thirties we had real problems with retention of population. We 
haven’t really grown since. 
 
And the correlation that happened there was there was a premier 
came along, a very charismatic young preacher who talked 
about the need for redistribution of wealth. At the time I think 
many people bought into it and they felt it was a good idea. I, 
myself, came from a family of strong socialists. 
 
One of the big things I think that rooted those ideas was a 
mentality of scarcity. When it hadn’t rained for years and years, 
it’s maybe easy to point the finger and say someone else has a 
bigger piece of the pie due to the fact that they must have taken 
it from me. But this mentality has cramped our province from 
having any real growth over the years. 
 
What we really need is an abundance mentality. And when we 
have a province like Saskatchewan — the leader in uranium, in 
47 per cent of the agricultural land in this country, we have an 
abundance of natural resources — we need an abundance 
mentality that says if everybody wants a bigger piece of pie, 
let’s make the pie bigger. Let’s not say whoever has a bigger 
piece of pie, we’re going to redistribute that. 
 
The real problem over the last 60 years in our province has been 
that abundance mentality has not existed. Socialism has said we 
can redistribute wealth but there’s nothing, there’s nothing in 
the plan on how to build that wealth in the first place. And this 
is a fundamental problem that has to change. 
 
In the global environment that we live in today, we see that 
Crown investing, competing against private enterprise, doesn’t 
work. It drives business out of the province. 
 
And what we can ask ourselves is what other jurisdictions in the 
world are taking government funds and investing abroad? Is 
New Zealand investing into Saskatchewan? Is South Africa 
investing into Saskatchewan? Is Japan, the Government of 
Japan, investing into Saskatchewan? 
 
There may be companies, private industries that invest globally 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That would be a private 
company — Hitachi, as the member opposite said — and that’s 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

 

fine. We’d invest . . . we’d welcome all private investment to 
come into our province. 
 
But this hasn’t happened. Governments won’t put money into 
Saskatchewan because across the world it’s not a good idea to 
do so. Further to that, the problem over the last 60 years is 
private enterprise won’t put money into Saskatchewan as well 
because it is afraid that taxpayers are going to have to prop up 
Crown corporations to compete directly against them. And this 
won’t work. 
 
It doesn’t work . . . Private enterprise does work for one very 
good reason. It’s those citizens’ money; it’s their money. Small 
business works very well because the people that are working 
with that, it’s their money; it means a lot to them. I believe that 
small enterprise is the backbone of our economy in 
Saskatchewan and always will be. It’s never going . . . Crown 
corporations are never going to be able to compete with private 
enterprise when you have individuals that don’t have a stake in 
it, when they work 9 to 5 and at the end of the day they go 
home. The public sector, unfortunately it’s not performance 
based, where free enterprise — the bottom dollar — absolutely 
is. 
 
A further problem in having a centrally planned economy is that 
the venture capital pool is always involuntary. When we see 
SPUDCO or Information Services Corporation losing money, 
they can always just go back to the government and ask for 
more and this is very problematic. 
 
In free enterprise when a business fails, Mr. Speaker, that’s it. 
It’s dead; you cut your losses and it starts over again. That 
certainly has not been the case with this present government. 
We’ve seen them invest in SPUDCO. They told us that this was 
a private-public venture; clearly over six years it was not. The 
minister still has not been fired; and although he has offered his 
resignation which — and apologized to this Assembly and I 
personally have accepted that — the Premier has refused to act 
on this. And the people of Saskatchewan do not feel that this is 
good enough. 
 
The people of Kindersley have been asking time and again, 
when is the election? This is the first question that I am asked 
every day that I’m in the constituency doing work. And just 
under short . . . under six months ago, Mr. Speaker, we had the 
by-election there, 83 per cent of the voting population voted 
against this government. They do not feel that the NDP is 
putting out a vision to grow our province in any meaningful 
way. 
 
(16:15) 
 
One of the things that was very telling about this was that the 
voting list from 1999 to 2002 had 1,000 fewer names on it. This 
is very problematic because this is leaving 150 empty houses in 
Kindersley. It means our small towns are abandoned. And many 
of these things . . . many of these people have left and they’ve 
gone right across the, right across the road to Alberta. And it’s 
hard on our local businesses. 
 
One of the things that the member from Mount Royal said 
today, he said that there’s a record increase in oil and gas 
drilling. And well, this may be true. It really does beg the 

question relative to the socialist philosophy, is why is this 
happening now instead of 40 or 50 years ago? Why does 
Alberta have a Heritage Fund and my constituents are forced 
out of bids for servicing these oil and gas wells because the 
companies have set up across the line in Alberta? 
 
So even though we may have a small oil boom, the fact is that 
this mentality hasn’t been there for some time. It has failed to 
produce the corporations being based in this province; it’s 
chased them out, everything comes across the line. It has been 
very damaging to the people that live specifically in the west 
central area. 
 
It’s funny that the thing that the government is claiming that 
precipitated the growth in the oil and gas industry recently was 
the cut in royalty rates. Well what a novel concept — that 
perhaps government allowing free enterprise to capitalize on 
their investment actually grows the economy. 
 
And if there is a success here — which I believe that there is; 
there’s been a measured success in new oil and gas in our area 
— how much better would that be for the province as a whole 
when the socialist aspect of that government is removed 
completely after a general election and those principles can be 
applied across the economy, in agriculture, in high tech, in any 
opportunity that’s available to the people of Saskatchewan, that 
we can go forward and actually have our economy grow. 
 
Members opposite also said, they said the Saskatchewan Party 
has really one plan and that’s about tax cuts. 
 
Well the thing that we find very, very problematic on this side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker, is that for 16 consecutive quarters 
we have had population loss, and this is not acceptable. It’s 
further . . . it’s completely unacceptable that our population has 
been stagnant at a million people since the 19 . . . late 1920s, 
and the correlation between population and socialism is exactly 
there. 
 
If we want to increase the number of people that live in this 
province, that work in this province, that pay taxes in this 
province, to provide services for the services which we all want, 
we’re going to have to lower taxes. Because this is the only 
proven formula, globally, anywhere in the world, that’s worked. 
 
When you lower taxes in a free enterprise economy, you 
generate growth. And it’s only going to be economic growth 
that stimulates population growth. Nothing else is going to do 
this. Investment in Crown corporations as the engine of the 
economy will not do this. Sixteen consecutive quarters have 
proven this without a doubt. It’s also been proven the world 
over in many other jurisdictions. Successful economies are not 
run from centrally planned governments. The role of the 
government in the economy should be to provide the 
environment, Mr. Speaker, for business to flourish, for money 
to be made, and then for taxes to be collected so that we can all 
enjoy the level of services which many of us want. 
 
The member from Greystone said yesterday that there hadn’t 
been an increase in the amount paid out to people receiving 
social assistance. There was about . . . at about $195. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I concur with the member. The real question here is: 
how are we going to pay for this? There is no doubt that we 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

should have more money for our hospitals. We should have 
more money for education. We should have more money for 
social assistance. But the real question is first and foremost: 
how do we grow the economy? 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melville on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the hon. member for allowing me the opportunity. I’m 
very encouraged to see young people have an interest in our 
democratic process, and visiting our legislature this afternoon, 
three young people in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
Maiken Mortenson from Denmark and Shane Schiele from 
Meadow Lake and Joe Vidal from Vermillion, Alberta. 
 
And it’s just a great pleasure to see these young people come 
here to watch our parliamentary process in action. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, 
one of the big problems that we’ve been having in the province, 
and in the constituency of Kindersley, is we have had a loss of 
population which has continued year after year. We’ve had, 
year after year, Mr. Speaker, a forcing of people off the land 
which is causing the farms to get larger and larger. 
 
You know there is a problem with farms getting larger and 
larger. I actually come from a fairly good-sized farming 
operation myself. And we’re very worried about family farms 
expanding and expanding to the point that there is no 
infrastructure left, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s gotten to the point, Mr. Speaker, that the New Democratic 
Party, under their tenure, we’ve seen hundreds of elevators 
close; we’ve seen our highways destroyed; seen the hospitals 
closed. Right now I have, Mr. Speaker, I have two small 
schools in my riding that are possibly slated for closure next 
year. These destroy communities outright. 
 
Our farming communities, our farming communities have 
produced for almost a hundred years, Mr. Speaker. The wealth 
is there; the land can make money. But, unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, our province, our provincial government has 
systemically not been in support of small rural towns and it’s 

really hurting us. It’s hurting the big farmers, it’s hurting the 
small farmers. 
 
One of the things that’s happening as you grow and expand 
your farm and hopefully invest in your capital assets — and for 
the dryland farming that’s predominant in our area, that would 
be expanding your land base — as you expand your land base, 
you would hope that over time the value of an acre upon 
purchasing it would increase over the next 20 or 25 years. And I 
can tell you without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers in 
my area have increased their per acre production over the 25 
years sometimes to the point of fourfold with the movement 
into higher tech and continuous cropping and whatnot. However 
the land prices have not followed suit. 
 
And part of the reason, I believe that that exists, Mr. Speaker, is 
because the infrastructure that the Government of Saskatchewan 
had provided formerly has been stripped right to the bone to the 
point that young farm families really have to question whether 
they want to come back or not. 
 
You can work your whole life and at the end of the day it may 
be that the school’s closed, the hospital’s closed, there’s nothing 
for your family anymore. You have 50 miles one way to get 
into town on a highway that’s totally decrepit. There’s no place 
to take your grain close, and long story short, after all that time 
and money invested, your capital asset hasn’t gained value. And 
this is a tragedy. This is a tragedy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, what has the NDP done to 
address this? For three years we’ve had drought in my area, Mr. 
Speaker, and on my farm. In the year 2000, the pulse crops 
were a failure on our stubble. In the year 2001, it was a 
complete disaster and only the summerfallow crops were 
harvested, at about 30 per cent their average capacity and in 
2002, that decreased. 
 
An average usually in our farm for a summerfallow crop would 
be, you know, in the 30-bushel to 40-bushel to the acre range 
and last year it was down to 10 bushels to the acre. The NDP’s 
response to this, Mr. Speaker, was to raise the premiums on 
crop insurance up to 52 per cent. 
 
This is devastating, Mr. Speaker. This is going to put young 
farm families out of the province once and for all. They’ll be 
gone. My neighbour, Mr. Brent Henry, who I went to school 
with from kindergarten up, has his farm for sale in the paper last 
week because of policies from this government. It’s a shame. 
 
We had 20 members in the RM (rural municipality) of 
Chesterfield, farming individuals, under the age, under the age 
of 40, and now we’re only going to have 19. This is a huge area, 
Mr. Speaker, and it is a shame what this government has done. 
It is a shame that they have not stood up for the farmer at our 
time of need. 
 
When it gets right down to it, Mr. Speaker, we have vast 
differences in ideology between that side of the House and this 
side of the House. Mr. Speaker, my primary reason for being 
here is to see pragmatism practiced in our government, that we 
have good government, that we have accountable government. 
 
This hasn’t been the case for a number of years. We have a 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

 

cabinet minister sitting opposite, Mr. Speaker, that for six years 
covered up lies and deceit and the Premier has not removed 
him. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. It has been the 
long-standing tradition of this Assembly that there is certain 
language that we do not use, and I would ask the member to 
withdraw the statement that he used and then proceed with his 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw and apologize to 
the member opposite. 
 
I do believe that the member did mislead this House for six 
years, saying that there would be a 50 per cent contribution 
from the private sector when in fact it was something like $56. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with all the problems that are in the world today, I 
think it . . . Having spoken to my constituents, I would like to 
touch on some of the things that are happening across the world 
with the war in Iraq. I heard from the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone, and the member from Saskatoon Southeast speak. 
And their position in favour of the Prime Minister of Canada, 
his stance, and also of what our Premier said. I’ve talked to 
people in the Kindersley constituency and I have some strong 
feelings on this issue as well. 
 
I think that there’s a folly in the logic when essentially what 
seems to be said here is that the nature of the actions are just or 
unjust relative to how many people say they are. In logic, I 
believe this is called the straw man theory. Supposedly this war 
will become a just war when we get into . . . if France says it’s 
okay or if Germany says it’s okay, but when the UN (United 
Nations)says it’s okay, suddenly it becomes morally tenable. I 
don’t believe this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that changed my mind and absolutely set in 
my mind that this war is the right thing is on a report from 
Amnesty International on one of the horrors that are being 
committed by the regime in Iraq. I’d like to predicate that by 
saying I was fortunate as a young man to meet my 
grandmother’s cousin . . . (inaudible) . . . from Poland, who was 
a survivor of the Auschwitz internment camp. I saw the tattoo 
on her arm. And I’m glad that I live in a country that 
participated in that liberation. 
 
Amnesty International has reported — they’ve been kicked out 
of Iraq for a number of years now — that one of the 
methodologies employed by that regime with their dissidents is 
to round up the dissident family, and this would be mother, 
father, and children. And they would take the dissidents to one 
of their torture chambers and torture the children in front of the 
parents. 
 
I’m a parent; I have two young boys. This is obviously . . . no 
one in this room would find those actions anything but 
deplorable. But what crossed my mind is what has to be going 
through those poor parents’ minds. They’re sitting there in utter 
hopelessness and I suspect that the only thing they can be doing 
is praying, Mr. Speaker — praying that something, somewhere 
will alleviate this situation. 
 
And I’m very thankful that we have men like Mr. Blair and Mr. 

Bush that realize this, that realize that the world is not always a 
nice place, that realize that going through the United Nations is 
not always the final answer, and that this can be stopped. 
 
It’s horrible that the war is having to go on. After three days of 
war, the electricity in Iraq is supposedly going to be out. After a 
week there’ll be hundreds of thousands of people who will have 
dysentery. It’s horrible, but it’s needed, Mr. Speaker, so that 
these atrocities stop. And it comes down to countries such as 
Canada that have these freedoms to be able to participate in 
that. 
 
(16:30) 
 
I’m going to leave that right now, Mr. Speaker, and go on to say 
our feelings, my feelings usually don’t see eye to eye with the 
government. The Speech from the Throne I don’t think really 
outlines anything new. It did not outline a vision; it did not 
outline a plan for growth. What I see from this Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker, is more failed farms, more poor 
highways, a longer and longer waiting list for hospitals. I don’t 
see things turning around, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the Speech from the 
Throne. I will be voting in favour of the amendment. I hope, 
Mr. Speaker, that I’ll be seeing everyone after the next election. 
I look forward again to serving the good people of Kindersley 
and I look forward to us serving after the next election in the 
government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very happy to 
join in this debate. I’m delighted that my first official 
declaration as the member of Saskatoon Fairview is to say that I 
will be supporting the motion in support of the Throne Speech 
and opposing the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as all rookies before me, and I 
suspect for most of you veterans, it is both a thrill and a 
humbling experience to stand in this Chamber that has echoed 
with the voices of Scott, Gardiner, Douglas, Lloyd, Blakeney, 
Steuart, and Romanow, and has endured the yips and bleats of 
Devine and his children across the way. 
 
I am aware that we are part of a legislative tradition that goes 
back at least as far as Magna Carta, and I give you my 
assurance, Mr. Speaker, that I will conduct myself in the 
knowledge of that tradition. I look forward to working with all 
hon. members as we go about the business of the people who 
sent us here, all of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I particularly want to acknowledge you. As a 
newcomer I know that it is your heady responsibility to see that 
the business of this legislature is conducted according to the 
rules and customs of that tradition. From what I have seen so 
far, you’re a wise choice and I look forward to your guidance. 
 
As I said in a member’s statement, I am proud and grateful to 
the people of Saskatoon Fairview for their support in the recent 
by-election and I repeat my promise to represent them to the 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2003 

 

best of my ability. 
 
Fairview is a constituency close to the heart of Saskatoon, an 
integral part of the most attractive city in Western Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatoon Fairview is made up of the diverse 
multicultural group of voters and children who take pride in 
their families and work, and they do not hesitate to participate 
in the affairs of their city and their province. 
 
One more comment, Mr. Speaker, before I address the Throne 
Speech. Before my election, I was a staff representative of 
CUPE, the Canadian Union of Public Employees. I’m proud of 
my union affiliation and I am also proud that my party openly 
and proudly supports the rights and privileges of working 
people to freely form associations for their mutual protection 
and advancement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — The New Democratic Party does not speak 
in code when it speaks of working people, Mr. Speaker, and we 
do not call people with jobs, job killers, as do the members 
opposite. Time and time again this party, this New Democratic 
Party, has taken the lead in passing legislation benefiting the 
lives of workers in this province. 
 
I was heartened, Mr. Speaker, on my first full day in the 
Assembly to hear the member from Regina Wascana Plains 
describe the value of workers and workers’ organizations in this 
province and to hear her mention the first Trade Union Act in 
Canada, our occupational health and safety legislation, and so 
on. I’m particularly pleased that she mentioned the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union), 
our provincial public service union which is much like my own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech describes the government’s 
five point plan for the province: (1) expansion of the economy; 
(2) provision of quality education and training; (3) ensuring 
protection of our environment; (4) securing medicare into the 
future; and (5) providing support to ensure a province of secure 
families and vibrant communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a plan to 
successfully open the doors of Saskatchewan to a wide open 
future and the government’s plan is working. It is a balanced 
and sustainable plan to create new opportunities and assist 
Saskatchewan people to take advantage of the resulting 
business and job possibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll support economic expansion and 
diversification in agriculture, oil and gas development, mining, 
forestry, and small and medium business. And further 
expansion of the economy will result from the provincial 
government investment in infrastructure programs, including a 
multi-year building for the future capital plan to be included in 
the 2003-2004 provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition says the government should get out 
of the economy. We do not agree. Nor do we agree with those 
who call for the sale of Saskatchewan Crown corporations like 
SaskTel or SaskPower. 

This government remains committed to responsive and evolving 
Crown corporations. The Crowns will invest $650 million in 
Saskatchewan this year to extend and renew 
telecommunications, power, and natural gas utilities. 
 
In the last eight years the Crown corporations have returned 
$1.6 billion to the people of Saskatchewan to support 
government services and programs and yet there are those who 
oppose government investment in the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several factors that have made 
Saskatchewan attractive for private sector investment in 
business development — high quality infrastructure, no payroll 
taxes or health care premiums, reduced personal and business 
income taxes, lower operating costs than elsewhere in Western 
Canada, and a well-trained, stable workforce. 
 
Saskatchewan’s expanding economy, Mr. Speaker, together 
with baby boomer retirements will create many new 
employment opportunities over the next 15 years, making 
post-secondary education and training increasingly important. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to training and 
education. For example, provincial grants for students, 
kindergarten through grade 12, have increased 42 per cent over 
the last five years. 
 
There are more than 4,700 training spaces in Saskatchewan for 
training home care and health care professionals. More than 150 
credit courses are now available on-line via Campus 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The province provides scholarships, bursaries, and grants to 
more than 11,000 post-secondary students, and apprenticeship 
allowances to 5,500 others. The province’s universities, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
campuses, and regional colleges support 90,000 enrolments 
each year. 
 
Other government initiatives includes plans for a 10-year beef 
production strategy to significantly expand the industry, 
supported in part by new ethanol plants and associated feedlot 
growth. 
 
A rural development strategy and participation in national 
agricultural policy framework to strengthen the rural economy. 
 
Increased support will be provided for child care subsidies and 
licensed child care spaces. 
 
A new green power portfolio includes a ninefold increase in 
wind power generation and the encouragement of small-scale, 
environmentally friendly, renewable energy products. 
 
We are developing northern health strategy and increased 
resources are planned for police services. 
 
These and other initiatives include . . . included in the Throne 
Speech are all elements in the New Democratic vision for 
Saskatchewan — our plan to keep the future of Saskatchewan 
wide open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support the member for 



March 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

 

Cumberland’s motion and I would move that we adjourn 
debate. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:41. 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................145 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................145 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................145 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................145 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................145 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................145 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
  Clerk Assistant (Committees) ..................................................................................................................................................145 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................145 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................146 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................146 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................146 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................146 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................170 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Provincial Men’s Lacrosse Teams National Champions 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................146 
 Congratulations to Country Gospel Singer, Lorraine Hartsook, of Eston 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................147 
 Western Aboriginal Business Summit Held in Saskatoon 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................147 
 Coming Home Campaign 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................147 
 Saskatchewan’s Crown Corporations 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................147 
 Saskatchewan Organic Producers’ Seminar 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................148 
 Emergency Medical Services Response Teams 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................148 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................148 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................149 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................149 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................151 
 Treaty Land Entitlement Claims 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................152 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................152 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Lorjé...........................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................155 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................158 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................161 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................165 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................168 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................171 
 


	Standing Committee on Crown Corporations
	Standing Committee on Crown Corporations

