















































Hansard: June 19, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1803 
 June 19, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 14:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the high cost of education on property tax. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again this 
afternoon I rise on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and district 
concerned about their lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Signatures on the petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, as you 
may expect, are all from the city of Moose Jaw. And I’m 
pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with the education tax 
in the province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
This petition is signed by people from Big River, Debden, 
Shellbrook, and Lloydminster. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gravelbourg and Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to read a 

petition regarding the Qu’Appelle River system and the 
lowering water levels on a few of the lakes and the harm that 
has. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with First 
Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water levels of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty that this dispute has 
caused. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people from the 
city of Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
residents from my home community who are proposing a 
constructive alternative to the government’s plans for a 
permanent CT (computerized tomography) scan in Swift 
Current. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner to Swift Current and instead provide a new CT 
scanner for the Southwest. 
 
And as in duty bound, these petitioners will ever pray, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
And they represent entirely the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens from all over Saskatchewan 
that are very, very concerned about the deplorable condition of 
Highway 43. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I mentioned all over Saskatchewan, 
this petition is signed by citizens from Mossbank, Saskatoon, 
Gravelbourg, Moose Jaw, Palmer, and Glentworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
in the Assembly on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan which are concerned with the lack of cellphone 
coverage in the Coleville area, and the heavy oil industry there 
and the danger that follows that. And the prayer reads as 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2003 

 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
construct a new cellular telephone tower at Coleville, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Coleville and Kindersley, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about services at the Kindersley 
Hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Kindersley and Eatonia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens that 
are concerned with the low water level in the Qu’Appelle lakes 
and this government’s inability to deal with the issue. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything within its power to work with 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water levels of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition come from the 
resort community of Katepwa Lake, the town of Fort 
Qu’Appelle, and Fort San. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 

those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Spiritwood 
and Mayfair. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are concerned 
that deregulation and privatization in the electrical industry is 
causing electrical rates to increase dramatically in other 
jurisdictions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of 
Estevan, Bienfait, and North Portal, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 27, 36, 100, 114, 124, and 140. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my privilege today to introduce to you and all members of the 
Assembly, a number of guests that are seated in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. They are here to mark United Empire Loyalist 
Day in Saskatchewan and of course to witness His Royal 
Highness’s visit to this city and this province. 
 
As you may know, Mr. Speaker, on the ninth of November, 
1789 — a little before your or my time — Lord Dorchester, Sir 
Guy Carleton, Governor General and commander-in-chief of 
Quebec and all British colonies, stated his desire to place a 
mark of honour on those who had sacrificed so much for the 
preservation of the Unity of the Empire by affixing the letters 
UE (Unity of the Empire) to their names and of their 
descendants of either sex. They were allowed to pass it on to 
their descendants as recognition for their loyalty to and service 
in defending the Crown during the American Revolutionary 
War. It is that which is recognized on this day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, among our guests today is Mr. Logan Bjarnason 
who is the president of the Saskatchewan branch of the United 
Loyalists of Canada. Mr. Bjarnason — I would ask him to 
please stand — is wearing a replica of his ancestor’s uniform 
from Butler’s Rangers. 
 
A number of other members are also in period costume. Among 
the other Loyalists joining Mr. Bjarnason and celebrating 
United Empire Loyalist Day are: his wife, Shirley, both from 
Froude, Saskatchewan; Gerald Adair of Maryfield, the branch’s 



June 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

 

secretary, and his wife, Pat; Doris Taylor of Regina, treasurer, 
and her husband, Clarence; Lorna MacKenzie, also of Regina, 
the branch’s genealogist, and her husband, Ken; Susan Darke 
from Zehner; Ken Fader from Regina; Jennifer Schafer has 
come from Vauxall, Alberta, Mr. Speaker; Barbara Miller from 
Prince Albert; Audrey Kaufmann from Lake Alma; Linda 
Smith from Regina; and Lloyd and Verla Redick who are also 
from Regina. 
 
I would ask all my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, in the Assembly to 
welcome these fine folks, very distinguished guests to our 
Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member from Melville in welcoming the guests to the 
gallery today. I know that United Empire Loyalists are an 
important movement in Canada. My own family had UEL 
(United Empire Loyalist) behind their name at one point, 
coming up from the United States long ago. 
 
And I’m very glad to see that you’re keeping our history, our 
important history, alive. And I ask all members present to again 
extend a welcome to our friends in the gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well to 
join the minister and my colleague in welcoming the 
representatives of the United Empire Loyalists and especially 
again to say hello to the Adairs — to Gerry and Pat — and 
welcome them to this Assembly. 
 
I don’t know how many years they’ve made the trip already but 
we’re pleased to see them coming and joining each and every 
one to celebrate this special event. And I know it was indeed a 
special event today with the prince coming to town. 
 
So to each and every one of you, welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with my colleagues in welcoming our esteemed time travellers 
to this Assembly. 
 
And I would also like to give a special personal welcome to my 
Member of Parliament, Carol Skelton. Although we don’t share 
a political philosophy, we certainly share a passion for ensuring 
that this world will be a better place for our children and 
grandchildren. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome Carol Skelton to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to join 
with the member from Southeast in welcoming Carol Skelton 
here today. Knowing Carol, I imagine she’s here enjoying the 
Farm Progress Show, and I hope she enjoys what goes on here. 
 

So I will also welcome her here too. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 
legislature, two constituents from Swift Current that are seated 
in your gallery. 
 
I’d like to introduce to members of the House and yourself, Mr. 
Speaker, Crystal Martens, she’s a part-time assistant in our 
office for the summer, back in Swift Current. And she’s here 
with her father, a businessman in the community of Swift 
Current, Dan Martens. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome them here to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much again, Mr. Speaker. 
In the west gallery, I would like to introduce to you and to my 
colleagues in the Assembly, a father-in-waiting that has his 
brother here as well, and a grandmother-in-waiting for a 
pending child delivery. 
 
I’d like to introduce my chief of staff, John Morris, his brother 
Michael who works with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), and Mrs. Morris who is here from 
Ottawa for the occasion of a pending arrival. 
 
Please welcome them to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Regina’s 100th Birthday 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, 100 years ago a town located by 
a small stream in the middle of a huge, open plain became a 
city. The town had been around for about 20 years and it had 
about 3,000 inhabitants. There were some who said that it was 
an awful place for a city; that this motley collection of houses 
and buildings squatting on the treeless plain could never amount 
to anything. 
 
But that’s not what the people of the town thought, and they set 
about transforming that little town into not a huge city but 
certainly a wonderful one. The people did the things that you 
would expect. They built hospitals and schools and churches 
and houses and office buildings. They built bridges and roads 
and put in trolley lines and did all the things you’d have to do to 
make a city. 
 
But they did more than that. They also started planning parks, 
planting trees, creating an oasis of green in the middle of that 
once treeless plain, and in the process created a great place to 
live. And there’s no two ways about it — Regina is a great 
place to live. 
 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2003 

 

I’m sure all of my colleagues will join me in acknowledging the 
vision, foresight, and hard work of all those who had a part in 
making Regina the city that it is today, and in offering 
congratulations to the city of Regina and all its inhabitants on 
its 100th birthday. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Paswegin Resident Honoured 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday, June 3, 
Ray Engemoen from Paswegin received national recognition 
when he was given an award from Environment Canada for 
volunteer service. 
 
For just about 40 years Mr. Engemoen took daily readings of 
temperature and precipitation as well as notes on the general 
characteristics of the weather. His monthly reports to 
Environment Canada combined with other data helped create a 
record of the climate of Canada, a service that’s been ongoing 
since 1840. Mr. Engemoen started recording the weather twice 
a day in September of 1963. He says he’s seen some very 
different weather. 
 
In a recent article in The Wadena News he stated that one of the 
memorable days was one several years ago when the 
temperature did not change between the morning and evening 
readings. With the sensitive equipment that he has at his 
fingertips, he says it is very rare that the temperature would not 
vary even half a degree. 
 
His recording information has not only been used by 
Environment Canada but by Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, 
RMs (rural municipality), and the local paper. I’ve also 
contacted him myself for rainfall information in the area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without volunteers this valuable information 
would not be available. I would ask this Assembly to join with 
me in thanking Mr. Engemoen for his commitment to gathering 
this information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

United Empire Loyalists 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
how’s this for a nice bit of synchronicity. Today we welcome to 
our legislature, our city, and our province, the Earl of Wessex. 
 
Today we officially celebrate the Queen City’s 100th birthday. 
And, Mr. Speaker, today I am happy once again to join my 
colleague from Melville in welcoming to the Assembly the 
members of the United Empire Loyalists, for today, June 19, is 
also their day. This is the day on which we recognize the 
roughly 4 million Canadians — about one in six — who can 
trace their ancestry back to the original Loyalists, those brave 
individuals who remained loyal to the Crown and came to 
Canada during the American Revolutionary War. 
 
As I said last year, Mr. Speaker, I am one of those, though my 
connection to my ancestors is one more year removed. Mr. 
Speaker, in this Assembly we are constantly reminded of our 
ancestral ties to the British parliamentary tradition through our 

rules and procedures, through our laws, and through the way 
our officials, at least, are costumed. 
 
The Empire Loyalists help preserve and strengthen our brand of 
democracy, but it is important to point out that although our 
governing system is British in origin, the original United 
Empire Loyalists were multicultural — they included liberated 
slaves, Mohawk First Nations, German, Dutch, Scotch, and 
Irish colonists. Our multicultural society as we know it today 
starts there. 
 
I am proud of my Canadian roots, proud that they include the 
UEL, and I know all members join me in applauding the 
strength and diversity represented by the United Empire 
Loyalists. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
we extend a very friendly welcome to Prince Edward over the 
next days, we should keep in mind many other visitors to 
Regina this week. The annual Western Canadian Farm Progress 
Show is underway in Regina and promises to attract many 
visitors once again to our province’s capital. 
 
The Western Canada Farm Progress Show began in 1978 after 
years of planning by members of the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce and the Regina Exhibition Association. That first 
Farm Progress Show in 1978 showcased the newest innovations 
in farm equipment, and over the years the show grew much 
larger as farmers in our province learned about the newest farm 
equipment and practices available through . . . to them, while 
manufacturers used the show to garner valuable feedback from 
their customers. 
 
Today the Farm Progress Show is considered one of the premier 
dryland farm equipment shows in all of North America. This 
year’s show has over 700 exhibitors spread out over 102 acres. 
Mr. Speaker, several of my colleagues and I were at the show 
yesterday, when I was honoured to be asked to speak at the 
luncheon hosted by the Regina Chamber of Commerce, and it is 
as impressive a show this year as any. 
 
Congratulations to all the organizers and exhibitors at the 2003 
Western Canada Farm Progress Show. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Ann’s Senior Citizen Village’s 50th Anniversary 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Sunday 
in my constituency of Saskatoon Eastview, I took part in the 
50th anniversary celebrations of St. Ann’s Senior Citizens 
Village. I was pleased to join St. Ann’s executive director, Mr. 
Rae Sveinbjornson; the Roman Catholic Bishop of Saskatoon, 
the Most Reverend Albert Legatt; the Ukrainian Catholic 
Bishop of Saskatoon, the Most Reverend Michael Wiwchar; 
and several other officials connected to this Saskatoon 
institution. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, this was both a 50th anniversary 



June 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

 

celebration, and at the same time, an official grand opening. 
Fifty years ago, Bishop Francis J. Klein founded the first St. 
Ann’s home. Over the years, the home has moved several times, 
expanding and changing each time to meet the needs of seniors. 
 
A year ago, the Minister of Health approved $1.16 million in 
provincial funding for the redevelopment of the current St. 
Ann’s Senior Citizen Village on Louise Street. So we 
celebrated 50 years of service, and christened expanded 
facilities which will take St. Ann’s well into its second half 
century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to support this redevelopment. It is 
one more example of how we are working with all our health 
care providers to strengthen and sustain our health system into 
the future for all of our citizens. 
 
I am pleased to have such a fine facility in my constituency and 
I extend my best wishes to St. Ann’s, its staff, and its residents. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

McMillan Motor Products 25th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we sit 
in this Assembly today, we may, as MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), on many occasions find ourselves just 
totally wrapped up with the process of our duties as legislative 
members and our duties on the floor of the Assembly. 
 
However, one of the special duties is time away from the 
Assembly and just enjoying the celebrations with our 
constituents. And this past week, past Thursday, I had the 
honour of joining together with the community of Kipling and 
the surrounding area as the McMillan Motor Products 
celebrated their 25th anniversary of their car dealership. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Glen K. McMillan, some 25 years ago, 
bought the dealership from the Ransoms who had operated the 
dealership for years. Bob Ransom then moved to Watrous and 
the McMillans came in and began running the dealership. They 
were joined by their daughter Monica and her husband Mark, 
and son Derek. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just to get together with folks and enjoy a 
barbecue and enjoy this celebration is something that makes the 
job of being an MLA worthwhile. I’m sure each and every 
MLA finds that that experience to be something worthy of note, 
and it’s also an opportunity as well to hear from your 
constituents and find out some of the concerns they had. 
 
One of the concerns on most people’s minds that day, Mr. 
Speaker, certainly was the BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) problem, as a lot of the men and women at that 
barbecue are in the livestock business. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my congratulations to the 
McMillan family and all their employees for 25 years of service 
and dedication to their community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sessional Reruns 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, you know that old song — 
Could it be? Yes, it could. Something's coming, something’s 
good. What’s coming here, Mr. Speaker, is summer session 
reruns — a daily replay of the highlights, rather the lowlights, 
of question periods past. Something good — hardly; something 
boring — daily. 
 
Faithful viewers of the legislative channel should not adjust 
their sets. They need not have their hearing checked. They 
should not assume that they have been thrown into the movie, 
Groundhog Day. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing wrong with the public. The 
fault lies with the fading stars across the way who are so in love 
with their two questions, that they ask them over and over and 
over. And timely? My word, Mr. Speaker, these questions are 
snatched right out of tomorrow’s headlines. Hey, Minister, 
what’s this bingo stuff — five years ago? Look, bud, when are 
you going to fix my road? Oh, you did. Well when are you 
going to fix my road? 
 
And why are we in the public suffering these abysmal reruns at 
thousands of taxpayer dollars a day? Could it have anything to 
do with the Carrot River by-election? Do they want to keep us 
here so we can’t campaign while their skeleton crew holds the 
fort down here? No, that would be manipulating the people’s 
business for crass political reasons, wouldn’t it? Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we would 
hope that the member for Regina Victoria would be as 
concerned about his government’s multi-million dollars in 
losses in the Crown corporations sector as he is about doing the 
business of the House. 
 
My question is for the minister of SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the president 
of SGI warned the Crown corporation is losing, is going to lose 
money in 2003. He also warned that car insurance rates would 
be going up as a result of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the minister assure the legislature today that the NDP’s 
(New Democratic Party) massive $17 million loss on their 
Ontario insurance company gamble at Coachman Insurance, 
will he assure the House that that gamble of taxpayers’ dollars 
will not drive up auto rates in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well SGI has 
not applied for any auto insurance premium increase at all, Mr. 
Speaker. Let me point out to the public of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, the great defenders of SGI, you heard the motion the 
other day. It lasted exactly one day, Mr. Speaker, one day. 
Today they’re back attacking SGI, Mr. Speaker; Mr. Speaker, a 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2003 

 

Crown corporation that has provided for the people of 
Saskatchewan amongst the lowest auto rates in all of Canada. I 
listened to their speeches the day before yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker; I listened to their speeches. Even they acknowledge 
that. But here they are back again today attacking SGI, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister still doesn’t get it. This 
is not an attack on the Auto Fund but this . . . Mark our words, 
Mr. Speaker, this is surely an attack on the NDP’s (New 
Democratic Party) abysmal record of wasting taxpayers’ dollars 
in places like Ontario, Mr. Speaker. That’s what it’s about. 
That’s what it was about two days ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last annual report of SGI for the year 2002 
we see here that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. I would 
ask all members to remind themselves that it’s a little difficult 
to hear when everybody is speaking at once. And we ought to 
be listening to a questioner and a responder. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to SGI’s 
annual . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Just a minute, just a minute. Order. Order. 
Perhaps longer, for longer than just a second. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to SGI’s 
annual report, in 2002 expense costs at the Auto Fund, 
excluding claim costs, went up a whopping $5.7 million, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s in a year where the Auto Fund only posted a 
razor-thin $850,000 surplus. And now the NDP is talking about 
jacking up the auto insurance rates for motorists across the 
province. 
 
The question to the minister is this: if he doesn’t want to answer 
the $17 million lost in Ontario, will he tell motorists in 
Saskatchewan what is he doing to keep costs down at the 
company so those don’t have to be passed on to motorists in the 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well either 
that member from the Saskatchewan Party does not understand 
the process, Mr. Speaker, or he is deliberately trying to mislead 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member knows . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the Minister of 
Crown Investments Corporation to withdraw the statement 
regarding deliberately misleading. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is there is no 

connection, Mr. Speaker, no connection between the investment 
in Coachman, as that member suggests, and the Auto Fund here 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — absolutely none whatsoever, 
Mr. Speaker, none whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SGI in the Auto Fund offers, as I have indicated 
many, many times, Mr. Speaker, and as those very members in 
the Saskatchewan Party grudgingly acknowledged the other 
day, offers among the lowest rates in all of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. Why must they stand up here today and attack SGI 
after they acknowledge that SGI does provide the lowest rates, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that minister should 
read his own annual report, because his own annual report 
shows that, what has the Auto Fund invested in? SCISL (SGI 
CANADA Insurance Services Ltd.), Mr. Speaker. What’s 
SCISL all about? Investing taxpayers’ dollars in Ontario. And 
furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the minister will not answer the 
question in this Assembly as to why the expenses at the Auto 
Fund are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order, please. Order. Once again, 
members, I would also remind all members to refrain from 
making personal comments across the floor. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And furthermore, the 
minister hasn’t answered the question. Expenses at this, at the 
fund are up $5.7 million last year, in a year where they only 
posted an $855,000 surplus. What is he doing to keep costs 
down, Mr. Speaker, so that they’re not passed on to motorists? 
 
On Tuesday in this House the Saskatchewan Party introduced a 
motion to maintain and strengthen public auto insurance in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Not only would the NDP not vote 
for our motion, but then they wouldn’t even let a vote on their 
own amendment go through — an amendment we would have 
supported. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of what SGI is saying yesterday in terms 
of the rates going up in the fall, in light of the expenses going 
up at the Auto Fund and the fact they won’t support our motion 
to support public auto insurance, will the minister tell the 
House, what is their hidden agenda? What are they hiding about 
their plans for the Auto Fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that, that 
question is absolutely incredulous, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely, 
it’s absolutely incredible. Mr. Speaker, the last time that SGI 
applied for a rate increase it was a 2 per cent increase. It was 
almost three and a half years ago, Mr. Speaker — three and a 
half years ago. 
 
Do you know what’s gone on across the country? We have seen 
rate increases in excess of 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker — in excess 
of 50 per cent. SGI’s last rate increase, three and a half years 
ago, 2 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we should be proud instead of 
attacking SGI and the Auto Fund. 



June 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

 

For one day, Mr. Speaker, they saw the light; they obviously are 
back in the dark again today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mathematics and Writing Skills 
of Saskatchewan Students 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Learning. K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) education system 
holds in its hands the future of our province’s most valuable 
resource, and that’s our children. And that’s why yesterday we 
were very disappointed and very concerned when the Indicators 
report was released. 
 
The report showed that Saskatchewan students are very 
generally falling below provincial expectations in mathematical 
testing and in some cases scored significantly lower than other 
Canadian students. 
 
As the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association correctly 
points out, our poor showing is a concern but so also is the fact 
that the students haven’t shown any improvement over the last 
five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does the Minister of Learning plan to do to 
help Saskatchewan students improve their level of mathematical 
skills? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know 
how important education is to our future. That’s why this 
government has invested $1.2 billion in education, 510 million 
into the K to 12 system. 
 
Studies like the report that was released just this week inform 
our decisions about how we change our curriculum to meet the 
needs of our students. That will be what we will be doing with 
the report, working with our department and our partners to see 
what changes we need to make to address the deficiencies or 
inefficiencies that we may have had pointed out to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, that department’s had five years 
to figure out what they’re going to do to improve it, and there 
really hasn’t been any significant improvement. There has to be 
a greater effort to help our schools focus on math. 
 
The results of the Indicators report show that there really hasn’t 
been any improvement and now we have to determine why we 
haven’t had this improvement. Do we need new programming? 
Do we need more resources? What are we going to do to make 
sure that students have the skills that they need to get into the 
future? And more importantly, how is this government going to 
evaluate the process? 
 
These Indicators reports were out every year for 10 years, and 
now it’s on a once-a-year or twice-a-year basis, and we have to 
be able to evaluate what’s our students’ improvement in math 
skills. What’s this department going to do to evaluate the 
students’ improvement? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our curriculum 
in Saskatchewan is called the Evergreen Curriculum, and it’s 
internationally renowned with its responsiveness to the needs of 
students. 
 
This is something that we will be looking at within the 
department and with our partners in the learning sector to see 
what we need to do to change, to meet the needs of the students, 
and to address some of the concerns reported to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just not good enough to 
continue looking at it. We have to have a minister and a 
department and a government that cares about the students . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Indicators report follows 
closely on the heels of the Council of Ministers of Education, 
Canada report that conducted a national writing test. Once again 
a large percentage of Saskatchewan students scored below 
Canadian average and below the expected level of writing and 
language ability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have two recent studies reporting that 
Saskatchewan students are trailing the national average and are 
underperforming in two very important skills — math and 
writing. 
 
We know our teachers are doing an excellent job with the 
curriculum and with the resources they’re given to work with 
and our students are being evaluated in the same way as other 
students across the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this should be a concern for the minister and it 
should be a concern for that government. Mr. Speaker, what 
steps does the minister plan to take to ensure that the education 
system helps our students meet and exceed accepted provincial 
and national performance, not only in math but also in writing 
skills? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said in 
the last two answers, the department will work with its . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said in 
my other two answers, the Department of Learning will work 
with its partners in the learning sector to address the reported 
results. We do this on a yearly basis. We look at all the things 
that we see from these indicator reports and then adjust our 
curriculum accordingly. 
 
On another note, Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic that this member 
stands in her place and says that they have a commitment to 
education. All we have seen from them is zero funding. And 
when it was asked to be clarified by the post-secondary critic in 
estimates, they said they would not just freeze it, they would 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2003 

 

keep it at the rate of inflation. 
 
Inflation would not have done anything for the school system. 
We would have seen cutbacks, layoffs. Nothing would have 
been accomplished with that sort of agenda and that’s all the 
Sask Party has to offer people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wildlife Habitat Land 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you, colleagues, for that rousing applause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Environment minister. In 
Saskatchewan there are about 3.4 million acres of land 
protected as critical habitat wildlife land under The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act. Mr. Speaker, will the minister indicate 
if it is possible for any individual or any corporation to purchase 
or in any other way acquire lands currently owned by the 
provincial government and protected under the habitat, or The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House 
we believe that the most important value any government could 
give the entire citizens of this great province is a fair, balanced 
approach, Mr. Speaker. And what that member is upset over, 
Mr. Speaker, is several days ago in estimates I told that member 
we’re going to do all we can to help the Indian bands of this 
great province achieve TLE settlement, treaty land entitlement. 
 
And they are going, Mr. Speaker, from 1 per cent to 2 per cent 
of the total land mass of Saskatchewan. And that lemon-sucking 
opposition doesn’t like it because . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. There are certain phrases that are not 
quite fitting for this Assembly, and I would ask the member to 
withdraw that statement before he proceeds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll withdraw that 
statement, but what the problem with that opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, is that every time we try and correct a wrong and to 
make sure we do justice to all people — and all people, on this 
side of the Assembly, include the First Nations people — they 
don’t like it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things we have done is to take 
wildlife habitat protection lands to help accommodate, to help 
accommodate TLE claims. And we can do that, Mr. Speaker, 
because most of the other land is encumbered by many people 
that settled this great province. And that member, who we 
haven’t seen for a number of weeks here, doesn’t like it, along 
with that party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would remind the member for 
Athabasca he’s not to refer to the presence or absence of 
members in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Speaker, in regarding critical habitat 

wildlife land, it was a former member on that side, the Hon. 
Lorne Scott, that implemented this Act. And that Act stated that 
critical habitat wildlife land was to stay in its natural state, and 
therefore the preservation of all people and the wildlife and 
habitat. It was their member that did it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Speaker, under the wildlife protection 
Act, protected land cannot be used for any purpose other than 
providing animal habitat — no hunting, no fishing, no logging, 
and no mining. But this NDP government has removed 
approximately 97,000 acres of protected land and used it to 
settle treaty land entitlement claims with First Nations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP taking land currently designated 
as critical habitat wildlife land and using it to satisfy TLE 
claims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out, Mr. 
Speaker, to that invisible member, that we have for many times 
across this Assembly have told time and time again all members 
across, that on this side of the House we believe in TLE 
settlement. And the Indian bands of this province have settled 
for TLE to go from 1 per cent of the entire land mass of this 
province to 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in Aboriginal people, the First Nations people do care 
about the environment, about the fish, about the wildlife, about 
the ecosystems. They are great stewards of our environment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we come along and say, this historical injustice, we’re trying 
to settle it. Hey, we got some opportunity here to not . . . go 
after unencumbered land to settle TLE claims. And all of a 
sudden they’re all up in arms over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they support TLE land claims, if they support to 
go from 1 per cent to 2 per cent, then they should get up and 
have the fortitude to say, yes, we do, and we have no problem. 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? They don’t. 
 
So they get up and they complain about TLE settlement because 
we’re putting them on wildlife habitat lands to make sure that 
we meet the obligations that we should be meeting. And they 
don’t like it, Mr. Speaker. Come clean. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that question is, 
we do. Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that a section of 
the land in the RM of Meeting Lake, that has been deemed by 
provincial government as critical habitat wildlife land and 
protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act has in fact 
been transferred to the Mosquito First Nation to satisfy a TLE 
claim? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — In our agreement with the First 
Nations, on this side of the House we’re going to honour those 



June 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

 

agreements. And what we often tell people is that there are 
many agreements we’ve signed with the First Nations, whether 
it’s treaty agreements or TLE agreements, and on this side of 
the House we’ll honour and respect our First Nations 
agreements. 
 
And on that side of the House, they don’t like it, Mr. Speaker. 
You know why? Because they don’t support those agreements. 
You know why, Mr. Speaker? There’s no common denominator 
when it comes to the good of all of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say to that member of the opposition and the entire 
opposition, that if you guys support TLE, get up and don’t just 
say it in the Assembly; practise it, Mr. Speaker. Practise it by 
going out and explaining to people the value of the TLE 
agreements, the gaming agreement, the value of the treaties. 
 
On this side of the House we respect the Aboriginal people, the 
role that they play in conserving the environment, and the role 
that they have to play when it comes to a land base and the 
economic value of that land base. And on this side again, Mr. 
Speaker, we support them 100 per cent and we practise what we 
preach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, does 
the Mosquito First Nation intend to use the critical habitat 
wildlife land it has acquired from the province for the purpose 
of selling outfitting services? 
 
And if so, has the Mosquito First Nation been granted an 
outfitting licence from either the provincial government or the 
federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ll explain to 
that member. On this side of the House we’re going to do our 
best efforts to settle TLE land claims. We’re going to do our 
very best efforts, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to balance all the 
interests, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And on this side of the House we’re going to stand up day after 
day, we’re going to defend the agreements that we made with 
the First Nations people, and we’re going to defend them with 
vigour. 
 
And what we’re not about to do, Mr. Speaker, is spend a whole 
bunch of time explaining to that opposition, who doesn’t 
support it, that this is how we’re going to do things. Because 
they don’t accept it, they don’t support it, and they don’t defend 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what that means to me, Mr. Speaker, is they never once in 
their entire speeches to the many First Nations ever come clean 
to say, yes we do or no we don’t. They say, oh yes we do. But, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why their Leader of the Opposition’s at 27 
per cent. On this side we’re at 45 per cent for leadership 
because we show examples how you make a deal and you stick 
by it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Government Harassment Policy 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in her 
report of a year ago — the report that I think Saskatchewan 
taxpayers paid $20,000 for — Marilyn MacKenzie said of the 
Saskatchewan government, and I quote: 
 

There exists a prevailing atmosphere of crisis management 
which permeates all senior levels . . . 

 
Now at the time of her report, the government committed to 
developing immediately an harassment policy for ministers’ 
offices. More than a year has passed. Has the government 
approved an harassment policy for ministers’ offices or does the 
crisis atmosphere spoken of by Ms. MacKenzie still prevail? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll speak on behalf of 
government that a great deal of work has occurred over the past 
12 months in building a harassment policy, one that will be 
applicable to the whole of government. And I think we’ve all 
learned from some more recent experience of harassment in 
government. 
 
The policy as it will affect ministers of the Crown and 
ministerial offices has been formulated. We are now in a 
process of discussion and consultation with staff within those 
offices and we expect implementation once that consultation is 
concluded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for Election 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier told us a few weeks 
ago that he couldn’t call an election because he had so much 
pressing business. And what might that pressing business be? 
 
The government’s ethanol strategy is in shambles. The 
legislative agenda this session can only be described as thin. 
The governor of the Bank of Canada says that his projected 2.5 
per cent growth rate for this year is now far too optimistic but 
our Minister of Finance sticks to the figure of 6.8 per cent. 
Ministers routinely tell this House what they are not going to 
do, namely privatize, but they do not tell us what they are going 
to do. Now we find that even drafting an harassment policy for 
ministers within a year is apparently too onerous a task for this 
government. 
 
So what business is the government doing that prevents them 
from seeking the confidence of the voters? Or is it a lack of 
their confidence in the voters that prevents them from calling an 
election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the first question that 
comes to my mind in response to the member from North 
Battleford is, does the Liberal caucus have a harassment policy? 
 
The second question is this, Mr. Speaker. Has the Liberal 
member of this legislature participated in any meaningful way 
to assist the people of Saskatchewan as we’ve moved through 
the BSE crisis? 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2003 

 

He says we have work yet to do. He’s right we have work left to 
do. We have to deal with a Liberal government in Ottawa on a 
daily basis, on a daily basis to bring some justice to Canadians. 
I ask the Liberal member from North Battleford, has he or his 
leader done anything of any substantive merit in the last several 
days to assist Saskatchewan people in a time of great need in 
this province? Has he done a significant thing in the last few 
days? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, leave to move a 
motion regarding absence of members for a Parliamentary 
Association trip. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly, the absence be granted to 
the members for Saskatoon Nutana, Melfort-Tisdale, 
Regina Wascana Plains, and Indian Head-Milestone for 
Monday, June 23 to Tuesday, July 15 inclusive to attend 
the Partnership of Parliaments in Germany and the State 
Legislative Leaders Foundation in Poland on behalf of this 
Assembly. 
 
I so move. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 43 — The 
Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is again 
a pleasure to get up to talk about Bill No. 43, a Bill to amend 
The Forest Resources Management Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to make a few comments on 
this Bill yesterday and it is my pleasure to be able to get up 
today and maybe get into a little more meat on this Bill, Bill 
No. 43. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we had an opportunity 
to be able to take a quick look at Bill No. 43, and certainly Bill 
No. 43 is designed, from an NDP government point of view, 
Mr. Speaker, to be able to address some concerns raised by the 
American United States forest industry. 
 
And certainly our number one consumer, the United States of 
America has some concerns about how we do business in 
Canada, in the country of Canada and certainly how we . . . and 
specifically how we do business in the province of 
Saskatchewan because as we all know, Mr. Speaker, after many 
years of this NDP government, we’re come to kind of expect 
that business in Saskatchewan must be done with and through 
the NDP government or not at all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important for this House to 
understand that there are some conditions that the United States 
government has put upon jurisdictions outside their country that 
will help what they believe . . . the standard that they believe 
they have set for themselves, Mr. Speaker, in order to have a 
fair playing field from their perspective. And after all, they are 
the customer. They are the customer, Mr. Speaker, and the 
customer you know, from a business point of view, is always 
right. 
 
They believe that there are five points that need to be met, five 
conditions that need to be met in order for jurisdictions, 
Saskatchewan being one of them . . . And it doesn’t matter 
whether it’s our neighbours to the west of us or neighbours to 
the east and even as far east as the Maritime provinces, these 
conditions must be met in order to be able to overcome the 
trade injury tariff that has been applied against our softwood 
lumber industry. And this extremely, extremely regressive 
tariff, Mr. Speaker, has put a great deal of pressure on the 
softwood lumber industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
But the softwood lumber, Mr. Speaker, is the responsibility of 
the provincial government and provincial governments need to 
take the opportunity to be able to address the issue themselves 
rather than come with Bills such as Bill No. 43, Mr. Speaker, 
which would lead more to, lead more to establishing a 
Saskatchewan position to help support the federal government 
in softwood trade dispute negotiations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the reality is is that we need to start 
in Saskatchewan depending less upon the federal government as 
this government is wont to do and to try to work out a 
reasonable agreement with ourselves. Put a process in place to 
be able to allow our forest industry the opportunity to do 
business anywhere in the world without the . . . with an 
opportunity, with an eye to the future, with a vision, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan is open for business. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we all know in this province in the 
forestry sector is that one of the things that this NDP 
government has hoisted onto the forestry sector is that if you get 
an allotment of wood, a significant acreage, or hectareage I 
guess, Mr. Speaker, as we now . . . is the term we should be 
using, is that — and of course we have some very large 
allotments in this province — is that there’s an expectation 
from these large corporations to do business in this province, is 
that there’s a minimum cut standard that this government, the 
NDP government foists upon them in order that jobs will be 



June 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

 

created. 
 
And you can kind of understand where the government was 
going on this when it was originally created. That X amount of 
wood must be cut out of your allotment every year, X amount 
of jobs will then therefore be created, stumpage fees will be 
paid, and in the meantime personal income taxes are going to be 
paid into provincial government coffers. And on the surface it 
kind of looked like a good idea. 
 
The reality was . . . is that this kind of a policy, Mr. Speaker, 
did not allow corporations, forest companies, forestry 
companies, the open-ended opportunity to be able to adjust 
production, as this Bill talks about, to adjust the production in 
order to adapt to market conditions. 
 
And a market condition has been foisted on us, Mr. Speaker, in 
Canada and certainly in North America. We’re actually . . . 
we’re overproducing softwood lumber to the point where we’ve 
driven the price of lumber down in North America because of 
overproduction. And overproduction is being caused in a 
multitude of jurisdictions because of a minimum cut 
requirement that has been foisted on them. 
 
And the reality is, is that because they have this minimum cut, 
the Americans, our largest consumers, see this, Mr. Speaker, as 
an unfair trading practice. 
 
They consider it dumping of softwood lumber by the 
Saskatchewan forest companies into the United States because 
they’re forced, these companies are forced to cut this lumber, 
they’re forced to saw it into dimensional lumber, Mr. Speaker, 
and then, then what does the company do with it? The forestry 
companies then are forced to either simply put it into storage, 
and of course they’d require massive amounts of storage as that 
. . . there’s huge storage facilities that would be required. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what really happens is that then these forestry 
companies try to unload this product into world markets. And it 
creates quite a problem for them because you know, Mr. 
Speaker, as an example, some of our forestry companies in 
Saskatchewan have long-term working relationships with 
wholesalers and retailers, and in the United States of America, 
and they want to be able to retain that relationship. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And so they continue to produce a product that is not as wanted 
as much as they’d like to see it wanted, but because of the trade 
injury duty that has been put upon our province in somewhere 
in that 27/29 per cent range, that we’re forced to sell lumber at 
sometimes below the cost of production in order just to get it 
off our woodlots. 
 
And so what the United States of America then is asking is — 
one of their conditions, Mr. Speaker — is to readjust our 
minimum cut requirements in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so forestry companies and businesses, businesses — and 
whether it’s in forestry or mining or oil and gas or agriculture 
— if you’re overproducing you want to be able to cut 
production a little bit, Mr. Speaker, and adjust your harvesting 
methods to reflect the demands of the industry. But when you 

have a minimum cut requirement as we do in Saskatchewan it 
makes it very hard to do. 
 
So this is one of the areas that our largest consumer, our largest 
customer, the United States of America have said to us — 
whether it’s Saskatchewan or British Columbia or Alberta or 
Manitoba or Ontario, anywhere where there’s a minimum cut 
requirement — they see this as an unfair trade advantage 
because it’s forcing companies in Canada to cut sawlogs, to turn 
that into lumber, and then are forced to sell it in order to just to 
defray the cost of putting up this wood product. 
 
Another concern that has also been raised by our largest 
consumer, the United States of America, the largest user of our 
export product, is that there are restrictions in certain 
jurisdictions in Canada on saw mill closures. Now in Canada 
we have to understand that when you do business, that 
sometimes that closures are going to have to take place and 
most of these closures take place around market conditions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so when a forestry company is forced to because of, one, 
minimum cut requirements or whatever conditions they may 
have to deal with when they’re working with a provincial 
government, is that they’re being forced to keep a mill open that 
otherwise that they may like to have sit idle for six months or 
nine months or whatever, and have the unfortunate — and of 
course it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, no one is doubting that — 
that forestry workers in these mills, forestry workers that are 
working first-hand in our forests may have to take some 
short-term layoffs and become clients of Employment Insurance 
in Canada. And that’s unfortunate. 
 
But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that is a reality in the business 
sector, is that when there are downturns in large sectors such as 
this, whether it’s forestry or mining or oil and gas, that there 
will be some layoffs. And when you force . . . When you have 
policies in place that force mills to remain open that are sawing 
lumber merely to fill minimum cut requirements, then, Mr. 
Speaker, our largest consumer, the United States of America, 
our largest trading partner, feel this creates also an unfair trade 
advantage. 
 
And so what it does then is that Canadian companies are felt as 
though they’re forced, they’re forced to adapt business practices 
that are not healthy for the long-term viability of some of our 
companies. And maybe, maybe the much larger ones are going 
to be able to weather this storm but you know we have some 
medium-sized producers in this province and some smaller 
producers, Mr. Speaker. They’re not going to be able to weather 
this kind of a storm when they’re forced to do business in this 
manner in this province and they’re looking for just a little bit 
of leeway in this area. 
 
And certainly when our largest user of our finished products, 
our largest consumer, the United States of America is also 
asking for this consideration, we need to be responsive to that 
consumer. 
 
One of the areas that lo and behold caught us by surprise is that 
we actually have a minimum, a minimum processing 
requirement. I know of situations in this province where some 
of our largest foresters have harvested areas of this province and 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2003 

 

really had no need for that, for that . . . those sawlogs. And so 
what they did was that they wanted to be able to have those 
sawlogs, figured they could sell them to someone else who may 
have a market that they could have used them for, and stuff like 
that or situations similar to that. 
 
And imagine our surprise on this side to find out that they 
actually had to get permission from the, from the provincial 
government in order to do that. Now we see a clause in here 
that it is going to allow that to happen on a smoother, a 
smoother basis. 
 
But the reality is these companies have already paid the 
appropriate dues, have made good marketing and planning in 
regards around softwood lumber, have made good business 
decisions on the basis of consumer usage; but they’re forced to 
cut timber because of a minimum cut requirement and they’re 
forced to saw this timber because they have, they have brought 
it in from our provincial forest. 
 
And so I think we need to be able to have the type of policies in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that will allow our provincial 
forest operators the flexibility — the flexibility, Mr. Speaker — 
in order that we may be able to adapt during downturns in the 
softwood lumber industry and yet be able to adapt again when 
there’s significant upturns in the softwood lumber industry. 
 
And we all know, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to wood 
products — and it goes right from whether it’s a softwood 
lumber to the OSB (oriented strand board) to plyboard, or 
whether we produce it right into high-quality paper — there are 
downturns in the markets and there are upturns in the markets. 
Softwood lumber is certainly suffering a downturn right now 
but we also know, Mr. Speaker, that there will be, there will be 
an upturn in the market and we need to be able to position 
ourselves to be able to handle that. 
 
And so one of the issues . . . another issue that our largest 
consumer south of us in the United States of America is 
concerned about is that we have long-term, non-transferable 
tenures they feel create barriers to the market for our provincial 
timber. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, even the forest industry understands that 
they’re going to have to start looking at how they do business 
different with provincial jurisdictions. 
 
And we know that to the west of us, the province of British 
Columbia is looking at putting some of these long-term . . . 
taking some lands tenures out of long-term and that are 
non-transferable. And the forest industry is agreeing to this, that 
some of this lumber needs to be . . . these timbers needs to be 
brought into a more modern-day type of thinking when it comes 
to breaking down the market barriers. 
 
And what they want to do is they want to set up a system, Mr. 
Speaker, where these large forestry operations or larger forestry 
operations — and maybe they’re not all large, I know there’s 
some smaller ones there also too in British Columbia — but 
actually give up some of their long-term tenures and have that 
put up for bid, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That bid system, Mr. Speaker, will actually set for the industry 

in British Columbia a base value of what that standing timber is 
worth. And their largest consumer, the United States, one of 
their largest consumers — and they have two large consumers: 
one is the United States of America, the other is Asia — but the 
one long . . . the one large consumer, the United States of 
America sees this as levelling the playing field between their 
forestry companies in the United States and the forestry 
companies in British Columbia. 
 
Now that’s going to create a problem here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. Because we know that some of our forest users in 
this province are doing business in the United States of America 
and if those consumers, that consumer market that they are 
wholesaling into in the United States of America suddenly find 
that there’s a market advantage for them to leave the 
Saskatchewan market and go to another market, such as British 
Columbia, or even if it’s Ontario or wherever it is, Mr. Speaker, 
that we’re going to lose some market advantage here in 
Saskatchewan and that will be unfortunate. 
 
So I think that’s why in this Bill we need to see some very 
definitive, definitive direction, Mr. Speaker, as to why we need 
to change this long-term and non-transferable tenures to a 
smaller degree. 
 
Now we know that, you know, we have huge tracts of land in 
Saskatchewan that belongs to the Crown, Mr. Speaker. And we 
certainly don’t want to be thinking about turning over to the bid 
system the entire province of Saskatchewan and we don’t think 
that that’s appropriate either. But we should be able to come up 
with a percentage of the forest that is harvested every year that 
could be put up for the bid system. 
 
And so on this side of the House, we’d like to see the type of 
legislation that would be very definitive, Mr. Speaker, when it 
comes to this type of concerns that is being brought forward by 
the United States, that’s actually been set out in their . . . a 
policy paper by the United States government. They would like 
to see some changes to the long-term, non-transferable tenures, 
Mr. Speaker, because what they see is, is that these tenures do 
not create a fair base price for the timber. 
 
What they see this as is just one agent, one agency and the 
government setting the price — this is what the stumpage fees 
are. The consumers see this as having an unfair advantage 
because what it creates then is a pricing system for stumpage 
that is set arbitrarily, Mr. Speaker, and not seen as having the 
opportunity for the marketplace to be able to establish stumpage 
fees. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s four of the issues I think that the 
United States . . . this United States policy paper has raised. 
 
There’s a fifth one that I’d also like to bring up too, and there’s 
concern amongst our consumers to the south of us, and they 
want to know definitively the prices that are being provided by 
forestry companies to the owners of the timber. And in 
Saskatchewan of course that would be the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so they feel — especially our competitors in the United 
States feel — that some of the jurisdictions in Canada are very 
secretive about what is being done about being public about the 



June 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

 

stumpage fees that are collected on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan for our forestry, from our forestry sector, and 
then does that provide an unfair trading practice by the province 
of Saskatchewan for forestry companies trying to deal in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
And so these are five areas that they’d like to see addressed. 
Now we take these five areas that the government already knew 
about, the NDP government already knew about and certainly 
weren’t . . . didn’t allow the opposition the opportunity to know 
that this, that these are some of the areas that had to be 
addressed. But what we’re knowing now, Mr. Speaker, is that 
these are the five areas that need to be addressed but this Bill 
actually only deals with three of them. 
 
And so if this Bill deals with three of them, does the NDP 
government actually believe that if they deal with three of these 
issues and not the other two, then do they feel strong enough, 
Mr. Speaker, that the United States will be able to accept that 
we have gone far enough in Saskatchewan in addressing this 
policy paper in the United States, these five, five points that 
they are very concerned about? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this is the type of issues that are 
being raised in the forestry sector. There’s five concerns raised 
by the United States of America, our largest consumer. Three of 
them are going to be addressed by the province of 
Saskatchewan. But if we only address three, does that mean the 
United States will accept, well three out of five is enough? 
 
I think what we’re hearing, Mr. Speaker, when we talk to the 
forestry sector, they have a great deal of concern that we need 
to address all five areas of concern raised by our largest 
consumer outside of Canada. And so then why not have an Act 
coming forward, a Bill coming forward this year to address all 
five areas of this issue so that we can put Saskatchewan at the 
leading edge, at the leading edge, Mr. Speaker, of being able to 
eliminate the softwood lumber tariff, this injury duty that has 
been applied against our softwood lumber in Saskatchewan? 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we know that the forestry sector is very 
keenly interested in this Bill and how it turns out, and actually 
the Saskatchewan Party has been working very closely with the 
players in the forestry sector in Saskatchewan. And certainly we 
have done due diligence on this side in getting that information 
out to them. And so we’re still waiting for some responses back. 
We’ve received a lot of responses back; there’s still some more 
we’d like to get. And so it would be more appropriate at this 
time, Mr. Speaker, that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:45) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 

minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Vice-Chair. 
Today I have with me, to my right, Christine Tanner, the deputy 
minister of Labour. And directly behind Christine is Mr. Jim 
Nicol, the assistant deputy minister. And directly behind 
myself, we have John Boyd, the executive director of planning 
and policy division. 
 
And seated behind the bar we have Eric Greene, director of 
labour standards; Cheryl Senecal, director, prevention services; 
Dawn McKibben, director, human resources and 
administration; Sharon Ackerman, manager of budget and 
operations; Glennis Bihun, manager of occupational health and 
safety partnerships; Jan Joel, senior policy analyst, the Status of 
Women office. 
 
And from the Workers’ Compensation Board, directly behind 
Mr. Boyd, we have Peter Federko, the executive . . . or chief 
executive officer. And Gail Kruger is behind the bar, 
vice-president of finance and information technology. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
officials. I guess this would be our third and perhaps final time 
to go through estimates with the Department of Labour. 
 
There are a few questions that were I guess unanswered and I 
want to pursue a little bit further from our last go-round in 
estimates. Most of my questioning today is going to be centred 
around WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) but I’ll try and 
have some more questions to keep the other officials entertained 
while we’re here. 
 
A Member: — We don’t want them dozing in the background. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — That’s right. I’d hate to just have it strictly 
to WCB. But we were talking the last time and we were going 
through the annual reports, and it took us quite a while to figure 
out, you know, the 2002 and the 2001 annual reports because 
there were some discrepancies in the numbers. 
 
I’ve since talked with the minister a couple times on that very 
thing, about the numbers as far as year in a glance and we . . . 
I’m very aware of the fact that those are rounded off numbers. 
They’re not the exact number. But I know they’re not rounded 
off by 20 and 30 and $40 million. They’re rounded off by 
thousands of dollars. 
 
And the minister explained to me — mainly behind the bar, but 
also I guess maybe I’d get her to put it on record again — that 
the 2002 annual report, when we look at year at a glance, the 
numbers are incorrect at the year in a glance 2002 numbers. Not 
the year 2002; the annual report 2002. There was a, I guess a 
couple of typos, and the numbers in year in a glance were 
incorrect. And we established the fact that in the 2001 annual 
report the year in a glance numbers were correct. 
 
And I guess just to get that base level to start with, if I could 
just have the minister comment on that. We realize that there 
were some typos, some incorrect numbers given in the 2002 
annual report year at a glance when we refer to the years of 
2000 and 1999. 
 



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2003 

 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Vice-Chair, the member is correct 
that the year at a glance in the 2002 annual report is incorrect. 
There is some figures that were brought forward incorrectly but 
the audited portion of the statement are correct. That has been 
gone through by the Provincial Auditor as well as the WCB’s 
external auditor, so the audited statements are correct. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well that’s a relief. But they also . . . I 
know the minister has referred me a couple of times to the . . . If 
I go back into the report and just don’t go year at a glance, if I 
go back into the report and look at the audited financial 
statements of WCB, that it will spell out what you are saying, 
that the one annual report, the numbers were carried forward 
incorrectly. 
 
And so that’s what I did. I went back just one more year to the 
annual report of 2000 and I looked at the audited statements of 
the year 2000 in the annual report. And the annual report states 
that the reserve and injury fund, which is this number that 
we’ve been in discussion over, is $136,992,000, or $137 
million. And that’s the financial . . . that’s the statement audited 
. . . the financial audited statement that appears in the 2002 
annual report. And it also appears in the 2002. 
 
The one discrepancy is this 2001. Now you’re saying this is the 
correct number in 2001; the incorrect number is in 2002. But 
when you go back one year to the year 2000 here, the numbers 
jive. And I guess all I’m saying is how would that be then, how 
come the financial statement in the year 2000 annual report 
jives with the 2002 annual report which you say is incorrect? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, with leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Deputy Chair, and thank you 
members for interrupting. I just would like to introduce to the 
Assembly my son, Eric, who is here today visiting. I likely 
won’t be able to get back to my other son’s grade 8 grad so he’s 
come down to soften the blow. 
 
And I’d like all hon. members to welcome Eric to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:00) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, for 
your patience. 

Now I believe you are looking at the year at a glance, and what 
. . . the 2000 annual statement was not adjusted until 2001. And 
I believe what you’re doing is comparing the 2000 annual 
report to the 2002 annual report and the auditor’s restatement of 
the figures, the $33 million — and that’s rounded off — and 
they are restated in the 2001 annual report. And if you will look 
at note no. 16 in the 2001 annual report, it will give you a better 
explanation or a clearer explanation of this. 
 
When you’re looking at the year at a glance, as I say, the 
accounting adjustment was back to the 1999 report. It was a $33 
million adjustment where the auditor restated the figures, that 
the $33 million was not a reserve and that it was a liability. So 
we’re looking back years, but because the reports and the 
restating was done in hindsight, you have to go back farther and 
look at the figures. 
 
But the note 16 in the 2001 annual report gives you a clearer 
explanation of the adjust . . . or the restating. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well thanks, Madam Minister, because I 
mean really it’s very important that we understand that. I mean 
we stood up here and we said that there was an 87 million loss 
in WCB the year previous, and 93.5 or . . . I forget the exact 
number this year, this past year. And then when you start 
dealing with the numbers, they don’t exactly jive. 
 
Now I realize that there is some adjusting. But just simply 
going back to the — you know, as you stated to me a couple 
times through question period and in other venues — go back to 
the financial statement and that will tell you. You can’t do . . . 
Just look at year in a glance; go back to the financial statements. 
And that’s what I did and it became certainly no more clearer. 
 
In fact it really became a little confusing because, as I said, the 
2000 annual report signed off by the auditors jives with the 
2002 annual report, and the one that is incorrect is the 2001 
which you are saying is the correct one because of the 
writedown. And we can probably spend a lot more time on that 
but we’re not going to. 
 
Some of the other issues that I had though regarding the WCB 
are regarding the industrial safety programs and in particular for 
example PIMA (Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association) 
which has its own safety program. I realize it’s funded through 
WCB. 
 
But can you explain some of the changes? I’ve talked to a 
number of business owners that are under the PIMA umbrella 
that are concerned with some of the changes that are going on 
with the safety programs that PIMA has . . . And it’s not only 
PIMA. I mean I’m thinking there’s a number of safety 
organizations that do safety programs for their members that are 
funded wholly or at least partially by WCB. And there are some 
changes that the board is looking at in that whole area. 
 
Could you explain to me some of the changes as far as the 
safety programs offered by associations for their membership? 
What changes does the WCB want to see in that area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much for the question. 
The concerns that you kind of touched on about PIMA and the 
safety programs and any changes that are being looked at, there 



June 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

 

are nine safety associations that receive their funding through 
premiums or it comes from the premiums within industry. 
 
And what the board has done is initiate a policy that the safety 
associations need to be administered by a separate board that 
has equal representation from both the employers’ side and the 
employees’ side. From previous experience, we know that 
having boards set this way increases the accountability and also 
the effectiveness of the programs that are run and the 
monitoring of the programs, the safety programs. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So I guess my question then, if you’re 
going to a separate board, employer and employee sitting on the 
board that will administer these . . . administrate and administer 
these programs and they feel that that is maybe a more 
accountable way, have there been problems in the past? Has 
there been any problems in the past with any of these 
organizations — of the nine safety associations that you had 
mentioned — had there been problems with accountability to 
warrant moving in this direction? 
 
Again talking to the organizations that I’ve had the opportunity 
of talking to . . . Now I shouldn’t say organizations, but 
businesses that are operated under these umbrella organizations 
felt that the program had been working very, very well prior to 
this new structure that WCB is asking. 
 
So I guess, what evidence is there, what are all the examples 
that are causing the WCB to go to this board structure? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Prior to the requirement and the changes 
that were put in place for the separate boards that oversaw or 
governed the safety associations, there had been some problems 
in some associations. And by the way that these associations are 
funded and through the WCB’s involvement in collecting the 
premiums that are used to fund these associations to address the 
situation, this policy was put in place. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And it doesn’t matter . . . There had been problems in the past, 
not necessarily with PIMA. But being the nine safety 
associations are all funded the same, they are treated the same 
so this requirement was put in place. And you know yourself, 
the questions to government, the demand for accountability and 
accessibility, that those standards run through just about 
everything in today’s life. There is a higher demand for 
accountability. 
 
So this is the policy that was put in place. And like I say, there 
was problems, not necessarily with PIMA and the safety 
association, but all nine associations have been given this same 
policy and set up to address those concerns. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So I guess my 
concern then would be that if there has been some concern, if 
there have been some problems in the nine safety associations 
— you’re saying not PIMA, maybe eight out of the nine have 
been fine — you’re changing the rules for all nine to operate, 
how all nine operate, when there may have only been some 
isolated problems with one or two that could have been dealt 
with directly. 
 

And you’re putting in another structure, a whole . . . changing 
the system, which once again . . . And you may have more 
information. Well you do have a lot more information than I do. 
I don’t know how much problem there was. Is it an isolated 
situation? Is there one safety association that was giving 
problems and the other eight were operating and functioning 
properly, but hence you’re changing the structure for all nine 
now because one was operating not as transparent as what it 
should have been? 
 
I’d be very interested in finding that out because I know the 
associations are saying why the change; we didn’t see that there 
was anything wrong. If you could tell me that the majority of 
them were operating without due diligence, not operating 
correctly, then maybe that would explain the change. But right 
now I’m having a hard time understanding why you’d change 
the structure for all nine safety organizations when there may 
have only been an isolated situation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the board policy that covers 
all nine of the safety associations has really put in place that all 
safety associations are treated the same. We can go into all the 
issues of increasing accountability and increasing the 
effectiveness of the safety associations, but really what it gets 
down to, more directly to your question, the safety associations 
have chosen to be funded through their WCB premiums. 
 
They chose this method of collecting the funding for the safety 
associations within their codes and classifications. The 
classification that PIMA is the designated contact for, and 
connection I guess, to the safety association for that code — I 
think it’s an M90 industrial code that they’re classified under — 
but it covers more than just PIMA members. Other small 
manufacturers that are within that industry code also contribute 
to the safety association and are covered by that association in 
the programming that it does. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Just one final question in this area. There’s 
no intent then through WCB to move all the training, the safety 
training out from underneath these organizations? It will still be 
the responsibility of these organizations to do the training in 
their area? There’s no intent to move it out from underneath 
these organizations into a totally separate structure, which then 
I guess starts a whole new structure out there? I guess I’ll leave 
it at that and I’ll hear your answer. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I’m not sure where this comes from but 
there is no intention to transfer the training or the trainers to any 
other area. It’s still the responsibility of the safety association to 
provide the training that they currently do. 
 
Through the Department of Labour and through the WCB, we 
have launched the work safe program, which really works with 
partners throughout the various industries. We have found over 
a number of years that working with partners with various 
expertise is really the most effective way. And we have worked 
over the last year especially to build these partnerships and to 
maintain them and in fact expand them so we have the best 
safety coverage in Saskatchewan and the coverage that 
Saskatchewan workplaces and workers deserve. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’ll be glad to 
hear that, that there’s no intention at all to move the 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2003 

 

programming, safety programming, out from these nine 
different associations in the near future anyway. 
 
Another issue that I just wanted to bring up was the direction of 
the mandate of occupational health and safety officers. Has 
there been any change in the role of OH&S (occupational health 
and safety) officers in the last year? 
 
And this comes from minutes from a Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce meeting where there was some concern as to really 
the direction and the role of these officers going from more of a 
kind of a liaison person to more of an officer type, ticketing for 
offences and that type of thing. 
 
Has there been a change in the mandate or the direction of the 
OH&S officers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well I guess 
when you talk about occupational health and safety officers, 
they have never been just a liaison officer with business. They 
do a variety of . . . or play a variety of roles within the 
occupational health and safety division. They do investigations. 
They do follow-ups on complaints or concerns that have been 
expressed. 
 
We get into our OH&S committee minutes. They can do 
follow-up on issues that show up repeatedly in minutes that are 
sent into the department. They can also do investigations where 
no minutes show up from a business. By law, those need to be 
filed at the department. If businesses are sending in minutes that 
say no problem, month after month after month, that’s not . . . 
it’s a highly unlikely. Then they do investigations to see if 
things, meetings are held properly. 
 
They do training. I mean, there’s a huge range of issues that 
they cover. 
 
One of the problems that we have found is that the OH&S 
system, in many instances, is based on compliance with the 
legislation and the regulations that are in place. 
Non-compliance is becoming a larger issue in certain areas. 
And we have certain employers that are repeat offenders, I 
guess is the best way to put it. 
 
So what we have been doing is looking at the various ways to 
increase compliance and ways to use the enforcement tools that 
are already within the Act and if there are things that we should 
be doing to increase compliance in repeat offenders. So that’s 
what we’re looking at. 
 
And we’ve been exploring different ways of doing that, 
throwing out some issues and getting responses back from 
various stakeholders. The chamber of commerce is one of those 
that we have had discussions with. 
 
Right now what we can do is issue letters of warning. Officers 
will do a report. They can be contravened for contraventions. 
We can issue stop work orders. And stop work orders not for a 
total business but in certain areas. Say a scaffolding was put up 
wrong, was unsafe, we could stop work in that area. 
 
And then we jump right to prosecutions. So there is a huge gap 
in there where there’s some concerns, that there should be 

something in between that we can do. So that’s probably the 
concerns you heard was we have been tossing out some ideas, 
getting some responses back from stakeholders as to what is 
appropriate and what things we should be doing. 
 
There is an issue here too and it ties back to your previous 
comments when we’re talking about WCB. And I know in the 
annual report there’s a concern that injury rates and claim rates 
are climbing. So the two are really tied together. That we need 
to express the . . . I mean the insistence, insist really that health 
and safety is a savings and it can have multiple effects in a 
workplace — more productive, safer workplaces are a proven 
fact. It really affects on the employer’s bottom line. 
 
So these are what we’re looking at in some of the issues that we 
have because they tie together not only with health and safety 
and the productivity in your workplace but also ultimately on 
your WCB rates. So safety is an issue all the way around. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess, 
certainly when I said that the OH&S offices are just a liaison, I 
realize the role that they play. I’m not slighting that in any way. 
 
But I do know that people are . . . some businesses are 
concerned that their role may go more from what you just 
explained to more of a officer that’s out looking hard for trouble 
and trying to find trouble and, you know, charge the outfit. 
 
You were saying that in some cases, you know, there are some 
businesses out there that maybe don’t have safety as a high 
priority and certainly I would think that would be very few and 
far between. Just talking to the number of business owners that 
I have talked to, they realize that, you know, safety is a 
extremely high priority, the highest priority for keeping their 
employees safe. 
 
But they also are concerned that they’re doing everything in 
their power and now is the mandate of the officers coming 
around going to have changed. They have probably a good 
working relationship with them but they’re concerned that there 
could be a change in direction; the next time those officers 
knock on their door of their business that, you know, they’re 
being maybe not as much of a person to work with but a person 
that’s looking for trouble in their business and I understand the 
warning. 
 
But I just want to make sure that I’ve got that right, that there’s 
no change in direction in that perspective. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, for the member opposite, the 
department has an occupational health and safety council 
established that gives the department advice on these issues. It 
is a council that is set up and it has a number of employee and 
employer representatives from various industries. 
 
And this is one of the recommendations that they made to us 
was: when we know that the injury rate is increasing, and the 
accident rate is increasing — and we’re currently at an all-time 
high — they stressed to us and recommended to us that we look 
at ways of enforcing compliance. 
 
And also, these are some of the options that they have given to 
us, that we are talking to with other stakeholders, various 



June 19, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

 

recommendations that the council sends back to us. But the 
enforcement is one that they have targeted as maybe a way of 
increasing compliance. 
 
And also, they have given us a recommendation to look at 
publicizing contraventions, that that may be a way of also 
enforcing and increasing compliance. 
 
So those are just a couple other issues that are out there that we 
are looking at. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, I’m also interested in the particular line of questioning 
that my colleague was taking. 
 
You mentioned the council that advises occupational health and 
safety. I wonder if you could outline for me just who is on that 
particular council, who are the representatives on it, what 
industries they represent, and whether or not they believe that 
it’s a good policy to have public humiliations as one of the 
enforcement tools? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — For the member opposite, the members 
of the committee are Jackie Griffith from Saskatoon, 
representing the public sector; Roy Howell representing the 
mining association, Jerry Huget from Regina, representing the 
firefighters; Garth Ivey from Regina, representing IBEW 
(International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers); Don Grant is 
the Chair — he was formerly from SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations); Mike Hogan from 
Lanigan, representing the SMA (Saskatchewan Mining 
Association); Jack Matheson from Regina, representing IPSCO; 
Pat Riley from Moose Jaw, the Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers; and Sherri Lynn Swaney from Battleford, 
representing the meat industry. 
 
What I referred to before was really at the . . . The council put 
forward recommendations, and it was really twofold. One was 
that there should be some investigation and research done into 
the effective use of the enforcement tools that are currently 
available under the Act. And also, now I may have not 
explained this properly or worded it properly, but there are 
other . . . The second part of the recommendation was that we 
should do some research into the effectiveness of publicizing 
offences. 
 
I mean, currently some offences are publicized. We don’t put 
out press releases on it or post them on a bulletin board 
anywhere, but the news media will pick up some of the more 
serious ones, if there’s a serious accident or a fatality, or 
prosecutions, or fines. Those will currently be picked up the 
media. 
 
But we were directed by the Occupational Health and Safety 
Council to do some more research on this to see if it is 
effective. And it’s something that’s done in other jurisdictions 
quite a bit, so we’re going to do some research on that. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Perhaps 
I’ll ask my questions more in a block so that we can proceed a 
little quicker. 

I’m wondering how many occupational health and safety 
officers there are in Saskatchewan; what the turnover rate is 
there? Also what are the qualifications necessary for an 
occupational health and safety inspector; what training they 
receive? 
 
And specifically in relationship to a letter I have from a 
constituent, I’m interested in particularly what qualifications, 
what experience, what training they might have in the oil patch 
and particularly with drilling rigs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, within the department there is 
25 persons that are designated as workplace safety, with the 
designation workplace safety officers. There’s 43 in total that 
are designated as officers, and their qualifications vary on the 
. . . depending, depending on the area that they may work in. 
Many are hired as specialists — whether for mine safety, 
ergonomics, hygienists. But if the member is interested, we can 
get you the training manual. Or training is continual in these 
areas but the policy and procedures manual goes into quite a bit 
of specifics on each of the areas, so we can get you a copy of 
that. 
 
But the turnover rate, I will have to get back to the member on 
that. We don’t . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, the oil patch 
stuff? We can get you more specifics on that and the turnover 
rate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, thank you. I 
appreciate the offer to get the information for me. The other 
item on this particular area dealing with the oil patch, I’m 
wondering how the industry in total compares to industry in 
general — so the oil industry versus the industry in general, 
how their accident rate compares through WCB. And within the 
oil industry itself, where do the drilling operations, how do they 
compare to the oil industry in general, to determine, you know, 
whether those are that much more dangerous, if they are more 
dangerous, Madam Minister? 
 
I know that a good many young people in Saskatchewan work 
in that industry. They’re highly paid, which would seem to 
indicate that it is a dangerous industry and therefore it takes a 
larger salary or a greater salary to attract people into that 
industry. So I’m just wondering what the statistics are on that, 
also on how often drilling rig operations are inspected by 
OH&S officers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, if the member opposite has a 
2002 annual report of the WCB, on page 24 there is the injury 
rates and claims duration for rebatable subclasses. And I believe 
you were asking about oil well servicing. If you look down the 
chart it’s D4. Your percentage of workers injured with time loss 
is 6.79. And when you look at all classes an average of, 
province-wide, it would be 4.95. So it is higher. 
 
There is also average days on that chart too. So if the member 
has the time to look at that it may give you a lot more 
information than what you have asked for. 
 
The oil well servicing is really among the eight identified 
high-risk injuries . . . industries . . . Sorry, let’s start that again. 
This is included in the eight identified high-risk industries and 
they have been targeted with some specific initiatives that 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2003 

 

would mean they would have increased inspections. Now for 
actual numbers, I don’t have that with me today but we can get 
it to you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I just have a . . . I realize our time is almost 
to an end here, but I have a couple more questions regarding 
WCB and just some of the, I guess . . . I’ve heard that they were 
going through some renovations at their head office. Could you 
explain to me what renovations are going on there, roughly 
cost, and the last time it had been renovated? When’s the last 
time it had been renovated, the cost, that type of thing? If you 
could answer that, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the building has never been 
renovated since it was built in the early ’90s so this is the first 
project that WCB has undertaken. 
 
The renovations currently, the renovations currently are done to 
accommodate occupational health and safety standards and they 
are done also to accommodate the new team-based case 
management. The renovations were begun late in 2001, and 
they are being done over a three-year period and will be 
finished in the year 2004. 
 
The total cost of the renovations have amortized over a 15-year 
period at an annual cost of 284,000, but what the renovations 
have also done in accommodating the team-based case 
management group . . . persons, is the renovations have allowed 
the WCB to end the lease on the 12th floor of the building. 
They were able to move those folks into the newly renovated 
areas which has meant a cost saving in the administration area 
of WCB of 252,000 a year. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Just so I can be clear on the one issue, you 
said $284,000 amortized over 15 years. Is that 284,000 over the 
15 years or 284,000 per year over 15 years? 
 
An Hon. Member: — For 15 years. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — For 15 years, yes. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — It’s the annual cost for 15 years. 
 
(17:00) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So it’s 284,000 or . . . we’ll round it down 
— 280,000 per year for 15 years to pay for the renovations that 
started in late 2001 and that’ll be completed in 2004? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Just to remind the member that these 
renovations were begun late in 2001. They have an annual cost 
of $284,000 that has been amortized over a 15-year period. 
 
But you also need to remember these renovations have allowed 
the WCB to end the lease on the 12th floor of their office 
building which is a savings of $250,000 that they previously 
would have paid. So there’s a savings. So you have a net cost of 
$32,000 a year. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:03. 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1804 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1804 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1804 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1804 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1804 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................1804, 1805 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1805 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1805 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1805 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1805 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1805 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1816 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Regina’s 100th Birthday 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1805 
 Paswegin Resident Honoured 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1806 
 United Empire Loyalists 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1806 
 Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1806 
 St. Ann’s Senior Citizen Village’s 50th Anniversary 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1806 
 McMillan Motor Products 25th Anniversary 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1807 
 Sessional Reruns 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1807 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1807 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1807 
 Mathematics and Writing Skills of Saskatchewan Students 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1809 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1809 
 Wildlife Habitat Land 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1810 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1810 
 Government Harassment Policy 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1811 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1811 
 Call for Election 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1811 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1811 
MOTIONS 
 Leave of Absence 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1812 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
 
 



 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1812 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Labour — Vote 20 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1815 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1815 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1819 
 
 
 


	United Empire Loyalists
	Call for Election
	United Empire Loyalists
	Call for Election

