















































Hansard: May 15, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1107 
 May 15, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of Saskatchewan asking that a dependable 
highway . . . or mentioning that a dependable highway system is 
vital to both public safety and economic development in a given 
area, and that Highway 49 from Kelvington to Highway 35 is in 
urgent need of construction and repair and without it the future 
economic development in the area will be hindered. The prayer 
of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and the 
surrounding areas. 

 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
community of Kelvington. 
 
And I’m very pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who are concerned about education tax. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause the reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 

The people that have signed this are from Wadena, Fosston, and 
Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning 
on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and area concerned about 
the lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the community of Moose Jaw and I’m pleased to present 
on their behalf. 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
government’s reluctance to renew Crown grazing leases 
continues to provoke concern in the area of Cypress Hills, and I 
have a petition on behalf of constituents from the communities 
of Cabri and Hazlet. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
unbelievable lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose 
Jaw. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as is duty bound your petitioners will ever . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Members, I’m finding over the last week that there have been 
far too many across the aisle here conversations going on 
during the time of members’ statements of petitions. And I find 
it rather distracting and very, more than that, probably 
disrespectful to the words that are being said and the efforts of 
the people that have put down the petitions. And I would ask 
members to tone it down and stop the comments across that 
override, that would override any petition or any member’s 
statement that’s being made. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This petition is signed by individuals all from the city of Moose 
Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I have a petition with producers who are very, very concerned 
about the premium rate hike of their crop insurance. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Rabbit Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine 
who have deep concerns regarding the condition of Highway 47 
between Estevan and the Boundary dam resort. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2003 

 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Estevan, 
Frobisher, and Bienfait. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from residents of southern 
Saskatchewan that are concerned about the huge area that does 
not have access to adequate health care. And the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of residents of west central Saskatchewan 
concerned about the state of health care. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley and Netherhill. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to the 
Davidson and Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctor 
services available as well as lab services, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of the Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 2003 
premium increases to crop insurance. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Rabbit 
Lake, Spiritwood, St. Walburg, and Marsden. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 18, 27, 35, 36, and no. 90. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: during the 
month of November 2002, how many calls were received 
on the Government of Saskatchewan’s the Future is Wide 
Open toll-free line; that’s 1-866-SASK-HAS. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other questions that I am also 
putting forward regarding the Future is Wide Open campaign. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation: for this current fiscal year, how many pledge 
drives or other fundraising targeted activities has 
Saskatchewan Communications Network held; how many 
more are scheduled; and further to that, what is the total 
amount collected to date from these activities; and how 
much of that came from public donations; and how much 
came from corporate donations? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, also: 
 

To the minister responsible for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation: for the fiscal year 2002-2003, how many 



May 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

 

pledge drives or other targeted fundraising activities did 
Saskatchewan Communications Network hold; and further 
to that, what is the total amount collected; and how much of 
that was from public donations; and how much was from 
corporate donations? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll also ask the same question for each fiscal 
year dating back to and including 1991 and 1992. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation: could you please outline the 
tendering process for the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation for the sound stage for the year 
1998; and who was awarded the contract? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve similar questions for all the years up and 
including 2003. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Environment: for the fiscal 
year 2001-2002, how many SARCAN depots were forced 
to reduce their hours of operation; and in what 
communities; and further to that, were there any SARCAN 
depots that closed; and if so, in what communities? 

 
I also ask the same question for the fiscal year of 2002 and 
2003. 
 
I also ask the question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: for the fiscal year of 
2001-2002, did SARCAN implement any new programs of 
services; and if so, how many; what kind of programs and 
services; what communities were affected; and what were 
the implementation costs of these programs? 

 
And also for the fiscal year of 2002-2003. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to introduce guests in the east gallery. We 
have with us today Leona, Carla, Krystal, and Tyrrell 
Kwiatkowski. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, they are very close to the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus. We consider them a part of our 
family. They are very important to us and we’re glad to see 
them here. I know they also very much appreciated some of the 
tributes made on both sides of the House a few weeks ago in 
regards to the passing of Carl Kwiatkowski. 
 
So I would like to ask all members of the legislature to show 
their appreciation to the Kwiatkowski family by welcoming 
them to the Assembly today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wasn’t sure if I could be here as soon as the House opened 
today because of another appointment. But I couldn’t pass up 
the opportunity to introduce in the east gallery a fabulous group 
of students from the community of Allan, and they’re 
accompanied with their teacher, Noel Roche, and Theresa Field. 
And I met with them earlier and they had lots of questions, and 
I wish they have a great day and enjoy the proceedings that 
they’re able to watch. 
 
So would everyone please join me in welcoming the students 
from Allan to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Moose Jaw Band and Choral Festival 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, and all members, if you want 
to get your toe tapping and your fingers feel like popping and if 
you have the desire to hum along with some great singing, then 
as usual, Moose Jaw has the answer for you. 
 
Starting today and through Saturday, the 54th annual Kinsmen 
International Band and Choral Festival will be taking place at 
several venues in the band city. Forty-three bands and 20 choirs 
from Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Alberta will perform for 
renowned clinicians, for each other, and for the public. 
 
This aspect of the festival is not mentioned often enough, Mr. 
Speaker, but one reason it is so successful and unique is that the 
students compete not against each other, but against the ideal of 
musical perfection. A clinician listens to each group and 
encourages them, rather than ranking them. If I may say so, this 
is a particular Saskatchewan virtue which we are proud to 
encourage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the day, the performances are open and 
free to the public. Special performances tonight and tomorrow 
are only $5 — and well worth the price. Tonight’s featured 
group is the Swift Current Comprehensive Wind Ensemble, and 
tomorrow it’s the University of Regina Percussion Ensemble. 
And Saturday all day is, quote, Mr. Speaker, “Moosic Day” — 
that’s spelled m-o-o-s-i-c — it’s Moosic Day in Crescent Park 
at the bandshell, as bands and choirs perform free to the public. 
 
It’s just one more reason to come to Saskatchewan’s tourist 
mecca, Mr. Speaker. See you this weekend in Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Achievements of Young Hockey Player Noted 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
recognize this morning the achievements of a young hockey 
player from our area. Bud Holloway comes from the 
community of Wapella and has played most of his hockey and 
minor hockey in the Wapella-Moosomin area. 
 
Bud is 15 years old. He played this year with Yorkton Bantam 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2003 

 

AA Terriers out of Yorkton, and on March 31 was awarded the 
Clifford Bast Memorial Trophy as the most valuable player on 
his team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year in 64 games, Bud scored 90 goals and 
had 98 assists. He is a 6-foot youngster and most recently was 
eligible for the WHL (Western Hockey League) draft. Mr. 
Speaker, Bud was selected 17th overall, and when you consider 
there are some 20,000 youngsters eligible for the draft — 243 
are chosen to be drafted — 17th overall is certainly an 
achievement. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Bud was drafted by the Seattle Thunderbirds of the WHL. Mr. 
Speaker, he will be joining another young player who’s 
currently playing with the Seattle Thunderbirds — Brooks 
Laich from Wawota. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this morning it would be certainly 
appropriate just to acknowledge the work and the effort, the 
hard work, the skating ability of this young hockey player, and I 
wish him well in his future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Highland Games 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The sights and 
sounds of Scotland are coming to Regina once again. This 
coming Sunday at the Douglas Park track grounds the Regina 
Highland Festival Association will be presenting the Regina 
Highland Games. 
 
The Highland Games are an enormous community event that 
features non-stop programming throughout the day and 
evening. 
 
There are children’s activities, heritage and vendor booths, a 
pipe band competition, a highland dance contest, and a heavy 
events strongman contest that will include the hammer throw 
and that most interesting of all strongman events, the caber toss 
— a caber toss essentially being a telephone pole that the 
contestants pick up and throw. 
 
This year there will also be an area of the grounds dedicated to 
celebrating the rich heritage of Celtic cultures where free 
workshops for Irish dancing, storytelling, and Celtic artwork 
will be staged. 
 
In the evening there will be a massive Scottish celebration 
called a ceilidh. This will feature live music and dance 
performances and a high-energy Celtic band. 
 
Mr. Speaker, competitors and participants travel from all across 
the Prairies to meet in Regina for this gathering and annual 
attendance is well over 3,000 people. 
 
I want to wish all the competitors, organizers, and participants 
the best for this weekend. I’m sure a great Gaelic time will be 
had by all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Benefit Concert for Estevan’s Craig Family 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, tonight 
at the Estevan Comprehensive School at 8 p.m. there will be a 
benefit concert for the Craig family of Estevan. The Craigs lost 
their home last November in a fire, their daughter has been 
diagnosed with diabetes, and a couple of months ago their 
three-year-old son was diagnosed with leukemia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all realize that with the time taken off work by 
the parents, travel and accommodations expenses can be a 
financial strain. So this great community is doing what it can to 
help. The Estevan Comprehensive School has donated its 
cafeteria; some chairs have been hauled out so people can dance 
to the music of polka great, Walter Ostenak and the 
Saskatchewan Western Senators. 
 
I encourage all people in the city of Estevan and surrounding 
area who are known for their generosity to support this most 
worthwhile cause. Hats off to the Estevan Comprehensive 
School teacher, Aaron Sklar, who within one week organized 
this event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must add that Bruce and Monique Craig were 
blessed with a new baby born just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we hope for a great turnout tonight at the Estevan 
Comprehensive School cafeteria at 8 o’clock. And I ask all 
members to join me in wishing the Craigs the best. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ag-West Biotech Bioscience Awards 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been 50 years since 
scientists discovered the DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) double 
helix that carries the genetic codes of living organisms and so 
opened up new avenues of scientific inquiry. 
 
To mark the anniversary of that discover, Ag-West Biotech 
Inc., the corporation mandated to support and promote the 
biotech cluster in Saskatchewan, has given out its own 
bioscience awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wilf Keller, research director for the Plant 
Biology Institute of the National Research Council, was 
recognized with a Bioscience Award in the lifetime 
achievement category. 
 
Lisa Jategaonkar, the information officer at the Plant Biology 
Institute, was recognized for her achievements in 
communications and public awareness. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, John Cross, co-founder, president, and Chair 
of Philom Bios incorporated, received the Entrepreneurial 
Leadership and Vision Award. Since its inception in 1980, 
Philom Bios has become an industry leader in the development 
and manufacturing of inoculants used in the pulse industry. 
 
The award for outstanding scientific achievement for a scientist 
still in the early part of their career went to Andrew Van Kessel, 
an associate professor in the University of Saskatchewan’s 
department of poultry and animal science. 



May 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

 

I ask all the members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating all the recipients of the bioscience awards on 
their achievement. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Juno Beach Memorial 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 6 the 
Canadian World War II memorial to the soldiers who 
participated in the D-Day landing will be unveiled at Juno 
Beach. 
 
The memorial is long overdue. After World War I, the Vimy 
memorial was begun within 10 years and opened in 1936. It has 
taken nearly 60 years for a Canadian war memorial to be built 
in Europe. 
 
So far seven provinces have contributed to the costs of the 
memorial. It is embarrassing that Saskatchewan has refused to 
participate. Mr. Speaker, Nova Scotia is a partner in the 
memorial for a contribution of only $25,000. 
 
Juno Beach was where the Canadian troops first landed. The 
Regina Rifles were among the first to land. All Canadians will 
celebrate the unveiling of the Juno Beach memorial on June 6. 
It will be a shame if Saskatchewan residents are not able to 
fully participate in this significant event because our 
government refused even a token contribution. 
 
I ask the government to review their priorities and contribute to 
the Juno Beach Canadian war memorial on behalf of the 
grateful people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy is on a 
roll and a big reason for that is exports. Mr. Speaker, domestic 
and international exports currently account for nearly 70 per 
cent of Saskatchewan’s GDP (gross domestic product). Today, 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words about STEP, the 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, STEP was formed in 1996 as a joint venture 
between Saskatchewan industry and government to help 
develop the exporting sector of the economy. It is an initiative 
that has been especially helpful for smaller companies who 
otherwise may have lacked the resources to break into export 
markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as of 2003, STEP has 273 members, of whom 45 
per cent are located outside of Regina and Saskatoon and are 
providing jobs and opportunities in the rural areas of the 
province. STEP members are engaged in business areas as 
diverse as agriculture, manufacturing, and education. And, Mr. 
Speaker, last year they generated something in the 
neighbourhood of $3 billion towards the GDP. 
 
Here is an example of one initiative. STEP members worked 

with partners in Ukraine to help them develop expertise in beef 
and forage production. Saskatchewan companies were able to 
develop linkages resulting in sales of agricultural equipment to 
Ukraine at an estimated value of over $10 million. In addition, 
over $200,000 were generated in the services area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate STEP members for their 
hard work, confidence, and initiative. It’s thanks to people like 
them that the future of this province is indeed wide open. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Juno Beach War Memorial 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve talked a 
bit about some foreign investments, but you know there is one 
investment overseas that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government should be making and that’s in the Juno Beach 
Centre war memorial on the Normandy coast of France. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Juno Beach Centre is being built to honour the 
tremendous contribution that Canadians made in the Second 
World War to the liberation of Europe and the protection of 
freedom and democracy all over the world. Seven provinces 
have contributed to the Juno Beach Centre, some as much as $1 
million. However, the Saskatchewan government has given 
nothing. They say that this memorial and all that it stands for is 
not a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government change its position and 
contribute to the construction of the Juno Beach Centre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
can confirm to the member opposite that we will be funding the 
Juno Beach War II memorial at the same level as Nova Scotia. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Out-of-Province Investments 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation. This morning the Leader-Post is reporting that 
executives at Saskatchewan’s 10 largest Crown corporations 
spent $806,000 on out-of-province travel in the last year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not unreasonable for senior Crown 
corporation executives to travel out of province on business. 
But taxpayers deserve to know what the return on investment 
has been for this out-of-province travel. But unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, that return is zero — not one red cent of profit on any 
out-of-province equity investments that the NDP made in the 
last year. In fact it’s even worse than that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that the NDP has lost 
money on every single out-of-province equity investment the 
government has made since 1995? 
 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
members from the Sask Party should know what the return on 
investment is, Mr. Speaker. It’s 9,000 jobs here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; it is partnering with 600 different 
companies here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; it is buying 
goods and services from 12,000 businesses here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is returning to the people of Saskatchewan a 
dividend of $300 million last year alone, Mr. Speaker, just to 
provide good service here in our province, Mr. Speaker. It is 
retaining head offices here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 
I could go on and on about what the return on investment is for 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the minister didn’t 
hear the question because it was about out-of-province 
investments. The minister knows full well that the NDP has lost 
taxpayers’ money on every single out-of-province equity 
investment the government has made since 1995. And during 
that time every single dime of profit earned by Saskatchewan’s 
Crown corporations have been earned providing services in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that every single dime of 
profit that the Crown corporations have made last year was 
made in Saskatchewan, and every single out-of-province equity 
investment has been a multi-million-dollar loser? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
answer to that question is absolutely no. The Sask Party 
opposite were actually handing out documents in the rotunda 
the other day that in fact proves that they are wrong, which is a 
bit ironic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The net — the net to the people of Saskatchewan of 
out-of-province investments from SaskTel alone, Mr. Speaker 
— is in excess of $95 million, Mr. Speaker. The net profit, the 
net benefit to the people of Saskatchewan, in excess of $95 
million, Mr. Speaker. And that money is returned to improve 
and better services here in our province, here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that 
the minister raised SaskTel because SaskTel executives spent 
$254,000 on out-of-province travel. But every single one of 
SaskTel’s six out-of-province equity investments is losing 
millions of dollars. Retx in Atlanta, Georgia lost 14.5 million. 
Navigata in Vancouver lost 13.5 million. Persona Inc. in 
Newfoundland lost 9.4 million. Craig Wireless International 
lost 10 million. Tappedinto.com in Nashville lost 2.4 million. 
And the grand winner, Austar Communications in Australia, 
was written down by a whopping $40 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that SaskTel’s six 

current out-of-province equity investments have lost the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan a grand total of $89 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again I 
will remind the members that SaskTel has provided, first of all, 
amongst the lowest cost service in the province and the highest 
quality, Mr. Speaker. And it has provided, Mr. Speaker, it has 
provided services in all parts of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while the member from the Sask Party opposite is talking, 
Mr. Speaker, let me make some comparisons. Let me compare, 
as an example, Mr. Speaker, what our Crown president for 
SaskTel gets in remuneration as compared to a fairly 
comparable MTS (Manitoba Telecom Services), Mr. Speaker, a 
company in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. The CEO (chief executive 
officer) from, the president of MTS, Mr. Speaker, makes in 
excess of four times what our president makes, Mr. Speaker — 
in excess of four times. 
 
(10:30) 
 
And arguably SaskTel would have probably the strongest 
telephone company in all of Canada right now, Mr. Speaker, in 
all of Canada. Rather than criticize we should be proud of what 
we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It might be 
interesting to note that the president of MTS is in a province 
that’s growing, Mr. Speaker, not in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP doesn’t like to talk about its dismal 
record of out-of-province equity investments at SaskTel. So 
maybe the minister would tell us about the NDP’s return on 
investment from out-of-province investments at SaskEnergy. 
 
SaskEnergy senior officials spent $256,000 on out-of-province 
travel last year. But according to SaskEnergy’s 2002 annual 
report, its out-of-province equity investments in Chile and 
Mexico have lost $5.1 million. 
 
SGI’s (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) senior executives 
spent $62,000 in out-of-province travel last year. And SGI’s 
investment in Coachman Insurance in Ontario lost 17 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations are losing 
money everywhere but in Saskatchewan. Why does the NDP 
insist on squandering those profits made in Saskatchewan by 
blowing millions of dollars in high-risk business ventures 
around the world? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
member opposite says that MTS is in a province that’s growing, 
Mr. Speaker. You’re darn rights it’s in a province that’s 
growing. And in case people don’t know, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
another New Democratic government that runs that province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

 

Mr. Speaker, and you know what — you know what? The irony 
of it is, do you know what the opposition are saying in 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker? The opposition in Manitoba, during 
this election campaign, are criticizing the New Democratic 
government because, Mr. Speaker — and listen to this — 
because they are not offering as low a tax rate and benefits as 
the Saskatchewan New Democrats are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Isn’t that interesting? Their cousins are critical of New 
Democrats in Manitoba because they’re not offering as good a 
rate on services and on taxes as Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, get on with it, get on board, work with us, support 
our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. Don’t on a daily basis 
stand here and criticize them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Saskatchewan would like to work. They’d like to 
work in Saskatchewan, with Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not 
run around the world. But the NDP doesn’t want to talk about 
their . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, members. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
doesn’t want to talk about their multi-million-dollar, 
out-of-province business gambles that are losing millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars. Isn’t it time, Mr. Speaker, that the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan stopped subsidizing the NDP’s foreign 
adventures and high-risk equity investments around the world? 
 
Last year our Crown corporation executives spent over 
$800,000 in out-of-province travel, but the return on that 
investment for Saskatchewan taxpayers was more than $100 
million of business losses — losses, Mr. Speaker. How much 
more taxpayers’ money is this NDP government going to blow 
on high-risk business adventures in places like Atlanta, 
Nashville, Australia, or Ontario before they admit that their . . . 
the NDP’s out-of-province business record is a dismal 
multi-million-dollar failure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again 
I’m going to remind the member, first of all, that by their own 
admission, Mr. Speaker, the documents that they handed 
around, the net — the net, Mr. Speaker — profit and benefit to 
the people of Saskatchewan was in excess of $95 million. And, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, into the future that number will grow 
to benefit people so that they get even improved services here in 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, it is a bit ironic coming 
from that Sask Party that when in the 1980s when the president 
of SaskPower at that time, Mr. Speaker, made something in 
excess of $400,000, made something in excess of $400,000, and 
that doesn’t include travel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we could eliminate all the travel of 
our CEO, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, would still be . . . would still benefit to an excess of 
$100,000, if you consider what was paid when they were in 
charge of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sex Offender Registry 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Justice. Mr. Speaker, yesterday in light of the tragic murder of 
Holly Jones, a 10-year-old girl in Toronto, both Ontario’s 
Public Safety minister and the Toronto police chief reiterated 
the immediate need for a national system to track known sex 
offenders. The federal government has been proceeding but it is 
a frustratingly slow process. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, other provinces have taken a leadership 
role and taken steps to protect their citizens, but as usual 
Saskatchewan has done nothing. Despite our Premier’s 
statement in the 2001 Western Premiers’ Conference that if the 
federal government doesn’t act, then the provinces should move 
forward on their own, Saskatchewan has done nothing in two 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government compromising the 
safety of Saskatchewan people and particularly our children by 
its inaction in setting up a provincial sex offender database? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this area has been of concern 
to our government for a long time, and we have worked, we 
have worked very carefully with our colleagues across the 
country. 
 
The federal government introduced legislation to set up a 
national system last December. Our officials are working 
together with the federal people on setting this process up. 
We’re doing that so that we can have a system that covers the 
whole country. We think that’s the best way to do it, in a 
careful, reasoned fashion. And that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister claims that this province is working on the national sex 
offender registry. I happen to have talked to the Solicitor 
General in another province. The solicitor generals met and say 
that Saskatchewan is sitting on their hands doing nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is the federal government’s progress 
toward the development . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, members. Order. 
Order. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, not only is 
the federal government’s progress towards the development of 
this national sex offender registry way too slow but there are 
some serious flaws in the registry legislation that have 
presented. 
 
And the greatest of those flaws is the fact that the registry will 
not be retroactive, which means that people who have 
committed and been convicted of a sexual offence in Canada 
prior to the registry being put in place will not be listed in the 
database. They will have to reoffend to be included in the 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2003 

 

registry. 
 
Predators like Paul Bernardo and Karla Homolka will not be 
included as it stands now. Mr. Speaker, that is an inexcusable 
and a very blatant flaw in the federal plans for a national sex 
offender registry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is our minister in Saskatchewan, what is he 
doing here to lobby the federal government to change their 
proposed legislation to ensure that it’s retroactive so that all 
known sex offenders in Canada are included in the national sex 
offender registry at the time of its inception? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to answer that 
question. In November last fall, the solicitors generals met as 
basically the ministers of Justice to discuss this legislation. It 
was then brought forward by the federal government on 
December 11, 2002. The Bill received second reading on 
February 21, 2003, was referred to committee. 
 
A number of these issues that the member opposite has raised 
are being discussed in committee and they’re trying to sort out 
how to deal with some of these things. We have to work within 
the Charter of the Constitution of Canada as we develop this. 
Our RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officers, our 
Saskatchewan Association of Police Chiefs, together with 
Justice officials, are all part of this ongoing discussion. 
 
We need to have a system that works for the whole country and 
works for and protects individual people in our province and in 
every province. We have to do that together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — We do have to do this together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of the delays by the federal government in 
establishing the national sex offender registry and the serious 
flaws in their legislation, there have been several other 
provinces that have taken decisive action and been proactive in 
establishing their own databases of known sex offenders in 
order to assist the provincial police forces and to protect their 
citizens. Ontario, Alberta, and Manitoba have all established 
their own databases and Web sites of convicted offenders who 
may pose a risk to people’s safety. 
 
The NDP government in Manitoba launched their site just last 
month. Pictures and descriptions of offenders who are 
considered to be at high risk to reoffend are on the site, which 
can be used by Manitoba residents and by Manitoba police 
services as a public awareness tool. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the interest of protecting Saskatchewan citizens 
and especially our children from known sex offenders, will the 
minister commit today to follow the lead of those other 
provinces and establish a sex offender database or public Web 
site in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we need in this country 

is a national registry and we’re going to work towards that. 
 
What we have in our own province is a legislation which 
actually protects police forces and police officers if they wish to 
provide information. That’s something that we introduced — 
the first place in Canada to do that — a number of years ago. So 
some of the kinds of protections that are there around providing 
information, we have a system and a committee that works with 
the police forces in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s very important that we make sure we have a system 
where it covers the whole country because people are mobile — 
they move from place to place — and we need to work together 
and we’re going to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for Election 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier says his chances in the next election are excellent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — He says the polls are sky high. He says the 
polls are great. In fact things are so good he can just hardly wait 
to get at it. For two years now he’s had to restrain himself from 
calling an election. 
 
The member for Nutana says there’s going to be a rumble in the 
jungle. Well I predict somebody is going to get gored in 
Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my question for the 
Premier is this: if he’s really so confident, if the polls are really 
so great, why doesn’t he just call the election and make my 
day? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier will call the 
election in due time. And the member from North Battleford 
should prepare himself for an election. Clearly, clearly when the 
member from North Battleford looks at the polling, he will see 
that in and across the province today we are in a dead heat for 
sure across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, that the polls will say . . . 
And I hear, Mr. Speaker, I hear, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of 
the Opposition for the Saskatchewan Party chirping from his 
seat. And it’ll be real wonderful, Mr. Speaker, when we get into 
the election campaign. 
 
And I know that he too, the Leader of the Opposition, is 
wanting an election in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Because the 
Leader of the Opposition and the member from North 
Battleford were both . . . After the next election, Mr. Speaker, 
one will go back to his law firm; the other one will go back to 
the farm, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

 

SaskPower Policy on Firefighting Expenses 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, last 
summer SaskPower equipment was responsible for starting two 
fires in the Outlook area, fires that the Outlook fire department 
responded to and put out. 
 
Well last week I asked the minister if SaskPower would pay the 
firefighting costs. And what was the first thing the minister said 
was no. But then he said he would have SaskPower review the 
matter and see if they could compensate the town of Outlook. 
 
(10:45) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Has 
SaskPower reconsidered their position? Will they reimburse the 
town of Outlook for firefighting costs incurred while putting out 
fires started by SaskPower equipment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I committed to 
the member from Arm River that I would have SaskPower 
review that case again. That is happening. I’m expecting a 
response very shortly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for Election 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m tired of sitting here by 
myself, and the time, the time is ripe for a huge Liberal revival. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is still wandering around the world 
looking for places to lose money. Hopefully they’ll find some 
Club Med resort that will agree to serve black french fries with 
the sundowners. 
 
The Sask Party has Schmidt on its hands. I don’t know how 
they expect to run the province when they can’t see the forest 
for the trees. 
 
Will the Premier call an election so that instead of singing solo, 
I’ll have a whole Liberal chorus here? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the people of Saskatchewan elect 10 Liberals, 
we’ll turn this House upside down. If they elect 40 Liberals, 
we’ll turn this province right side up. 
 
I don’t blame the Premier for being scared of the Liberals but 
will he screw up his courage and call the election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, having 
listened to the member from Battleford through his comments 
that he made in calling for the election, it is clear that he will 
have a new career after the next election. He can be a stand-up 
comedian, Mr. Speaker, and work across Saskatchewan. 
 
But the member from North Battleford should keep his powder 
dry because the Premier is considering over the weekend about 
having an election in Saskatchewan. 
 

And the member from North Battleford can start to pull out his 
law texts and his law books and begin to refresh his mind, 
refresh himself again on his requirement to go back to his law 
career, Mr. Speaker, because in North Battleford we have an 
excellent candidate in Mr. Taylor who understands not only, 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan scene, Mr. Speaker, but also 
understands the federal scene and will be able to deliver for 
Saskatchewan a far larger chunk of resources for our province 
from the national government than the member from North 
Battleford has who’s been sitting here as a Liberal now for the 
last several years. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, there’ll be a gore all right in North 
Battleford, and there’ll be the gore of the member from North 
Battleford when it’s done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, to call or not to call, that is the 
question. Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer the slings 
and arrows of outrageous fortune or to take arms against a sea 
of troubles. That’s what the Premier’s got to decide. 
 
If the circumstances are as favourable as the Deputy Premier 
says, what’s holding them back? Why doesn’t he get off the 
fence? It must be getting awful sore. 
 
I say to the Premier, if you’re so tempted to go, why don’t you 
go? Are you going to call the election this year, or will it be up 
to the Lieutenant Governor to call the election next year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member from North 
Battleford, as I said earlier, should stay tuned because he’ll hear 
soon enough about the next election. And the member from 
North Battleford will not want the next election to be over in a 
hurry for him, Mr. Speaker, because he won’t be sitting in that 
chair when it’s finished. 
 
And nor, Mr. Speaker, will the member from the Saskatchewan 
Party be here, because I say this, Mr. Speaker. They have not 
called in the last couple of weeks, the Saskatchewan Party, for 
an election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why is it that they haven’t called for an election, Mr. Speaker? 
Because when they look at what’s happening in their polls, Mr. 
Speaker, on quality of life issues, on health and education and 
highways and environment, they’re dropping like a rock, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And they haven’t asked about an election, Mr. Speaker, because 
when they look at the polling on the individual, leader to leader, 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition from the 
Saskatchewan Party trailing by over . . . by 50 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, is what’s happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And he’s got the problem that the member from North 
Battleford talks about. He’s got the Schmidt problem, and he’s 
got the investment problem. And when the next election comes, 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House you’ll see a government 
return a larger majority and they’ll be gone back to their old 
professions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1116 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2003 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member . . . 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please, 
members. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — For a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday of this week I 
raised the point of order regarding letters that were quoted from 
by the minister. The minister quoted from two different letters. 
The Minister of Agriculture quoted from two different letters. 
He has since tabled one letter but has failed to table the second 
letter. 
 
And right in Hansard, page 1051, it states that: 
 

I have a letter here, Mr. Speaker, . . . (the letter is) written 
. . . by Mr. Peters. And he says . . . 

 
That’s a direct quote, “he says,” he’s not paraphrasing. And he 
goes on to quote the letter talking about the potato industry and 
how he wants to grow 400 acres. It’s a direct quote from a letter 
that I had asked for that letter to be tabled. You’ve already ruled 
on it, said that it should be tabled. In fact, the minister himself 
has stated that he would be glad to table the letters — not letter. 
And that’s all we’ve received so far is one letter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, when I, when I said to the 
House, Mr. Speaker, and to the member opposite that I would 
table my letters, I made reference, Mr. Speaker, to the letters of 
which I was referring to. 
 
I quoted from, Mr. Speaker, from the letter from Ms. Buhr, and 
that letter I had expected would have been tabled on Tuesday 
when I said I would table it. What I did with the letter, Mr. 
Speaker, is sent it to the Hansard and expected that it would 
make its way into the House. It did not make its way into the 
House, Mr. Speaker. And I apologize for it not making it into 
the House because it was a procedural process that I should 
have known and it did not occur, Mr. Speaker. So we held that 
letter for an additional day. It should have been here yesterday 
to the House and to the members as they’d requested. 
 
The second letter that I made reference to, Mr. Speaker, I did 
not quote from the letter, Mr. Speaker, I made reference to the 
letter. 
 
And I made reference, Mr. Speaker, to a third letter, Mr. 
Speaker. I made reference to a third letter, Mr. Speaker, of 
which I said I had in possession. 
 
And I said that on the onset I had three letters of which I was 
making reference to. The one I quoted from, Mr. Speaker, and 
in Beauchesne’s . . . The member from Indian Head-Milestone 
is correct . . . (inaudible) . . . quoted from it. From those letters 
from which I quote, I should provide them to the House and 
have. And would have done that yesterday had it not been for 

the procedures of not having tabled it and my staff had sent it to 
Hansard as opposed to it coming here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’ve tabled the letter, Mr. Speaker, of which I made 
reference to and read from in quote. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, I made reference. And I made 
reference, Mr. Speaker, not only to the letter from Mr. Peters 
but I also made reference, Mr. Speaker, to another letter that I 
have from the, from the environment crop development fund, 
Mr. Speaker. And I also made reference, Mr. Speaker, and I 
also made reference, Mr. Speaker, also made reference to a 
meeting that I had in, that I had in Outlook . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, members. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, members. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Members, this is not an item of debate at this stage nor is it an 
item for some other type of unruly discussion. I’m trying to 
entertain a point of order and I ask the member to complete his 
point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, when I was making reference 
to my knowledge of the potato industry in the Outlook area I 
made reference, Mr. Speaker, in my comments, to the letter that 
I had that I did not table and that I did not read from, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Peters. I made reference from 
the irrigation crop development letter that I have, Mr. Speaker, 
that I did not make . . . that I made reference to and did not 
quote from, Mr. Speaker. And I made reference, Mr. Speaker, 
from a meeting that I had in Outlook with individuals from that 
area who are community leaders and innovators and developers. 
And I made reference, Mr. Speaker, in my comments, to them 
as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve tabled the letter of which I quoted from, 
and Beauchesne's clearly states that I should, should table those 
letters. And I have in fact tabled that letter, Mr. Speaker, as was 
requested by the leader . . . by the member from Milestone. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — On the point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Point of order. Would the member state his 
point. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on page 1050 of Hansard to . . . in relationship to the issue at 
hand, the Deputy Premier said: 
 

. . . Mr. Speaker, I have here a letter here from Lindylou 
Buhr who is a potato producer in that area, Mr. Speaker, 
and she writes . . . She said: 

 
And then he provided the quote. And that is the letter that the 
opposition has received. But he went on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I have a letter here, Mr. Speaker, that’s written to me by 
Mr. Peters. And he says, Mr. Peters says: 

 
And then he quotes him. Mr. Speaker. That letter has not been 



May 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

 

supplied by the Deputy Premier. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Moose Jaw North 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to the point of order as well. 
 
The Speaker: — Same point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Same point of order. Mr. Speaker, we have 
heard the Minister of Agriculture make reference to the context 
with which he presented his response in the House two days 
ago. He made reference to a particular letter and provided a 
quote and has tabled that letter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note when I listened to the very words that the 
House Leader from the Sask Party just referred to, you’ll note, 
Mr. Speaker, he did not use the phrase, I quote. 
 
We’ve heard the, we’ve heard the . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. We have heard 
the explanation of the Minister of Agriculture who has said that 
he was paraphrasing. You will recall as well, Mr. Speaker, in 
making ruling that the context is also to be considered and you 
will recall, Mr. Speaker, I suspect . . . Mr. Speaker, if I can have 
the order of the House, please. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I specifically note that — and the tapes, the tapes 
of the Legislative Assembly will show this — that when the 
Minister of Agriculture was making reference to the 
communication from another person, he was looking directly at 
you, did not look at the paper, was not providing a direct quote, 
and provides, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to review the record. 
Part of the record is the tape record, Mr. Speaker, which I think 
will . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order. Would the 
member complete his statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I suggest 
that as part of the review of the record, that the tape available 
will assist you in determining that, as a matter of fact, the 
Minister of Agriculture was not providing a direct quote 
because he was not referring to a piece of paper; he was looking 
directly at you when he was making his remarks. 
 
And the evidence is available, Mr. Speaker, to point out that the 
Minister of Agriculture was paraphrasing. Under the rules of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, clearly the minister has followed the 
rules of the House and I would ask that you would find the 
point of order out of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — On the same point of order. Mr. Speaker, in 
light of the fact that the suggestion was made by the Deputy 
House Leader of the government that he review the tape, I’d ask 
that you also look at the comment in Hansard, which when the 
member for Yorkton made reference to the leader and he said 
my constituency leader, he referred to obviously a direct quote 

because he would not have been referring to the Leader of the 
Opposition as my constituency leader. He was referring to the 
comments made by Mr. Peters. 
 
(11:00) 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, I suggest, that you review the letter to see 
whether or not the direct quote matches what’s in Mr. Peters’s 
letter in making your determination. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, the issue has 
grown far more complicated than I had initially regarded it with 
some of the comments made here today. So I would just like to 
take some time to think about this and then bring back a ruling 
at a later time. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 267 through 278 inclusive, Mr. 
Speaker, in the atmosphere of being honest, open, and forthright 
so that the members opposite can do their job. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 267 through to 278 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
This Bill is one of two omnibus Bills containing amendments to 
18 different Acts. The amendments will enhance the ability of 
the Government of Saskatchewan to respond to the threat of 
terrorism. This Bill enhances our ability to react to terrorist 
activity and the threat of terrorist activity by building upon 
existing infrastructure and existing powers. 
 
The amendments do not create a new emergency response 
scheme in the province, but instead expand the scope of existing 
legislation to apply to new kinds of threats. The objectives of 
this legislation are to enhance the province’s ability to protect 
the safety of the public, protect the health of people of 
Saskatchewan from biohazards associated with terrorism, 
protect the environment, protect and control access to Crown 
lands and natural resources. 
 
It also includes provisions to prevent identity fraud that may be 
used to further terrorist objectives, to prevent unauthorized 
access to information related to the investigation, detection, and 
prosecution of terrorist activities, to place stricter controls on 
private investigators and security guards, and to prevent 
fundraising for organizations that support terrorist groups. 
 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2003 

 

The way in which the Bill accomplishes this is through 
amendments to existing legislation. Wherever possible a 
common definition of terrorist activity contained in the 
Criminal Code has been adopted as a triggering mechanism in 
the amendments. The powers granted under this Bill will be 
engaged when terrorist activity has occurred or where there is a 
credible threat of terrorist activity occurring in Saskatchewan as 
determined by intelligence or terrorist activity in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Amendments to The Emergency Planning Act adopt the 
definition of terrorist activity from the Criminal Code. In 
addition, the Saskatchewan emergency planning unit will be 
renamed the Saskatchewan emergency management 
organization to better align with the name of similar 
organizations in other jurisdictions. 
 
Amendments to The Public Health Act are made to expand the 
current authority of the medical health officers over 
communicable diseases to deal with biohazards generally 
associated with terrorist activity. In addition, increased 
reporting requirements for those in the health care and 
education sector will assist in early identification and control of 
all kinds of health hazards. 
 
The law regarding isolation and detention orders has also been 
strengthened to allow officials to better enforce orders made to 
prevent or control the spread of public health threats. For 
example, a medical health officer can make emergency isolation 
and detention orders of up to 48 hours duration when it’s 
necessary to halt the eminent spread of a communicable disease 
or biohazard. In addition, health officers can now also enlist the 
assistance of peace officers to enforce such orders where an 
individual refuses to obey an order. The order can be extended 
by the Minister of Health. 
 
Amendments to the following Acts are aimed at preventing 
identity fraud and protecting provincial identity documents 
from being used to further terrorist objectives. In particular, The 
Department of Health Act and Medical Care Insurance Act will 
be amended with respect to Saskatchewan Health cards, and 
The Vehicle Administration Act will be amended with respect 
to drivers’ licences. The amendments to these Acts strengthen 
the ability of the province to demand further information and 
documents prior to issuing identity cards. Power is also given to 
cancel or suspend an identity card, registration, or licence. 
 
In addition, the fines have been increased to a maximum of 
$50,000 to reflect the serious nature of identity fraud and the 
furtherance of terrorism objectives. 
 
Amendments are also being made to legislation to better protect 
our environment from the threat of terrorist activity. 
Amendments to The Natural Resources Act will provide the 
Minister of Environment with the specific ability to restrict or 
prevent access to, and/or order evacuation of, regulated areas 
under the control of the provincial Crown. In addition, the 
maximum fine for breaches of the Act are increased from 
25,000 to 250,000. 
 
The Environmental Management and Protection Act of 2002 is 
also being amended. The amendments contain broader 
emergency powers for the minister to prohibit or curtail 

discharges of contaminants and toxins and to direct the proper 
handling and storage of hazardous substances — all with a view 
to prohibiting the use of such substances for unlawful purposes. 
 
Similar amendments to The Clean Air Act will allow the 
minister to shut down facilities that are contributing to air 
contamination and to direct that necessary action be taken to 
safeguard the public and the environment from threat of 
airborne contaminants. 
 
The Prairie and Forest Fire Act has also been amended to allow 
the minister to take preventative action and to restrict access to 
land where there is a threat of terrorist activities in such lands. 
In these cases, the minister may make emergency orders 
without the usual notice required under the Act. Again, 
maximum fines have been increased to reflect the potentially 
serious nature and the potentially devastating consequences that 
may result from a breach of the Act. 
 
Regulation-making power is created under The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act as well as The Pipelines Act to allow for 
regulations that will relate to threats to the security of our oil 
and gas installations by ordering the shutdown of facilities or 
such other security measures as may be necessary. 
 
Amendments to The Dangerous Goods Transportation Act 
allow the minister to respond to terrorist activity or to the threat 
of such activity by making orders to take action to protect the 
health and safety of people and prevent damage to the 
environment. In addition, significant fines may be imposed 
upon anyone breaching these provisions. 
 
The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act will 
be amended to allow the government to refuse to provide access 
to a record where its release would prejudice or interfere with 
the detection or prevention of terrorist activity. A further 
amendment would enable the government to share information 
relevant to the purposes of combating terrorism with other 
governments, government agencies, and certain prescribed law 
enforcement agencies. Similar amendments are proposed for 
The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act which governs municipalities. 
 
Two additional amendments are included in the Bill. The 
Private Investigators and Security Guards Act will be amended 
to allow the registrar under the Act to refuse or cancel a licence 
to a licensee who has attempted to obtain access to confidential 
information, the disclosure of which would prejudice or 
interfere with the detection or prevention of terrorist activity. 
 
A final amendment to The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses 
Act will provide the registrar under that Act with the ability to 
refuse or cancel a licence to an entity that has raised, or has 
demonstrated an intention to raise funds for a charitable 
organization that has links to terrorist organizations as 
identified under federal legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the effect of these amendments will not create a 
new regime to protect Saskatchewan from terrorist activities. 
The basic framework for emergency response in the province 
will remain unaltered. 
 
What this legislation does do is complement the federal 



May 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

 

Anti-Terrorism Act passed in 2001, and the Public Safety Act 
now before parliament. In many aspects it parallels the 
legislation that was passed in Manitoba and Alberta last year. 
 
Although other provinces have not seen fit to legislate in this 
area, we believe that this legislation provides meaningful 
amendments that will strengthen and enhance our ability to 
respond to the threat of terrorist activity. 
 
This is of course not the only response that the government and 
the people of Saskatchewan made to the events surrounding 
September 11, 2001. 
 
Part of my duties are to Chair the province’s cabinet committee 
on security, with my . . . where I am joined by my colleagues, 
the ministers of Justice, Health, and Government Relations. We 
have worked together in a number of areas to coordinate 
provincial responsiveness to various possible emergencies or 
threats. 
 
Improvements in communications with the federal government 
and other governments have taken place, including a new 
information-sharing protocol among key provincial departments 
and agencies. We have quietly made significant improvements 
in our ability to respond to this new kind of threat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members will appreciate I must limit my examples 
today because of the sensitivity of much of the information and 
the security considerations involved. Many of the front-line 
people responsible for emergency preparedness however have 
been actively improving those responses, including police, fire, 
health, and other emergency personnel. 
 
Although not the only response, we believe that this is a 
meaningful, measured, and balanced legislative response not 
only to terrorism but to other emergency situations that may 
arise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment 
Act, of 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, whenever I see an omnibus Bill it makes me nervous, 
because an omnibus Bill in its very nature is so wide and broad 
and covers so many of the provincial statutes that it’s difficult at 
times to determine just what effect it’s having in all areas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, security of the citizens of this province, of 
our institutions, of the state itself, is very important. We saw an 
attack of that terrorist activity on September 11 in New York 
City that I think is still having an impact on us all today, and 
this piece of legislation is an example of that kind of impact that 
it’s having. 
 
And so while terrorism is certainly very real around the world, 
we have not seen any direct evidence of terrorist activity, to our 
knowledge, in Saskatchewan, although there were reports right 
after September 11 that there may have been some connections 
with individuals coming to this province on potentially terrorist 
activities or activities that led to that terrorism, Mr. Speaker. 

And so while we feel that we’re a long ways away from where 
the terrorist activity takes place, in this world we’re only a few 
minutes or hours away from it at best, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s not just terrorist activity in the sense of someone 
attacking an individual or institution, but as the minister 
mentioned, it’s also terrorism of a biological nature or of a 
hazard in some other form as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Take a look at the SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) 
situation that is developing around the world. We certainly need 
to be able to martial our expertise and our health officials to 
combat that kind of a situation. And also, Mr. Speaker, to do 
what is necessary to provide assistance and protection to those 
people who, perhaps through the lack of common sense, don’t 
recognize that they are a threat to those around them and they 
need to be apprehended and treated, Mr. Speaker, to resolve the 
issues and the health concerns that they’re involved with. 
 
But you have to ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, in these very broad 
security measures, what impact does that have on the 
individuals? Does this type of legislation dealing with terrorism 
and biochemical threat, health threats, will this legislation deal 
as well with the individual that is causing a threat to others in 
the community because they have a communicable disease of 
some form or another that potentially threatens the life of 
others? Will they as well be covered under the broad definition, 
Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation brings forward? 
 
(11:15) 
 
We also need to be careful, Mr. Speaker, that the term, terrorist 
activity, is not so broad as to allow governments — not just in 
Saskatchewan but across Canada and across the world — to use 
those kinds of definitions to cover up other issues, Mr. Speaker. 
You know you look at the situation in China where the SARS 
health threat was taking place and the government was not 
releasing that information — not only just to their own citizens 
but around the world — so that other jurisdictions could take 
the necessary steps that were needed to prevent a SARS 
epidemic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we need to be careful in these kinds of legislation that we 
move as far as needed but not so far as to infringe on the basic 
civil liberties of the people of Canada. We have certain rights, 
Mr. Speaker, that are protected under the Bill of Rights and 
under our constitution. And while it’s a delicate balancing act, 
we also need to be very careful that we’re not stepping beyond 
those bounds. 
 
So while this is a very comprehensive Bill — it deals, as the 
minister said, with 18 statutes — it’s going to take some time to 
go through, Mr. Speaker, to determine exactly what impact this 
is going to have in all of those areas, what powers are being 
given to the government, what accountability and constraints 
remain in place to make sure that the government is moving 
ahead in a responsible manner, Mr. Speaker, both to protect 
people and to protect our rights as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would move at this time that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2003 

 

Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2)/ 

Loi corrective (gestion de la sécurité) de 2003 (no 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2). 
This is Bill 33 and it’s one of two omnibus Bills containing 
amendments to 18 different Acts. 
 
Two Bills were needed because of the amendments to The 
Change of Name Act and to The Vital Statistics Act, both of 
which have bilingual requirements. This Bill will also enhance 
the ability of the Government of Saskatchewan to respond to 
the threat of terrorism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I reiterate that keeping Saskatchewan individuals 
and communities safe is a top government priority. This Bill 
also enhances our ability to react to terrorist activity and the 
threat of terrorist activity by building upon existing 
infrastructure and existing powers. The amendments do not 
create a new emergency response team in the province but 
instead expand the scope of the existing legislation to apply to 
new kinds of threats and emergencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tragic events of September 11, 2001 caused 
people everywhere to rethink security and security 
management. This Bill is a result of that review process in 
Saskatchewan. The objective of the legislation is the same as in 
Bill 32, namely to enhance the province’s ability to protect the 
public and the environment. The way in which the Bill 
accomplishes this is through amendments to the existing 
legislation as well. 
 
The amendments to these two Acts aim to prevent identity 
fraud. We are protecting provincial identity documents from 
being used for terrorist ends and purposes. The strengthened 
provisions allow us to obtain more information before issuing 
identity cards. Again, the maximum fines have been increased 
to $50,000 in order to reflect the seriousness of identity fraud 
offences that may be linked to terrorism. These changes 
complement federal legislation and reinforce our commitment 
to keeping Saskatchewan people secure and safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2). 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to add a 
few words to the comments made by my colleague from 
Cannington. 
 
This Bill is very much related to the previous Bill. Again it’s a 
very sweeping Bill and it’s changing many . . . well, 18 
different Acts. And that raises some concerns that what the 
implications of changing that many Acts . . . Of course making 
it bilingual, of course, is a necessary requirement that should 
take place. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, concerning 9/11, obviously there was 
security concerns that were highlighted after the 9/11 tragedy. 
And we as a province and a nation, working with our friends 
around the world, need to work together to ensure the safety of 
our common citizens, Mr. Speaker, but I think we have to look 

at changes in legislation that may have changes to individual 
rights and freedoms in the province and in the country. 
 
There’s obviously a balancing act between security 
requirements and the rights and freedoms of the individual and 
that is something that we should not take lightly. And we 
should look at that in more depth as we, as our critic looks at 
this Bill and discusses this issue with the various stakeholders. 
 
As my colleague had pointed out, there’s various types of 
terrorism — not only the type that happened on 9/11, but 
bioterrorism is a serious threat, especially in our agriculture 
economy. There certainly is a threat to the individual far as 
bioterrorism and not only the other security, potential security 
problems with terrorism as far as bombs and those types of 
issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to change various Acts and 
legislation and bring in laws and so on and so forth, but it’s 
another thing to have the financial resources to deal with 
terrorism in our society. And I believe it’s very important that 
the government be in contact with the federal government and 
the federal authorities, and also the provinces, and also with our 
neighbours and allies around the world so that we coordinate 
security concerns, have it done properly so that it works well at 
the international border with the United States, but also works 
well with our trading partners around the world. 
 
And we will definitely take a serious look at this Bill and the 
other Bills that are introduced today, and our critics will be 
asking some very serious, important questions concerning this. 
And at this point I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Non-profit Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant 
la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Non-profit Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
According to data for the year 2000 gathered by Statistics 
Canada, Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of volunteer 
participation in Canada, with 42 per cent of Saskatchewan 
residents aged 15 and older volunteering on an annual basis. 
This government recognizes the significant contributions to 
Saskatchewan made by people in these organizations, these 
volunteer organizations, and the volunteers that devote their 
time and energy to their operation. 
 
The Premier has recognized the importance of the work of 
non-profit organizations through the establishment of the 
Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative — an initiative which 
seeks to build on an effective and collaborative relationship 
between the Government of Saskatchewan and the voluntary 
sector. 
 
The Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan recently issued 
a report entitled report on the Liability of Directors and Officers 
of Not-For-Profit Organizations. The Law Reform Commission 
conducted extensive consultations with volunteer groups in the 



May 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

 

province, and I would like to quote from their report. And I 
quote: 
 

During the course of the Commission’s consultation with 
the not-for-profit sector, we found that concern about 
liability is very real. While many volunteer board members 
are uncertain about the scope of their potential liability, 
almost all are uneasy about the changing climate in which 
they now operate, and many feared that board recruitment 
will become more difficult for their organizations. 

 
This Bill seeks to amend our legislation in a manner that will 
address these concerns and maintain a healthy non-profit sector 
in the province. It does so by following the recommendations 
made by the Law Reform Commission in their report. 
 
These amendments will enhance the protection from liability 
for directors and officers of not-for-profit corporations by 
providing that: (1) directors and officers of non-profit 
corporations will not be personally liable in any civil action for 
acts or omissions connected with their responsibilities to a 
non-profit corporation; (2) directors and officers of non-profit 
corporations will be covered by this immunity whether or not 
they receive compensation from the non-profit corporation; (3) 
however, the immunity will extend only to acts done in good 
faith and will not extend to fraud or profit taking at the expense 
of the non-profit corporation; fourthly, the immunity will not 
relieve directors and officers from certain statutory liabilities, 
for example unpaid tax remissions and unpaid wages pursuant 
to The Labour Standards Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will note that these amendments do not 
provide absolute immunity for directors of non-profit 
corporations. Directors who engage in dishonest or criminal 
behaviour or directors who act for personal gain will not be 
protected by these amendments. Furthermore, directors will 
remain liable under certain statutes for unpaid wages, for 
unpaid statutory remissions for income tax, employment 
insurance, and for certain kinds of environmental damage. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan legitimately require that non-profit 
corporations continue to be responsible and accountable to the 
public. The Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative seeks to 
ensure that the voluntary sector and the Government of 
Saskatchewan remain accountable for maintaining the trust and 
confidence of Saskatchewan residents by ensuring transparency, 
high standards of conduct, and sound management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments contained in this Bill seek to 
strike a balance between the need for public accountability of 
non-profit corporations and their board members with the need 
to provide protection to the many individuals who devote their 
time and energy to perform valuable community service as 
board members of non-profit corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased therefore to move second reading of 
The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we all know and recognize the importance of our 
non-profit corporations in this province. 
 
When you take a look at the non-profit corporations, they’re in 

every community. They facilitate every part of our social 
existence in this province, whether it’s the rink or whether it’s a 
group looking after FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) or whatever it 
may be, Mr. Speaker. We have a very, very broad range of 
non-profit corporations in this province. 
 
And indeed, the people who serve as directors in these 
corporations need to know that there is some protection in place 
for them when they’re carrying out their duties for those 
non-profit corporations. Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal of 
fear, in fact, in some of these organizations, when they 
participate in community activities, as to just what liability are 
they assuming by being a member of the board of a non-profit 
corporation when they partake in community functions. 
 
And one of those that I think that each and every one of us 
would recognize in our own communities is when an 
organization is putting on some sort of a social function in 
which liquor is involved, because the board of directors, the 
person who signs that liquor permit, is assuming a great deal of 
liability, Mr. Speaker, and they potentially put their livelihoods 
at stake in doing so. And this piece of legislation, I think, may 
very well provide them with some comfort that if they’re 
carrying out their duties in the proper manner, they’re carrying 
out their duties in good faith, that they will be protected. 
 
But I guess the real question has to come down to, then, what is 
the meaning of the term, good faith? If at some point in time 
within that corporation there’s an indication that the corporation 
has . . . a particular activity is not recommended and the board 
of directors carries on with that activity, have they now 
breached the definition of the term, good faith? 
 
And the minister is listening so I’m going to ask him to come 
forward when we get into Committee of the Whole sometime 
later, perhaps next month, to come forward with a definition of 
what he means by the term, good faith. What is the criteria for 
that? What would step beyond the bounds of good faith? 
 
(11:30) 
 
So that is one of the very areas I think that people across the 
province are very concerned about. If they believe that they are 
doing what is proper and right for their non-profit corporation, 
for their work in the community, what does good faith mean? 
Where are the lines on it? What qualifies it? And how will the 
courts perhaps interpret that as well, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Therefore I would . . . To give the communities, the non-profit 
corporations, the directors, a chance to review this piece of 
legislation to determine whether or not it’s what they feel they 
need for protection, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 
Subvote (CP01) 
 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2003 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I’m pleased to be joined today by Neil Yeates, who is the 
deputy minister of the department. Seated behind me is Terry 
Lang, the ADM (assistant deputy minister) responsible for adult 
corrections. Next to him is Mae Boa, who is the executive 
director of management services. 
 
We are also joined today by Ron Simpson, who is the director 
of custody for the young offenders program; and Tom Young, 
who is the executive director, protection and emergency 
services. 
 
Additionally we are joined behind the bar by Nick Surtees, 
who’s the executive director of licensing and inspections. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to 
officials again. We’re time-compressed, I gather, today. So I’ll 
have a few questions and then I’ll ask my colleague from Sask 
Rivers to . . . who has a few questions. 
 
My first question, Mr. Chair, to the minister is, we’re aware last 
time that we were up in the House on Corrections and Public 
Safety we were hard pressed to get answers out of the minister 
on a number of issues. In fact it became a debate about whether 
or not one can or should answer questions, as I recall, because 
there was very little forthcoming in the way of answers. 
 
So my first question to the minister today, Mr. Chair, is if he 
can provide me with the status of the overtime costs that I’d 
asked in the previous session. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, while I don’t 
agree with the member’s contextualization of the last time that 
we had an opportunity to discuss these estimates, I do 
nevertheless have the answers to the questions on overtime that 
he had posed in the committee. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’d like to thank the minister for the 
overtime costs because this is quite pertinent in looking at 
budget and budget rebasing that I was talking about. And I’ll 
have . . . I’ll take some time to look at this and the next time 
we’re up I’ll have probably some more questions with respect 
to that. 
 
My next couple of questions, Mr. Chair, deals with a recent 
notice that I received about a lockdown at the Regina 
correctional facility during Easter weekend. And I would just 
like to ask the minister if there was a lockdown during Easter 
weekend; how long the duration was, if there was a lockdown; 
and what precipitated the lockdown . . . Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, my officials advise me 
that there was no lockdown over the Easter weekend at the 
Regina facility, or I understand, any of the adult facilities in the 
province — no lockdown. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To the 
minister, the Saskatchewan Party has become aware — and 
we’d like some confirmation rather than hear what could be 
deemed idle gossip — would you confirm for us that on or 

about March 17, through that week, if there was a disturbance at 
the Pine Grove correctional facility in Prince Albert, and some 
details surrounding that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised that 
around that point there was in fact a disturbance in one unit at 
Pine Grove. An investigation has been undertaken. I understand 
they are in the process of working through the 
recommendations now to adapt what is necessary to make sure 
it doesn’t occur again. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Would the minister be able to provide for us today any 
information on whether there was any damage caused to the 
facility because of that disturbance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the 
detailed information here but the officials advise me that the 
damage was largely to fixtures, including light fixtures and 
toilets. I can provide the members with greater detail perhaps 
next time we meet. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. I wonder if you could also confirm for us, Mr. 
Minister, whether there was indeed a fire, a small fire or a large 
fire, that took place during the time of that incident, and 
whether outside sources were needed to be brought in to help to 
quell the fires? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m advised that the disturbance did 
involve some of the inmates setting fire to some items. P.A. 
(Prince Albert) Fire Department was involved in this as it is a 
procedure for us to call local fire agencies when these kind of 
disturbances occur. And they were called in. They participated 
with us and the matter was dealt with. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Would you also be able to confirm for us, Mr. 
Minister, that an individual who may have been . . . whose 
participatory rate in the incident may have been significantly 
higher than other inmates has actually been transferred to a 
federal facility at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’ll have to check to make sure. It’s our 
belief at this point that none of these . . . none of the individuals 
involved were transferred although there have been, there have 
been transfers to the federal facility, although it’s my 
understanding that it does not affect individuals in this 
particular case. 
 
Again, we’ll check back on this and return with a more 
thorough answer. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the incident of 
the fires and where the Prince Albert Fire Department had to be 
called in to help quell the fires, is there an extra cost incurred 
for the department because of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, actually the fire 
department did not extinguish the fire. The fire was out by the 
time they had entered the facility, although they did assist in 
clearing smoke out of it. There was also no additional cost 
incurred by the department for that service. 



May 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, was there a lockdown then in the facility that occurred 
because of this incident? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, there was in fact no 
lockdown as a result of this and programming was able to 
resume the next day in the facility. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. You had referred earlier to the fact that this is under 
investigation for internal purposes. Will the document be made 
public and will that . . . Is it normal then for these documents to 
be presented to the House just for public information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, it’s not our practice to 
make public reports, particularly as they deal with security 
matters. In the case of the Regina situation, there was an 
executive summary done of the report that was provided to the 
unions and we’ve had . . . I did make that available to the 
members of the media. 
 
We have not yet resolved whether we’re going to make that a 
regular aspect of this. We can explore that issue as we look at it. 
Part of it depends on what . . . how much of the matters are a 
result of direct security issues. Obviously we do not want to 
make public security related matters and so we need to be 
careful at times with the type of information and the amount of 
information we provide on this. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one final 
comment, Mr. Chair, to the minister. You made a good point 
about, you know, raising concerns about public safety issues. 
And maybe as a point to the minister and to his officials, is that 
in the incident such as at Pine Grove where the incident appears 
to have been dealt with rather quickly and efficiently, I think it 
would also be in the public interest if an executive summary 
could be provided to the media to help them understand that 
there is sound security measures being taken at all the 
correctional facilities in the province. And so that if there’s a 
perception of good security, it can be supported by good 
executive summaries brought forward by these investigations. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I just wanted to make you aware of that type 
of thinking that’s going on in the province. People want to 
know that our facilities are safe. You’re indicating to him I 
think a quick executive summary of successful incidences such 
as that where things can go wrong, and how quickly they can be 
dealt with by the staff — and effectively — that not only is 
there an appearance of concern for public safety, but it actually 
goes a step beyond that and people become completely aware 
that their concerns in the surrounding neighbourhoods are fully 
realized by the staff at these facilities. 
 
(11:45) 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I just want to toss that to you. And I 
certainly on behalf, thank your officials for coming out today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the 
member for his questions. Let me say that I generally agree 
with the assertion that he puts forward that both . . . there’s a 
public interest in a number of these issues. And also that it, I 
think, it’s helpful for us where we can increase the transparency 

of what is happening in these kinds of incidents, through the 
release of non-sensitive information, that we should endeavour 
to do so. I think it’s good both in terms of the union 
management relationship but also, as the member points out, in 
terms of public interest. This is an issue that we are . . . we have 
had under some active discussion. We’ll see how it works. But 
generally I agree with what the member is advocating. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
mentioned that there’s an executive summary of the report. And 
I missed the preamble. Is that from the escape from the Regina 
Correctional institute? And if so, would it be possible to receive 
a copy of that? If the media have it, I haven’t seen it published 
in the media. But I would like to receive a copy of that 
executive summary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I have a copy here that 
I can certainly send over to the member. This is the complete 
copy. The copy that was released to the media did not contain 
the names of the investigators. But I can certainly share that 
with the member. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’d like to thank the minister for that. 
Just a couple of questions on the overtime costs now that I’ve 
received this. And this is just a quick look at the budgeted and 
actual overtime costs. 
 
And when we look at the totals, it kind of jumps out at one. 
When you look at 2001-2002, budgeted was 1.5 and a bit and 
actual was 2.1 and some, give or take $500,000 in overtime 
costs, which is a fairly substantial amount. 
 
But then you jump to 2002-2003, where budgeted, basically the 
same as budgeted in 2001-2002, 1.5 and change, but the actual 
was 2.8. So that’s about $1.3 million of an increase. Can the 
minister give some rationale for this huge increase in overtime 
costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the member does point 
out that the budget for the last two years has been relatively 
stable at 1.5. I’m told that we budget on the basis of overtime to 
cover off running the facility on a 24/7/365 basis — that is 
around the clock, every day of the year, which takes into 
account overtime costs related to statutory holidays and such. 
 
The incremental costs that we see on the actuals fluctuate 
somewhat because it depends on a number of variables that 
change, everything from inmate counts, which is largely the 
driver here where we ended up with higher than expected 
inmate counts; or as the member has asked in the written 
question, some of the additional costs come from overtime and 
labour where we have special circumstances, either increased 
security need or a lockdown situation, these kind of things. 
 
I will say also to the member and members here, this is an 
interesting question in terms of how we should appropriately 
budget because there is this large variable here. Obviously 
we’re aware of the fact that there is pressure. Whether we can 
accurately . . . As the member had stated previously, should we 
constantly rebase the budget on the previous year’s 
expenditure? 
 
I think this is a good issue of debate. It’s one that I know we’re 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2003 

 

talking about internally as to how we better forecast what the 
overtime is based on the inmate counts. But it is our view that 
the . . . At this point it is a fair assumption that overtime costs 
will be based on those kind of things we can accurately predict. 
 
Should we go back and think again about what our realistic 
numbers are or what the potential impacts are? I think that’s a 
fair question. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that’s 
where I was coming from before when I asked about rebasing 
budgets. Because if one looks at the 2001-2002 and your actual 
amount was two point something million dollars in overtime 
costs, actual overtime costs, which rebasing is, you include that 
in your primary budget, and then add on another amount for 
budgeted overtime costs. In this case it would be 1.5 million. 
 
And that’s what I was referring to about rebasing. And I guess 
my question is, is that actually what’s being done, you’re 
rebasing your base budget by the amount of your overtime 
costs? One element of it only because there could be lots of 
other elements where you would be rebasing. 
 
But I understand the variables and some overtime costs. We 
don’t know if there’s going to be lockdowns. And I don’t know 
enough within the system because we haven’t got a full 
disclosure of how the management within the system works as 
to . . . For an example, in a lockdown, why would there be 
overtime costs in relation to a lockdown where in fact people 
are locked in cells twenty-three hours or twenty-three and a half 
hours a day, is some of the information that I have received? 
 
So my question back is, is rebasing used? Is this money 
included as part of the increase which is rebasing your actual 
budget estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, it’s difficult for us to 
move beyond the 1.5, $1.6 million figure for overtime because 
of the number of variables we have. 
 
I think the member asks a legitimate question. And it’s one that 
we are actively working on within the system as to how do we 
control the overtime costs, and how do we work with the unions 
in each of the facilities to make sure that we have a better 
accounting for . . . or maybe a better forecasting model for what 
that overtime is going to be. It’s our view that we need to bring 
the overtime costs down below that $2.8 million figure of last 
year. And that’s something we are working on co-operatively 
with the folks in the system. 
 
If I can address the other question the member raised, and that 
is around why there are additional costs as we deal with things 
like a lockdown. Because of the higher security level that we 
move the facility on to, we require additional staff. And just 
because the inmates are locked in their cells doesn’t mean 
there’s not a more dynamic approach that needs to be taken. 
This does increase some of the cost around the facility. 
 
So I don’t have the written answer to the question the member 
posed the other day, but that should be available in another day 
or so, particularly around the Regina lockdown. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I’d like to thank the minister for 

that answer because that was kind of my next question, was 
what would cause the extra staff during a lockdown. 
 
I don’t know if that was an explanation — you need more staff 
when everybody is locked down. I think for the layperson 
involved in this, you would think you would actually need less 
staff in a lockdown, although there’s heightened security. 
That’s why the people . . . the inmates are actually locked in 
their cells for 20-some hours a day. And I don’t think the 
security levels within the facility have to be increased because 
people are incarcerated within the confines of a cell. I would 
think escape is far more difficult from within the cell than it is 
from an auditorium, for an example. 
 
So I don’t know if there’s any rationale you can give me, why 
there’s more people that were required for security than in a 
lockdown period; and if there is, I could understand why there’s 
overtime. But maybe there’s something within the management 
of this that needs to be looked at, because again I don’t see why 
we need heightened security during periods where people are 
actually locked in their cells. If the minister could explain some 
of the rationale for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, there’s a couple of 
additional costs that we incur when we’re in a lockdown 
situation. First of all, we will employ . . . more hours of 
employees to go through and search the cells to make sure that 
contraband is not in the cells. We make sure that the facility is 
restored to a safe environment. 
 
Second of all, obviously when we’re in lockdown we don’t 
have inmates participating in activities that they normally 
would. This may include everything from laundry to kitchen 
duties, and so we need to bring in paid labour to replace that. 
 
Those are the two largest components of it. Obviously there’s 
additional risks that we have when we’re in a lockdown to make 
sure that we don’t have disruptions within the cells, and that’s 
part of what we also deal with within it. This is one of the 
reasons that we obviously try to keep the lockdown periods 
relatively short, both for the overall welfare of the folks who are 
incarcerated but also in terms of the costs that we bear. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the opposition critic for the 
area, the member for Wood River, for his questions, and the 
member for Saskatchewan Rivers for his questions today. And 
I’d like to thank my officials for coming out. 
 
I would, just before moving that we rise and report progress, 
certainly wish members opposite a good long weekend and 
indeed hope my officials are taking a long weekend also — 
maybe not quite as long as the members are. 
 
But I would move that we rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
the minister and officials also today. I think it was far more 
productive than the last time we met. In fact we did get some 
answers and the atmosphere was actually a lot more cordial 
than it was in, let’s say the last time. So I’d like to thank the 
minister and again thank the staff for the answers they provided 
today. 



May 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

 

The committee reported progress. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before I move 
adjournment I’d like to wish all members a good weekend at 
home with their constituents. We’re extending, by agreement, 
the hours of the weekend for members. So I wish all members a 
good weekend. Enjoy yourselves and see you back here on 
Wednesday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming everyone a good long weekend. 
It looks like the weather is going to finally co-operate for 
everyone and we’re going to have a nice, warm weekend. And 
I’m sure that all the members and the people working within 
our offices and within the Legislative Building will appreciate 
the weekend and the nice weather. 
 
And if, if by some chance there’s an election call, we’ll see 
some of you back after that. Have a good weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:03. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1108 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1109 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1109 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1109 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1109 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Moose Jaw Band and Choral Festival 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1109 
 Achievements of Young Hockey Player Noted 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1109 
 Regina Highland Games 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1110 
 Benefit Concert for Estevan’s Craig Family 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1110 
 Ag-West Biotech Bioscience Awards 
  Jones.........................................................................................................................................................................................1110 
 Juno Beach Memorial 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1111 
 Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1111 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Juno Beach War Memorial 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1111 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1111 
 Out-of-Province Investments 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1111 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1112 
 Sex Offender Registry 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1113 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1113 
 Call for Election 
  Hillson ............................................................................................................................................................................1114, 1115 
  Serby ..............................................................................................................................................................................1114, 1115 
 SaskPower Policy on Firefighting Expenses 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
POINT OF ORDER 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1117 
 
 



 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1117 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1119 
 Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2)/ 
 Loi corrective (gestion de la sécurité) de 2003 (no 2) 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1120 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1120 
 Bill No. 29 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2003/ 
 Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1120 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1121 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Corrections and Public Safety — Vote 73 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1122 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1122 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1122 
 


