















































Hansard: June 23, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1845 
 June 23, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf 
of people from my constituency who are concerned not about 
Highway 49, which I’m sure everyone is aware is in atrocious 
shape, but Highway No. 23. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 23 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in Porcupine Plain and 
surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Porcupine 
Plain and Weekes. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 43, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Ponteix, Gravelbourg, and Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine 
who are very concerned about the horrible condition of 
Highway 47. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Frobisher, 
Lampman, Colgate, and Estevan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to stand 
again on behalf of residents of the Southwest who have a 
constructive solution for the need for a brand new CT 
(computerized tomography) scanner for the Southwest. And the 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner to Swift Current and instead provide a new CT 
scanner for the Southwest. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from two 
communities: the city of Swift Current and the town of Cabri. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise again with a petition on behalf of residents of southwestern 
Saskatchewan who are extremely concerned about the condition 
of Highway 43. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Vanguard, 
McMahon, Swift Current, and Pambrun. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
on behalf of citizens of west central Saskatchewan concerned 
with the state of health care in the area. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is all signed by the good folks of Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens opposed to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
2003 premium increases to farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition for citizens concerned on the 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

condition of Highway 14. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair this highway in order to address 
safety concerns and facilitate economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as duly bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by people from Wilkie and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province who are 
very concerned with the inability of this government to resolve 
the issue in the Qu’Appelle Valley. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with First 
Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to its normal level and 
end the economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has 
caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from Pasqua 
Lake and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the education 
tax the people in the province pay. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Birch 
Hills, Prince Albert, Shellbrook, Holbein, and Mullingar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
signed by Saskatchewan people who are concerned that 
deregulation and privatization in the electrical industry is 
causing electrical rates to increase dramatically in other 
jurisdictions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 

 
And this petition is signed by people from Regina. 
 
And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — The following petitions have been reviewed and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received and 
tabled as addendums to previously tabled sessional papers nos. 
12, 13, 116, 120, 124, 140, and 141. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 69 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: under 
the Saskatchewan film employment tax credit, whom 
received payment for the production of the TV show 
Designer Guys? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 69 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: which native bands have 
taken possession of land being critical habitat and wildlife 
land; further to that, how many acres and where; also, have 
any bands applied for outfitting licences on these lands; and 
have any been approved? 

 
A second question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day 
69 ask the government the following question: 
 

Also to the Environment minister: which Act is your 
department introducing an amendment to, dealing with 
critical habitat wildlife land; further to this, when was this 
change made and was it done through cabinet or 
legislation? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to be introducing 
international guests from Chiapas, Mexico. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like of course to say welcome to them, and hola, and also 
in Cree, Ta wow. Ta wow in Cree means you’re welcome; this 
place is wide open for you. 
 
We have over at your Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker, George 
Ordoñez Ruíz, who is the president of the University of 
Chiapas. We have George López Arévalo, the vice-president of 
the university. 
 
We have Guadalupe Castillejos, coordinator of the masters 
program of indigenous education. And we have George Coello 
Trejo, who is the director of graphic design for the government 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

 

of Chiapas. And we have Gabriel González, the assistant to the 
president of the University of Chiapas. And along with them we 
have the interpreter and entrepreneur, Ruth Bleau who lives in 
Regina. 
 
Could I have all members to please welcome these international 
guests who are here, Mr. Speaker, to see not only the education 
and interchange that takes place between the democracies but 
also the historic opening of the First Nations University of 
Canada. 
 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member from Cumberland and on behalf of the official 
opposition welcome our honorary guests. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Spanish.) 
 
Nice to see you and I hope you enjoy the proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Soundtrack for summer in Saskatchewan is 
brought to us this week by SaskTel — it’s jazz and it’s sizzling. 
 
I’m once again happy to announce to the Assembly and to the 
public at large that jazz has arrived on the riverbank in 
Saskatoon and throughout Saskatchewan. And I’m even more 
pleased to say once again, as the MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) of jazz, that beginning on the 20th, this 
past Friday, and carrying through to this Sunday, the SaskTel 
Saskatchewan Jazz Festival is underway again. 
 
I’m happy to be the MLA of jazz as most of the venues for the 
festival are in my constituency. But more importantly I make 
this claim for, like all jazz lovers, I love a bit of syncopation 
and the spirit — the wonderful spirit — of improvisation. Jazz, 
Mr. Speaker, is a music that can make your spirits soar, and at 
the same time, you’re feeling the blues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is jazz and blues and gospel aplenty all day, 
every day. There are concerts by internationally recognized 
musicians like Joshua Redman, the Downchild Blues Band, and 
Holly Cole last night put on a fantastic show. And there are 
performances by many excellent homegrown musicians we 
have right here in Saskatchewan. There are university and 
collegiate bands, proving that jazz is the music of youth. There 
are performers like 80-years-young Ray Dahlen, who has been a 
fixture on the Saskatchewan music scene for more than 50 
years, and he’s played at all 17 festivals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you can snap your fingers and tap your toe, 
check out the 17th annual Saskatchewan SaskTel Jazz Festival 
this week. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Romanow Commission Expenses 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears that the 
Canadian Senate has something to teach Roy Romanow about 
fiscal responsibility. According to the Ottawa Sun, the 
Romanow Commission spent a whopping 3.2 million 
taxpayers’ dollars on media relations. We are told the 
commission hired 42 separate firms to do this work. Mr. 
Speaker, this is unacceptable — $3.2 million is almost a quarter 
of the $14.2 million total cost, a cost that is still rising. 
 
The Senate conducted a similar study, travelled the country, and 
published a five-volume report for less than $400,000. We have 
also learned that the Romanow Commission spent more than $1 
million on travel, meals, and accommodation. How is this any 
different than the unacceptable spending practices of Privacy 
Commissioner George Radwanski? Mr. Speaker, both have 
shown total disregard for public dollars and appear to have 
milked taxpayers for all they are worth. 
 
The whole point of the exercise was to improve Canada’s ailing 
heath care system, but what has changed? Has the health system 
in Saskatchewan or Canada improved as a result of the 
Romanow Commission? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the same Romanow, Premier Romanow, 
when he was premier of Saskatchewan and when he stepped 
down as premier, left behind him a legacy of the longest 
surgical waiting lists in the country, chaos in the workplace, a 
shortage of nurses, overtime out of control, record number of 
nurses on stress leave, doctors and specialists leaving, and 
frustration by the general public because their loved ones were 
unable to access timely appropriate care. 
 
Is it any wonder when $14 million later we have nothing to 
show for this abuse of taxpayer . . . 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask members to allow members’ 
statements to be heard. 
 

Community Initiatives Fund Grants 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning it was 
my privilege to present two Regina community groups with 
grants totalling over $7,000 from the Community Initiatives 
Fund to support their youth related summer programming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Rainbow Youth Centre received $3,200 for 
staffing their teen help centre. This centre will set up at the 
Regina Buffalo Days celebration to provide assistance to kids in 
need. Services that will be available at the teen help centre 
include immediate crisis intervention, counselling, agency 
referrals, and general information. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, Sacred Heart Community School received 
almost $4,000 for their summer fun zone program. This 
program will consist of morning reading and discussion circles 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

with the opportunity to invite guest readers and speakers from 
the community. The program will also promote healthy, active 
lifestyles for the kids, providing cooking lessons, arts and 
crafts, recreational activities such as swimming and biking, and 
field trips to Wascana Park, the Science Centre, the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) depot, public libraries, and 
other fun and interesting locations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government views supporting these kind of 
programs as investing in the future — the future of our children, 
the future of our families, and the future of our communities. 
 
I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in wishing the Rainbow 
Youth Centre and the Sacred Heart Community School every 
success with their summer programming and a summer filled 
with fun and learning. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

100th Anniversary of St. Peter’s Colony 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this year, 
2003, marks the 100th anniversary of the settlement of St. 
Peter’s Colony near Humboldt. 
 
A major celebration to mark this event will be held at St. Peter’s 
Abbey in Muenster the week of August 1 to 3. Civic and 
religious dignitaries will be invited, as well as people who used 
to live in that area. 
 
The main celebration will be Sunday, August 3, 2003. A mass 
will be celebrated in the morning with bishops and visiting 
abbots present, as well as many local parishioners and visitors. 
And a choir from Minnesota will sing at the mass as well as at 
an evening concert. 
 
A parade will be held in the afternoon and over 50 
organizations and businesses from the area will be part of this 
jubilee parade. A display of vintage machinery, an 
old-fashioned threshing demonstration, a display of artifacts 
from each community, musical groups, and visiting will be a 
vital part of the afternoon. On Saturday, August 2, an alumni 
reunion for St. Peter’s College will be held. 
 
Mr. Speaker, St. Peter’s Colony began in 1903, two years 
before Saskatchewan became a province. Benedictine monks 
from St. John’s Abbey in Minnesota accompanied settlers to 
Western Canada in 1903 to act as their pastors. And by 1906 
there were 6,000 new settlers in St. Peter’s Colony. Many of 
them came from Minnesota. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 100 years of successful growth is a significant 
achievement. Congratulations to St. Peter’s Abbey on reaching 
this most noteworthy milestone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ile-a-la-Crosse’s New Multi-use Facility 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s with great pleasure that I rise today to share some more 
good news from this government and for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

This morning my colleagues the Minister of Health and the 
Minister of Learning and I were in Ile-a-la-Crosse, and we were 
very pleased there to announce a $300,000 investment for the 
planning stage of a very special multi-use facility that’ll 
combine both a health care facility and a high school facility 
into one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a very exciting project. I am told that there’s no other 
community in the country that has both a high school and a 
hospital all in one building. This concept is another 
Saskatchewan first. The efficiencies and savings that’ll be 
achieved by building only one facility instead of two are 
obvious. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this project is more about cost saving. It’s 
about innovation, community spirit, and above all else about 
co-operation. 
 
The community leaders knew that Ile-a-la-Crosse needed a new 
school and a new health care facility. More importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, they all understood that people in the community are 
better off if the elderly people were in one health care facility 
and the young people in the school could spend more time 
together into one facility, sharing companionship, guidance, and 
caring, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they set about to make that 
happen in the design of one facility to do both. 
 
The people of Ile-a-la-Crosse should be congratulated for the 
innovation, Mr. Speaker. We recognize their great efforts at 
bringing so many community partners together on a project 
such as this. It is no easy task. It is much about co-operation. 
Mr. Speaker, the residents of Ile-a-la-Crosse and the 
surrounding communities have demonstrated the true spirit of 
Saskatchewan co-operation by working together to ensure that 
the needs of everyone are met in this new multi-use facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also announce a commitment . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Frenchman River Valley Gospel Music Jamboree 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, over this past weekend I had the 
privilege of participating as an emcee for one of 
Saskatchewan’s longest-running gospel music events, the 
Frenchman River Valley Gospel Music Jamboree. This . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. The member for 
Cypress Hills, but start over, please. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, over this past weekend I had the 
privilege of participating as an emcee for one of 
Saskatchewan’s longest-running gospel music events, the 
Frenchman River Valley Gospel Music Jamboree. 
 
This was the 12th annual weekend for this jamboree which 
featured a variety of musicians from all four Western provinces 
and drew people from every corner of Saskatchewan and well 
beyond our borders. 
 
Located in the expansive and beautiful Frenchman River Valley 
south of Shaunavon, this jamboree has provided music of 
outstanding quality and variety for many thousands of fans of 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

 

gospel music throughout the years. 
 
Starting at 6 p.m. Friday and running late into the night each 
day and through to Sunday afternoon, attendees were treated to 
the sounds of Southern gospel, bluegrass, traditional and 
contemporary genres, and even some ska music for younger 
fans. It came from soloists, trios, quartets, and even a choir; big 
bands and small groups, professionals and amateurs alike, all 
drawn by one unifying factor — a love of gospel music. 
 
And one of the strengths of this jamboree is the audience’s 
enthusiasm for good local talent, and once again this year we 
found that there was a real wealth of musical talent in the 
southwest part of this province. 
 
Now over the past 12 years, the Frenchman River Valley 
Gospel Music Jamboree has seen nearly every kind of weather 
situation. This year the rain stayed away. The skies were 
overcast and a strong breeze blew, but nothing dampened the 
spirits of those who had come long distances to take in this 
wonderful weekend. 
 
From the late night jam sessions to the home-cooked meals and 
even to new friendships, every fan got what they were looking 
for at this year’s event. My congratulations to the organizing 
committee and every one of the dozens of volunteers who 
helped make this annual gospel music event such a memorable 
and wonderful experience. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform 
Encephalopathy 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Alberta’s Premier will be 
arriving in Washington today for several days of meetings with 
American politicians and officials and he has publicly stated 
that he will be lobbying the Americans to lift the trade 
restriction they placed on Canadian beef. He will specifically be 
meeting with the vice-president of the United States, Dick 
Cheney, to present our case. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan should publicly applaud Premier 
Ralph Klein for his efforts to lobby the United States . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — . . . on behalf of the beef industry and on 
behalf of our province’s economy. 
 
Today Saskatchewan’s Industry and Resources minister is in 
Washington at a biotechnology conference. Mr. Speaker, is he 
also taking the time or making the time during his trip to meet 
with American officials and politicians to lobby on behalf of 
our beef industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!, 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, when the member asked her 

question she made the comment that Premier Klein is in the US 
(United States). And I think her words were, to present our 
position. And that’s exactly correct. 
 
Because in the meetings in Kelowna, of which I had the 
opportunity to sit into as well, Mr. Speaker, the Western 
premiers, the Western premiers, Mr. Speaker, agreed that when 
Mr. Klein, Premier Klein, goes to Ottawa, it was the objective 
and the responsibility of our Premier to talk with Ontario and 
Quebec to get them onside respecting a national strategy on 
compensation — of which our Premier was able to do — and 
then articulate to Mr. Klein the position that we as Canadian 
provinces would take to the US. 
 
Mr. Klein is articulating accurately. He’s articulating the 
position of Canadian premiers as it relates to the BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy) and the importance of opening up 
the boundaries, Mr. Speaker, and the borders. Because it was 
Mr. Klein, Mr. Speaker, who said that what will not be required 
here or necessary is for all of the premiers of Canada to begin 
the lobby. This will be done through one individual person, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s being done by Mr. Klein. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I’m pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that the 
premiers picked the premier that shows leadership most often. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan beef industry is about to enter 
its sixth week since the discovery of one cow infected with 
BSE. The price to the industry and to our economy is growing 
as the borders to some of our biggest international trading 
partners remain closed to Canadian beef. 
 
It’s my understanding that scientists from Japan are in Canada 
reviewing CFIA’s (Canadian Food Inspection Agency) 
investigation into the disease and that the international panel of 
scientists may release their complete written review of the 
investigation this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister provide an update as to the status 
of the international panel’s review and when the Japanese 
scientists may provide reaction on their findings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t get an opportunity to 
answer the latter part of the first question that the member asked 
me because she asked me what it is that Mr. Cline, 
Saskatchewan Mr. Cline would be doing in Washington when 
he’s there. 
 
Mr. Cline will be meeting with the other parts of the industry, 
Mr. Speaker. He’ll be meeting with Mr. Boyle from the 
American Meat Institute. He’ll be meeting with Dick . . . Mr. 
Newpher, who’s with the American Farm Bureau, Mr. Speaker. 
He’ll be meeting with Mr. Terry Stokes, who’s with the 
National Cattlemen’s Association, Mr. Speaker. And he’ll also 
be meeting with some of the staff, Mr. Speaker, from 
Veneman’s shop, we’re told. 
 
Now when the member opposite speaks about how it is that 
we’re coordinating the efforts in the opening of the border, it’s 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

done in this fashion, Mr. Speaker. Through Mr. Vanclief we’re 
dealing directly through our national government on the trade 
issue. Through Mr. Klein, the Premier, we’re dealing directly 
on the representation of the premiers across Canada to put that 
position forward on behalf of each of the provinces. 
 
With the cattle industry we have the Canadian cattle 
association, Mr. Speaker, that are dealing with the cattle 
associations in the US, monitoring and coordinating from that 
perspective. And, Mr. Speaker, from the Western provinces we 
met last week, of which I couldn’t attend because I was sitting 
in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but Alberta and Manitoba met 
with South Dakota and North Dakota and with Montana to 
coordinate the movement of the border from that perspective. 
Four fronts working, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Japanese market is also 
very important to the Canadian beef industry and it also is 
significant what their decision will be as to whether or not the 
borders will close. There’s implications there, Mr. Speaker. So 
does the minister have any thoughts on my last question, when 
the Japanese scientists may provide reaction to their findings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I don’t know the specific answer as to 
when the Japanese scientific community are going to prepare 
. . . and make the recommendation, Mr. Speaker. I know this, 
though, Mr. Speaker, is that our CFIA, our officials have 
provided all of the technical data that’s required for Canada to 
the US. The US is reviewing our data today to make a decision 
about the opening of the borders. 
 
The US government is having conversations today with Japan 
and with Korea regarding the scientific evidence that Canada 
has provided. The outcome of that decision yet, Mr. Speaker, 
has not been made because we’ve yet not had a decision from 
the US on Canada’s situation in terms of the movement of beef 
into the US. I expect that in short order as we’ve hoped for now 
for several days — 10 to be precise — that we would have had 
a decision out of the US yet. We don’t have a decision out of 
the US yet. 
 
I know that Mr. Vanclief is talking to representatives from 
Japan; I know that Mr. Vanclief is talking to representatives 
from Korea. But our biggest issue today, Mr. Speaker, is to get 
the borders into the US open. That’s what we’re working on, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, by all reports the CFIA’s BSE 
investigation was extremely thorough and it is expected that the 
international panel of scientists will report favourably. But ever 
since the case of BSE was publicly announced, the minister has 
raised expectations that the trade restrictions, particularly those 
imposed by the US, would be lifted in very short order. He’s 
repeated it numerous times, Mr. Speaker. That hasn’t been the 
case, and there is still no indication at all from the United States 
that the lifting of those restrictions is even imminent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for some realism. The beef industry 
needs to know where the negotiations with our international 

trading partners are at. And will the minister tell us if the 
borders to the US will open to the beef by July, or July 1, July 
28; is there any indication whatsoever? Realistically, when does 
the minister expect to see Canadian beef begin moving across 
the American border? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have said continuously 
what the Minister of Agriculture from Canada has said — that 
he’s in the midst of negotiating with the US government the 
opening of the borders. 
 
The decision about the opening of the border is not in the hands 
of the minister from Saskatchewan, nor is it in the hands of the 
minister from Ontario, or nor is it in the hands of the minister 
from British Columbia or Alberta. It’s in the hands of the US 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it will be the US government who will decide, in its own 
timely fashion that they will determine, Mr. Speaker — that 
they will determine. Not that the minister from Saskatchewan 
will determine or the member from Watrous or those others on 
that side of the House who pretend that they have some new 
information about agriculture or trade — that’s not where it will 
be determined, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It will be determined at the end of the day by the US 
government when they are assured, Mr. Speaker, that their 
evidence is complete and they are then prepared to do that. 
 
Our hope, Mr. Speaker, is that it will open very quickly. And 
we are looking forward to that opening as quickly as it can be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the situation in the beef 
industry is the most serious issue facing our agriculture sector 
and our provincial economy. Now that we know that there are a 
lot of NDP (New Democratic Party) MLAs on that side of the 
House that don’t believe it is all that serious because they have 
repeatedly said it is a waste of taxpayers’ dollars for this session 
to be continuing. 
 
However, the Minister of Agriculture was quick to chide the 
federal government for adjourning parliament last week in the 
face of this crisis. And the Premier, in response to questioning 
last week from the member from North Battleford, also 
correctly stated that there is still work to do on this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tomorrow the Saskatchewan Party is presenting a 
private member’s motion that if this session adjourns, the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture be directed to meet weekly 
to monitor the issues related to BSE; and should the United 
States border not be opened to Canadian beef by August 1, that 
this Assembly reconvene August 5 for a report from the 
committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government support that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I can say to this House today 
and to the people of Saskatchewan that the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, of which the members opposite would have an 
opportunity to sit if we were to proceed with this kind of an 
option, would be the last thing that I would give consideration 
to do at this point in time, with the inclusion of the standing 
committee, because to date, Mr. Speaker, the representation to 
any issue, in particular this one, from those group of men and 
women over there on one suggestion, Mr. Speaker, from one 
suggestion, Mr. Speaker, has not been evident anywhere. 
 
We already have, Mr. Speaker, today, we already have today in 
Canada on this issue, Mr. Speaker, a public policy. We have a 
public policy, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in Canada today we have a 
public policy on our approach to deal with this issue. We have a 
public policy, and the public policy includes today not only the 
Saskatchewan beef industry, it includes the Canadian beef 
industry, of which the Saskatchewan industry is fully engaged. 
Our public policy, Mr. Speaker, includes every province in 
Canada today to be called back on short order. Our public 
policy includes today the federal government’s intervention at 
the federal level with the national government and all the 
premiers. 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 

Water Levels in Qu’Appelle Lakes 
 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. Mr. 
Speaker, six weeks ago the Saskatchewan Party raised concern 
about a dispute between a number of First Nations and the 
federal government over flooding of First Nations land in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley. According to the provincial government 
news release dated April 17, failure to resolve the dispute will 
result in a serious decline in water levels this summer on Pasqua 
Lake, Echo Lake, Crooked Lake, and Round Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister advise the legislature what 
progress has been made in resolving this dispute? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no question that this is a very serious matter, and I can 
advise the Assembly that we have been on top of this matter 
from day one. We’re working very closely with all the parties 
involved. We’ve made a number of statements in the Assembly. 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I want to point out is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that the important part 
of governing is you want to make sure that you’re sitting there 
with all the facts before you. And we would ask all the people 
involved that are in the opposition not to interfere and to allow 
due process to unfold and to allow the . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, please, members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And to allow the respect to flow 
between all the parties involved, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s 
very crucial and that’s exactly what this provincial government 
is doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are sitting down with all the affected players. We’re sitting 
down, discussing all these issues with all the different Indian 
bands that are involved. We have a series of meetings, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re on this issue on a daily basis. There is telephone 
calls that are made on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker. We’re on 
top of this matter. We’re going to continue working very hard 
to try and resolve this matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would ask the members of the opposition, that if you 
have no solution then get out of the way. We’ll govern and 
we’ll make sure we govern fairly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Perhaps the minister should take his own advice 
and have the facts before him when he’s dealing with this issue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a letter to the editor of the Fort Qu’Appelle Times 
last week seems to suggest that there’s absolutely no progress 
being made over this dispute. Todd Peigan, a spokesman for the 
Qu’Appelle Valley Indian Development Authority says the 
province is not participating at all in negotiations over the water 
structures at Echo Lake, Crooked Lake, and Round Lake. 
 
And Mr. Peigan also says, and I quote: 
 

(The) ultimate decision by the Qu’Appelle Valley Indian 
Development Authority and (the government of) Canada is 
to decommission the control structures if the province is 
unwilling to negotiate. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what is this NDP doing . . . government doing to 
ensure that those water control structures are not 
decommissioned and that the water levels in the Qu’Appelle 
Valley lakes are not devastated as a result? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what I view across the 
way, Mr. Speaker, is an opposition party that’s sitting back 
saying, h’m, now this is a good government; they have done the 
largest income tax history . . . cut in the history of 
Saskatchewan; they’re fixing the roads . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Now they’re investing the largest investment in health care 
history, Mr. Speaker; they’re balancing this ninth consecutive 
budget, Mr. Speaker. Now how could we compromise that 
government, Mr. Speaker — that’s what they’re thinking. Now 
they’re scurrying around their backrooms; how could we make 
some trouble here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out that what they’re trying to do 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

today, they’re trying to say, hey, we’ll make them pay the 
federal government’s bills, that’s what we’ll do; we’ll try and 
compromise them some way, shape, or form; or we’ll try and 
make trouble between the First Nations people and other people 
throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not the way you govern in Saskatchewan. 
You find a common ground, the right ground in which you want 
to build a relationship on, to build a partnership with and to find 
resolution. You don’t go out there looking for trouble, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s exactly what the opposition member is 
doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — . . . could take a lesson in governing from that 
member, Mr. Speaker, because this issue seems to indicate that 
that minister has done absolutely nothing on this issue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lakes along the Qu’Appelle River system play 
a critical role in the economies of local communities like Fort 
Qu’Appelle. And Pasqua Lake, Echo Lake, Crooked Lake, and 
Round Lake are major summer tourist destination spots. If this 
dispute between the First Nations and the provincial and federal 
governments are not resolved soon, water levels in the lakes 
will continue to decline and the local economy of Fort 
Qu’Appelle and surrounding area will be devastated, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is a huge problem. Why is this NDP government taking the 
position that it doesn’t care about the water levels and the future 
of the economies of this area, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious 
matter. As I’d mentioned to that member, we’re on top of this 
issue. We’re meeting on a daily, regular basis to try and find a 
solution, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll continue moving forward. 
 
But what’s amazing to me, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 
House we’re going to find a resolution. We’re going to work 
very closely with First Nations, with the people of the 
Qu’Appelle River Valley system . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve asked members a couple 
of times to not to be hollering out. So I ask again for a third 
time for members to restrain themselves a little and wait for 
their turn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want to point out that the . . . we’re also going to work 
with the federal government; we’re going to work with the 
Indian bands that are affected and the people of the region. 
We’ll find resolution to this challenge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, is across the way, is all 
they’re trying to find is trouble, Mr. Speaker. And shame on 
them. Because out here we’re trying to find some resolution to 
the challenge and we shall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out to that 
minister that what we are doing is we’re presenting the 
concerns of those residents in that area who are very concerned 
about the level, water levels in those lakes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — And, Mr. Speaker, at the rate that that minister is 
handling this issue, there won’t be any water left in those lakes, 
Mr. Speaker. So I would ask, Mr. Speaker, what other 
initiatives is this minister willing to take besides making 
excuses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s so very important to 
point out that across the way there’s no solutions whatsoever to 
any of the challenges we face. Zero, Mr. Speaker; a big fat zero 
in terms of effort across . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again, a big fat zero when it comes to 
finding some solutions to the challenges to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and that’s right across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point out the important thing is to make sure you talk 
with all parties, Mr. Speaker. And I know those guys across the 
way have not talked to any party involved. All they stand up 
and they doom and they gloom and the world is ending, Mr. 
Speaker. The answer is no, the world is not ending. And we will 
find a solution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker. If you want to be fair, be fair to 
everyone. And I would ask any member across the way, last 
weekend we had in Saskatchewan, we had a great celebration, 
opening of the First Nations University. And not one of those 
members was there, Mr. Speaker. They should be there 
celebrating Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Telephone Service in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s for the 
minister responsible for SaskTel. One of Saskatchewan’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order, order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s for the minister 
responsible for SaskTel. One of Saskatchewan’s challenges 
over the next 10 years will be to grow the economy of rural 
Saskatchewan. And one of the necessities of business growth in 
a competitive global economy is access to reasonably priced 
telecommunications services, services like additional telephone 
lines to facilitate the growth of rural businesses. 
 
And yet SaskTel told Donna Carpenter, the manager of Green 
Hills restaurant at Greenwater Lake, that a second telephone 
line into her business would cost nearly $18,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what small business in Saskatchewan can afford to 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

 

pay $18,000 for a second phone line? Why is the NDP charging 
$18,000 to install a single telephone line into Green Hills 
restaurant at Greenwater Park? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the question because it gives me the opportunity to explain I 
think an issue that’s difficult for a lot of people of 
Saskatchewan to understand. 
 
The truth is first of all, Mr. Speaker, the truth is first of all that 
in all of Canada there isn’t any telephone company other than 
SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, other than SaskTel, that subsidizes the 
first instalment, Mr. Speaker. After that, Mr. Speaker, after that 
it’s the full cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Sask Party opposition wanted the situation 
that we have, that is deregulation and open competition, Mr. 
Speaker, you’ve got it here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This 
is exactly the scenario that our government, Mr. Speaker, 
described would happen, would happen under a deregulated, 
competitive environment. That’s the circumstance that we have. 
 
Having said that, SaskTel still does subsidize the first 
installation which no other telephone company in Canada does, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough that SaskTel is 
charging $18,000 for a second business telephone line into rural 
Saskatchewan, but it’s $18,000 for a third line. And it’s $18,000 
to install a fourth line. In fact, it’s $18,000 for that company for 
every single time they want to install another business 
telephone line. All businesses need additional telephone lines as 
they grow, but $18,000 for an additional phone line makes it 
impossible for businesses to grow in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a hospitality industry. They’re working on the margins 
of coffee and of meals; they can’t afford $18,000. Mr. Speaker, 
how can the NDP justify claiming the future is wide open when 
their policy is to charge $18,000 every time a rural business 
needs another phone line? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well of course 
we try and encourage as much economic development in all 
parts of Saskatchewan as we can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say this if the members in the Sask Party 
want to listen, Mr. Speaker. If the members opposite want to 
listen, if you had exactly the same scenario as she just 
described, Mr. Speaker, as that member just described, in 
Alberta — their beloved Alberta — you know what the cost for 
the first line would be? It would be $18,000 as well for the first 
line, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly what happens right now in 
Alberta. 
 
They have a different scenario but, Mr. Speaker, given . . . if 

you took exactly the same situation, three lines in Alberta, three 
lines in Saskatchewan, the difference is — and I want them to 
listen carefully — the difference is is that SaskTel subsidizes 
for the first line, unlike what happens in any other jurisdiction 
in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the only way they can have the 
exact same scenario is if we got rid of this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — This government has no idea what it’s like to 
operate a business or to facilitate businesses in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I noticed the minister didn’t 
mention what would happen in Manitoba either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prairie Truss at Annaheim has three lines into 
their business right now. They’ve had that for a number of 
years. They need an additional line and so when SaskTel came 
to give them a quote, they found out the line was already there. 
The only thing they had to do was connect two wires. Do you 
know what it cost them for that, Mr. Speaker — $3,250 to 
connect a wire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if people in Saskatchewan realize that 
there is a cost to operate this type of business in Saskatchewan, 
and this NDP government doesn’t realize that they are a 
detriment to business in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
What are you going to be doing to help this province grow? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well isn’t that 
. . . Wouldn’t that be lovely, Mr. Speaker? That member says if 
they got to be government, Mr. Speaker, they would fix this. I’ll 
tell you how they would fix this, Mr. Speaker. Do you know 
what they would do, Mr. Speaker? They would do as I’ve said 
many, many times — they would sell SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, 
and then they would have exactly the circumstance that exists in 
every other province, that is where there is no subsidization of 
any one of the installations of those lines, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How can you possibly criticize, Mr. Speaker, a telephone 
company that provides — as described, Mr. Speaker, in The 
Globe and Mail of Saturday, May 24 — the lowest telephone 
rates in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker? How would they fix it? 
They would sell it and everybody would pay as you go, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Rosthern on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Point of order. 
 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

The Speaker: — Order, members. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During question 
period the minister responsible for SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) rose in his place and 
said that there hadn’t been a single person from this side 
attending the First Nations University. That is incorrect, Mr. 
Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition was there . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, Order, please. That is not a 
point of order. That would be a debatable item. 
 
Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, please, members. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today once again to stand on behalf of the government and table 
responses to written questions no. 753 through 758 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for 753 through 758 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 43 — The 
Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure for me to stand in the House today and speak on 
the Bill No. 43, the amendment to The Forest Resources 
Management Act. 
 
And I am pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that after my speech that 
I will be delivering, I am going to move this Bill into 
Committee of the Whole. The reason I am going to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, is because my hon. colleague, the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, did a remarkable job in speaking for 
some three hours on this Bill; and that was a feat I don’t know 
many people could do, especially in forestry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the people involved in the forestry industry, 
everybody knows that this industry is an industry that is much 
welcomed in the province. We do have some difficulties 
regarding the forestry industry because of the trade laws that’s 
been in place now. The softwood lumber issue is a huge issue 
and the forestry people, the forestry sector, is suffering 
immensely from this. 
 
And I think for the most part in regarding this Bill, Mr. Speaker 

. . . And this Bill is kind of like twofold; there’s 60 per cent of 
this Bill that is good and then there’s 40 per cent of this Bill 
isn’t worth the paper it’s written on. But this Bill is 
subsequently just like our present government, the NDP 
government. When something comes out and they do have a 
good reason for a Bill and it’s a good thing for the industry and 
the province, they always got to put something in that’s going 
to hinder and hurt our resource areas in the province. And that’s 
why, being that this Bill just came up not more than 10 days 
ago, right away we as the opposition, and as the member from 
Athabasca resort us to as lemon-sucking opposition, that’s why 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve already ruled once on that, 
on the use of adjectives of that type, and I prefer members do 
not repeat this item even if they are quoting it. And I would just 
ask the member to continue and try to keep in mind that all 
members in the Assembly are hon. members and all members 
should consider each other as hon. members. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the reason I use those adjectives is the fact that the minister 
from Athabasca in my questioning on Thursday stated those 
very same . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve just ruled on it and that 
should be sufficient. Let it stand at that, please. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. From that I’ll 
go on. In regarding this forestry industry, this opposition, the 
first thing we do is when a Bill comes up this late in the session, 
the first thing is the red flags go up because there’s got to be a 
reason why it came up. 
 
And by talking to the forestry industry in this province, we 
know why, and there’s good and there’s bad. And I will be the 
first one to say that at any time somebody, whoever it is and 
from whichever party it comes up and says it’s good, then we 
applaud that. But, Mr. Speaker, when they put things into Bills 
that only satisfy their own political agenda, then it’s time to put 
the red flags up and stop it. And that’s exactly what this 
opposition has done. 
 
And that’s why the member from Saskatchewan Rivers got up 
and spoke so long, because it was not a Bill that should be 
moved forward in a hasty manner like they thought it should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 60 per cent of this Bill — 60 per cent of this Bill, 
Mr. Speaker — talks about the trade problems in Saskatchewan 
and Canada with the United States with the softwood lumber 
issue. And we know from the industry perspective, from the 
Mistiks, the Weyerhaeusers, the Carriers, the L & M Wood 
Products of Glaslyn, Zelensky Brothers of La Ronge, that they 
agree that 60 per cent of this Bill has to go through. We need it 
and we need it now. 
 
But it’s the other 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker, of this Bill that there 
is problems. And those problems are in the area of regulations. 
And that’s where this government, this NDP government, is so 
good at putting in regulations that gives back to the province the 
total control of everything. Everything we do in this province 
has to be controlled by the government — control, control, 
control. And isn’t that the way the socialistic government of 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

 

today operates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Why couldn’t they just bring in a Bill, just 
bring in a Bill for the good of the people of this province, for 
the good of the industry in this province? That’s all that they 
ask. That’s all that the industry asks for. And that was good. But 
no, they’ve got to stick it into the people of Saskatchewan by 
bringing in more regulations. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, people in this province have had enough of 
this. And when the Premier gets the courage to call an election, 
whether it be this fall or whether it be next spring, the people 
are going to vote on this and they will remember this. And I 
guarantee you the forest industry of this province is going to say 
we are tired of that government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Speaker, everybody knows how this 
forestry industry in the province needs this Bill . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I must have 
hit a nerve over on that side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the forestry industry, everybody knows, has 
hardships right now — real hardships. You talk to the L & M 
Wood Products of Glaslyn and they’re having it tough. You talk 
to anybody in this province . . . It’s just like the farmers. It’s 
just like the farmers in this province having a real tough time 
with making a living in this province. The forestry people of 
this province are having the same . . . (inaudible) . . . And it’s 
this softwood lumber issue that’s hurting them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk of the Mistiks and the 
Weyerhaeusers, the two big holders of FMAs (forest 
management agreement), when they look at this they say hey 
great. You know the government put something forth good. We 
agree with it because it’s going to affect us but it’s also going to 
help us. And they applaud that part. 
 
And you know, the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) 
Northcote, I remember talking to him and him saying that we’d 
better get on line with this because the forestry industry people 
are going to write letters of recognition saying that we need 
this. Well did they get any letters? Was there any letters sent out 
stating that? There was letters sent out, Mr. Speaker, and I 
know because I’ve got copies of the letters. The letters stated 
that yes, this Bill we need. 
 
But we do not need the regulation reform that is put into this 
Bill by this NDP government. That’s what they’re scared of. 
They are scared about that issue. And we don’t need to listen to 
the forestry personnel as saying . . . as government, trust us. 
We’ll look off on your behalf. Trust us. This government of 
today, Mr. Speaker, hasn’t shown any trust to the forestry 
people. And that’s why the forestry people of this province are 
upset with the wordings of the Bill, especially when it comes to 
regulations. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina is talking that the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers is done. But I want to go 
back to the member from Saskatchewan Rivers in his three-hour 
deliberation of this Bill. He pointed out good and he also 
pointed out bad in this Bill. And he went on and on about the 
forestry industry in this province and what it needs, and what it 
takes to move this industry forward, and what it needs to help 
solve the problem we have with the softwood lumber issue. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he did an eloquent job. But I fail to say that 
. . . I hope the members on the opposite side listened to what he 
said. Because what he was doing was stating the facts. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t want to go down that road 
that the member from Saskatchewan Rivers had mentioned 
because we don’t have three hours to debate this Bill. We need 
to move this Bill forward and we need to move it in a timely 
fashion. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And in order to move that in a timely fashion, today we need to 
move that into COW, which is Committee of the Whole. When 
we move it into Committee of the Whole, I know that other 
members of this side have many questions regarding this Bill, 
especially on regulations. And at that time, Mr. Speaker, I will 
be questioning the minister in those regards. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I will close debate and I 
will move this Bill on to Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
The Chair: — And I would recognize the minister to introduce 
her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much. With me today, 
to my left, is Angie Gelinas, deputy minister of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. To her left, Twyla MacDougall, director of 
finance for SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network). 
Directly behind Angie, Dylan Jones, executive director of 
policy and youth. And behind myself, Chris Martin, acting 
director of corporate services. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Madam 
Minister. And I would like to welcome your officials here as 
well this afternoon. 
 
Madam Minister, last year following the passage of The Status 
of the Artist Act, you appointed an advisory committee to focus 
on artist equality. Essentially, this committee was to study 
labour and social equity issues for artists, and I was wondering 
if you could give me an update on this committee’s activities to 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

date. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is a very large area really that the 
Status of the Artists Committee is looking at. One of the 
reasons, I think, is because the whole field of artists and 
performers and producers — all the cultural workers — there’s 
a lot of differences from one area to the other in how they work, 
how they’re employed, and what their conditions of work are, 
so I think we will see this process going on for a while. 
 
But they have produced an interim report; it’s on the Culture, 
Youth and Recreation Web site. It’s up there for public 
discussion and discussion with the various art sectors. And we 
could download it and print it and provide you a copy, but you 
can also go to the Web site directly. We didn’t actually bring a 
copy of it with us today although we could get someone to go 
out and print it and bring it back in. 
 
But I’ll just let you know that what the committee’s doing in the 
first phase of their work is they’re consulting quite broadly with 
people at what you would call both the management and 
employer end of the spectrum as well as the employees, 
contractees, performers that work in this area. 
 
Some of the main issues that they’ve encountered so far is 
whether there is a possibility to extend collective bargaining 
rights to some of the workers in that sector, issues around 
conditions of work, occupational health and safety standards in 
some of the areas where there’s safety and health issues, and as 
well as their first preference, looking at government’s practices 
as an employer of artistic and creative people. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, you mentioned the collective 
bargaining rights, and I was just wondering if you could tell me 
what sort of discussions have occurred in that area; and also 
with whom and what recommendations, if any, have been 
brought forward? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In this area we’d have to say that the 
committee is moving extremely carefully because in the 
absence of a collective bargaining framework a lot of people 
have made their own agreements. I guess in the modern age 
what we’d call gentleperson’s agreement about how they’re 
going to work together and how they’re going to set standards 
and set wages and whatnot. 
 
So it’s been like a bargaining model but without any legal 
endorsement. It’s more by the power of agreeing mutually to do 
that. 
 
So people are very conscious of the desire to not upset those 
things that are working well, and I would just have to say that 
they’re moving extremely carefully in this area. There’s no 
predetermined view certainly on the part of the government that 
this is where we will end up or want to end up. There’s a view 
that they’re exploring in what way the people who work in that 
sector have a voice with their employers. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Another issue, Madam Minister, the advisory 
committee was studying was the application of workers’ 
compensation legislation and occupational health and safety 
legislation to artists. Again, could you just tell me what the 
committee has heard and what suggestions it has made? 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think if we look at it from the full 
spectrum of what’s being discussed, on the one hand there’s 
people who feel that better education, so that people who are 
working with hazardous chemicals and substances in the arts 
area and whatnot, have a full understanding of, from an 
educational strategy point of view, of what it is they’re working 
with. 
 
I guess the other spectrum is if, once you get into a workers’ 
compensation plan, there has to be someone who pays both the 
employees’ part as well as the workers’ part. And in some 
instances the distance of employment is so short that there’s no 
way really to identify who the employer would be. So it may be 
as they go into it that they’re . . . the only thing they may be 
able to do in a lot of areas is to provide an educational 
approach. 
 
If there’s a way to give people a way to opt into the system by 
virtue of identifying who would pay both the employee portion 
and the employer portion, where it made sense to do that, they 
would also look at that as well. 
 
But again, there’s no predetermined view of how that will 
happen. Just the notion is that quite often when workers in this 
area have accidents or get sick, they’re poverty-stricken and 
they really have no way to support themselves or their families 
while they’re going through that period of disability. So again 
trying to take a practical approach to what could actually work 
in this area. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Adequate pension 
plans are always a major issue with working individuals, 
including artists. This is another area that the advisory 
committee was studying. Could you tell me what has come 
forward as a result of that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think in this area of pension plans, 
everybody agrees that it’s very important to figure out some 
way to help cover people in this sector. 
 
I know that . . . if the member will indulge me in a couple of 
quick anecdotes. 
 
I was visiting some folks when my husband was having his 
liver transplant in Ponoka. And they’re people who all their 
lives they’ve worked at places like, you know, Bazaart and the 
other fairs and sold their goods, but neither one of them has 
ever worked in any area where they could accumulate any 
pension; and that would include Canada Pension Plan because 
in order to get your Canada pension, you have to have worked 
for — what is it, at least four years — for an employer who’s 
registered as a Canada Pension Plan employer. 
 
So again it’s how to look at an innovative way of how these 
folks might become connected to a pension plan because 
typically they don’t have enough surplus income to buy RRSPs 
(registered retirement savings plan) or anything like that. It’s 
possible there are some areas that have voluntary agreements on 
how they’re going to handle pension and sometimes, as happens 
in the non-government sector, an employer will pay into an RSP 
(retirement savings plan) for an employee. 
 
Again, as we go down this road, it may be educating people as 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

 

to what their options are and then leave it up to them to make an 
arrangement with their employer. Or it could be that groups of 
employers may decide that as a group of employers, they would 
pay the employer portion of pension and that the artist would 
pay the employee portion. But at least trying to figure out, is 
there a way to make sure that these folks have access to a 
pension? 
 
I don’t know if you know, but only 50 per cent of people in 
Canada actually have access to pensions, so this isn’t a problem 
just for this sector; it’s a problem for other people as well. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I understand, you 
know, that a problem could arise, as you stated, that a lot of 
times that these people don’t have enough to invest in RRSPs, 
and that’s true not only in the arts but also in many other 
occupations that people have. 
 
Madam Minister, could you elaborate on . . . a bit on the issue 
of education, professional development, and training programs 
for the artists. Given the nature of the work they do, it is 
somewhat of an ongoing thing for this group. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’ve gone through a big transition in 
thinking about cultural industries over the last, let’s say 10 to 15 
years. People were much more just individual artists out on 
their own, but now as culture has become a part of, a stronger 
part of tourism and a stronger part of economic life in the 
province, it would certainly be true that they need to understand 
better how to get the maximum return from their efforts in the 
commercial world. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And quite often people don’t have any business training, any 
business background, so quite a lot of the emphasis at industry 
training sessions . . . For example, the Saskatchewan recording 
industry has a conference once a year that moves between 
Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan where the artists get 
together and they look at things like marketing, touring, 
developing your promotional packages, your product, getting 
your product to the marketplace. 
 
And this is just all ways to help artists take what they already do 
but get the extra commercial benefit from it. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Not everyone has 
access to these types of program, be they public or private 
sector workers. Is the advisory committee looking at some kind 
of compensation for artists in this area, or a levelling of the field 
per se? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can tell you that if, for example, if a 
person’s a member of one of these associations, they get on 
their mailing list and then they get information about the 
various development grants that are available, grants for 
marketing kits, for promotional, for touring. Sometimes there’s 
support for touring. 
 
And as well you’ll find that Web sites are quite developed in 
this industry because a lot of the folks are very technologically 
oriented. And so there are a lot of ability for people to access it 
no matter where they live, and to access market opportunities. 

But certainly if they’re a member of the relevant association 
that they participate in, whether it’s a craft person, a music 
person, an arts person, they would be regularly informed of all 
the opportunities in their area. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, when you talk about the 
taxation of artists, what specifically are you referring to other 
than what already exists? Are you planning on setting up a 
different tax regime for them; or will they be paying taxes 
differently than others, and if so, in what way? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Actually interesting enough, there’s a 
tax issue here that’s very similar to the tax issue for hockey 
players in the province, and that’s the question of whether 
you’re an employee or not. Because if you’re an employee 
there’s an expectation then that you have to pay certain sums on 
behalf of employees. If you’re an employer, self-employed, 
then you have a different status. 
 
And the federal government has recently gone through a 
process where they’ve clarified the tax status of some of the 
workers in this industry; for example, if you’re employed by a 
symphony or a regular performing company, a ballet company, 
something like that. So really most of the examination in this 
area is around the definition of whether you’re an employee or 
considered self-employed, and that would be the same of our 
provincial committee as well. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — So have the advisory committee brought 
forward the same details that you just outlined? Have they come 
up with that same conclusion or have they come up with 
something else . . . or have they come up with anything else, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would have to say that the first, I 
guess, round of discussions by the Status of the Artists 
Committee was to identify the range of issues for the different 
types of artists that fall into this sector. 
 
And now that they’ve identified a series of issues including 
pensions, tax status, occupational health and safety, whatever, 
what they’re really doing now is starting to do the more detailed 
work to look at what other provinces are doing, what other 
countries are doing, and to start to develop some models for 
what the best way might be to do these things. And it’s not 
always the best way. As you know, it’s also the way that would 
be acceptable to people, keeping in mind that there’s both 
employers and workers in this sector. 
 
So like I say, we’re working in an area that’s relatively 
unexplored but where there is some traditions of how things 
have been handled. And so I think it’s going to be a while 
before we see actions that move beyond the educational or 
beyond making sure that people are better informed about what 
their options are to anything that might fall into the realm of 
changing either federal or provincial practices regarding some 
of our major safety net programs in this country. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
one of the concerns that the advisory committee had was that 
the professional artist had yet to be defined in the legislation. 
Has that definition been determined yet and, if so, what will be 
the legal definition of a professional artist here in 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I wish I could tell you that I had 
the answer to that one, but this is similarly still being discussed. 
They’re looking at what’s in the artist . . . the Canadian Artists’ 
Code and looking at different possible definitions. 
 
And at the end of the day, you know, I don’t know what the 
outcome will be but certainly you’d have to look at everything, 
including whether a person has self-declared themselves as a 
working artist in their own tax forms that they submit. So 
there’s a number of ways of looking at how this declaration 
occurs. But it’s not a done deal yet. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, I assume that the advisory 
committee has went out of province and perhaps out of country 
to get the definition of a professional artist from other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, because this is fairly 
leading-edge work, even in the world, to look after this sector 
. . . because again the sector itself is changing; they’re going 
from people who used to work in a certain way to people who 
are more of a cultural industry sector now where they’re more 
involved in tourism and economic activity. So the actual status 
of artists themselves is changing. 
 
I guess in previous centuries they would perhaps be the patron 
of a wealthy person who would look after them, and because of 
the kind of society we live in today, that’s not as likely to 
happen. 
 
So we’re . . . I would have to say that Saskatchewan is on the 
leading edge of looking at how to do some of these things, and 
that the federal government has done some work in this area, 
Quebec has done some work in this area, but there’s not a lot of 
places where a lot of work has been done. 
 
Now even while I say that, I met with the ambassador from 
Austria a couple of years ago and they, for example, 100 per 
cent fund their opera there because it’s very much part of their 
tourism. So there’s different ways that different places handle 
this. But we don’t have any of our cultural groups here who are 
100 per cent funded. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman of 
Committees. And if I can, Madam Minister and officials, I have 
some questions as well — and appreciate the opportunity to 
post them here in the legislature — specifically around the 
relationship or the work the department does with SRIA 
(Saskatchewan Recording Industry Association) here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Talking to some of the members of that organization and some 
of the bands that are actively involved in that organization, I’ve 
heard a concern from them about their ability to access, not so 
much provincial resources even, but what they would deem to 
be our share or a fair share for the province — for 
Saskatchewan — of federal resources, especially when it comes 
to maybe making a video or assisting with an album project. 
 
And I wonder if you could comment generally on that and what 
steps the department’s taken, maybe the minister has, if there is 

a federal minister’s . . . a ministerial federal-provincial meeting 
or a committee process in place. If you could just generally 
comment on that issue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think that the question you pose is an 
important one because it doesn’t just affect SRIA, it affects all 
parts of our cultural sector. And I do think, if I might just give 
an opinion for a moment, that setting up the department was a 
key part of having someone who had the clout to have that 
discussion with the federal government as well as with the 
various funding councils that operate at the federal level. 
 
One of the first meetings that I had in fact was the Canada 
Council came to town and I spoke to the Chair about our 
concerns with funding. 
 
And what they’ve done as a result of that discussion, they 
identified one of the problems that they don’t get as many 
applications from Saskatchewan because people here are not as 
well versed in how to access that money. So one of the things 
they’ve done is brought some workshops to Saskatchewan to 
help people in that sector to have a better idea of how to access 
that money. 
 
As well, our deputy has been in Ottawa several times discussing 
with them the need to have Saskatchewan have its share of 
resources on that and other matters, but also at the 
federal-provincial territorial meeting to have the ministers in 
Canada get more proactive in addressing what kind of a funding 
relationship there should be out of the pool that exists for 
Canada. 
 
You know again I step out on kind of slippery ground here, but 
I would say that in the sports sector there’s a more predictable 
relationship. And that doesn’t always guarantee you get your 
share but the discussions have maybe gone to a more advanced 
level of arguing that point. 
 
And I think in the arts area sometimes what happens is a 
federal-provincial territorial meeting won’t be called for a few 
years which means that then you don’t have an opportunity to 
raise the issues you want to raise, and have to raise them one at 
a time. And I think provinces generally find that in dealing with 
the federal government you’re usually more successful if the 
provinces have a united view of what they’re trying to 
accomplish and then there tends to be a better response from the 
federal levels. 
 
So unfortunately because the House was sitting I didn’t get to 
attend the last ministers’ meeting. Maybe we should have gone 
together and then we would have evened out the numbers. But 
at any rate, this is an issue we’re very conscious of and are 
specifically working on. And the Canada Council has 
acknowledged it and is co-operating with us to try to improve 
that. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the minister 
for that response. And along the same vein, although probably 
in a little different subject matter, is maybe other things that the 
department has looked at doing or can do with the appropriate 
resources for, for . . . I’m thinking specifically of some bands. 
 
I’m thinking specifically of one band actually — a band I’m a 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

 

fan of— the Touchtone Gurus of Saskatoon but there are many 
others that would fall in the category; but I talk mostly to them. 
My brother-in-law’s a drummer so we can chat about these 
issues. 
 
And I wonder . . . I’ll ask this other question then along that 
same vein. You know the . . . I think this particular band I think 
is on their . . . This is their second CD (compact disc) release 
now. 
 
And you know they have invested in their . . . they’re treating 
this like a business. They actually do some other work as a band 
to pay for the . . . to raise funds to be able to produce a CD, try 
to support it best they can. They go on cross-Canada tours. 
They have agents trying to promote their records, the releases 
on radio across the . . . You know they’re trying to do it all as 
an independent. And I know many others are — not just them. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Is there anything, Madam Minister, that your officials have 
looked at doing to help them with radio play here in their own 
province? Because I hear from them and I think it’s exemplary 
of what happens maybe for some of the other bands is that for 
some they find it very, very difficult for radio play. 
 
Obviously radio’s a private industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan or SRIA 
or anybody else can’t and ought not to try to force certain radio 
play, but I think it’s a very healthy beginning for some of these 
bands that are very close to some significant commercial 
success. And I note they seem to be having trouble getting radio 
play and so I think of things like if the department liaises with 
Saskatchewan radio. 
 
Of course some of our radio chains have investments in stations 
elsewhere as well. There might be some attendant spinoff 
benefit to that. 
 
So has the department looked at working hard with our radio in 
the province? And I’m not . . . I was in radio in this province so 
I’m not beating up on radio at all. I think they get a blizzard of 
requests for radio play and they do the best they can, and in 
many cases they sort of are the platform for groups, whether it’s 
Wide Mouth Mason or others, that get started here in the 
province and then have a greater appeal nationwide. 
 
But is there anything else over and above, or anything at all I 
should say, that the department has thought about doing with 
these radio stations to promote obviously not just one band and 
not just one genre but as much as possible with these stations 
for Saskatchewan radio play? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Being that this is a developing industry 
. . . I mean it’s within my recent memory, the initial funding for 
SRIA. So they didn’t have an industry representative in the 
province before SRIA existed; everybody was just individual 
performers competing with each other to get whatever limited 
gigs they could get at bars or whatever. 
 
But it’s developed a lot since then and like the oil industry, like 
potash, like mining, it is important for these musicians to work 
through their industry association because it’s through that 

association that they then articulate to government how they 
would like us to support their efforts. 
 
And certainly we do support the CRTC (Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) on its 
Canadian content initiatives. But what you’re speaking to, other 
than what you might do to urge, and certainly if SRIA wanted 
to get involved in doing a joint urging of the use of 
Saskatchewan artists on both radio and in other types of media 
activities, certainly that’s something we could have a bit of a 
partnership on. 
 
But there’s nothing in mind in terms of setting quotas or 
anything like that for content, as what we have hoped is that the 
extra resources put into things like being able to produce a CD, 
being able to have a marketing kit, being able to be informed on 
how to do it more effectively would help the bands create some 
of the openings for themselves. 
 
But I think it’s always very important to work through your 
industry association because it’s those industry associations that 
meet with government and articulate what help it is they think 
they need in order to make their industry grow. 
 
And aside from that, that’s one of the reasons I support, 
personally, community radio because community radio does do 
a lot more airplay of local music. 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s a good point, Madam Minister. In fact I 
think to the . . . This particular band has had some success with 
respect to promoting their singles on college radio which would 
be similar to and in some case synonymous with community 
radio. 
 
So the point is well-taken, and I also agree that the advent of an 
association is — an industry association — is probably their 
best hope for getting . . . making the case with Saskatchewan 
radio. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — A bit of a supplementary answer. 
 
SCN has in the past year and a half been refocusing on some of 
the niche market opportunities provided by having a publicly 
owned station. And some of the program they’ve been doing 
has been bringing to the front Saskatchewan talent, 
Saskatchewan movies, Saskatchewan issues, Saskatchewan 
environment. 
 
And certainly again that would provide opportunities for the 
kind of band you’re talking about to be seen in the 
Saskatchewan marketplace, especially as people come to 
understand that if they’re looking for something to do with 
Saskatchewan that that’s a very logical source for them to turn 
to. 
 
And there’s the high school program that’s done . . . that 
involves the students. There’s the cultural shows and whatnot 
that are on that network now, as well as the reinforcement of the 
Saskatchewan news that is carried. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you. It leads to actually the next 
question that I have regarding SCN specifically, and it’s a 
discussion that we’ve had at the Standing Committee of 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

Communications of this Legislative Assembly and the 
rebroadcast of proceedings from this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And the minister will know that throughout rural Saskatchewan 
and indeed in the cities as well, the proliferation of these small 
dishes as an alternative to cable television or just an alternative 
to no cable or no other channels has really taken off in 
popularity. 
 
And the advantage of course . . . One of the advantages of 
various kinds of technology, cable TV and the small dishes, is 
that you can pick up the legislative proceedings. On cable, you 
can on a regular channel in most cases. And on these small 
dishes, you can if your dish picks up . . . can pick up SCN. As is 
the case with most small dishes, they will be able to access 
SCN. 
 
Now I think it was last year, and it might be even this year, 
there’s that replay of question period, for example, from the 
proceedings. And believe it or not, Madam Minister, there’s a 
number of people, an amazing number to me and to others, 
would watch that replay — people who have access to those 
small dishes. 
 
And I think we’ve had this discussion at the committee as to 
whether or not that can be expanded, whether or not SCN can 
provide some sort of regular time on its system for the 
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I understand it could have consumed all of its program times, so 
I’m certainly not asking that. I wouldn’t . . . I don’t think any of 
us should want to . . . I don’t think any of us would want to 
force that on the people of Saskatchewan. But I think that 
there’s a . . . there might be a reason for SCN to look at further 
expanding the broadcast here, just so that the whole province 
has more equal access to the proceedings of the legislature on 
television. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the things that has happened 
over the past year is to add ExpressVu as a carrier of the 
legislative channel which means it gets out more broadly than it 
did previously when it was restricted to cable. 
 
The other thing I guess is, as legislators we have the 
opportunity to, through our Board of Internal Economy or 
through some other mechanism, to suggest improvements to the 
legislative service. So I think it would be a bit incumbent on us 
to articulate what we think our constituents would like in this 
area and then to move that request through to SCN. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to ask some 
questions if I can about the sound stage and I guess the 
involvement of SaskFILM with it. 
 
Can the minister provide for us today the date . . . that since the 
facility opened, the total number of companies or productions 
that have made use of the facility? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In 2002 there was five productions that 
used the sound stage involving three different production 
companies. And in 2003 there’s four different productions and 
actually four different production companies that have used the 
sound stage and there’s a fifth that will be announced shortly. 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess you’ve 
already alluded to this other one that will be announced shortly 
which answers the question, the subsequent question was: what, 
how many projects were on the horizon? You’ve indicated 
there’s the one on the horizon to be announced. So unless 
there’s an additional number that you want to provide, I’ll move 
on to the next question. 
 
Could you provide for the Assembly a breakdown of the sound 
stage itself in terms of the percentage of the facility that is 
office space, production, post-production, audio or video 
facilities; what’s being leased out maybe to somebody else for 
their purposes, office or otherwise? Do you have just a general 
breakdown of a configuration of the sound stage? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This particular part of the sound stage 
operation is SPMC’s (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) and I don’t know if you’ve completed your chance 
to ask questions of SPMC yet, but certainly if that opportunity 
doesn’t exist, we could get some information for you. But if 
you’re able to ask SPMC directly, you’ll get much more 
thorough and complete information. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Actually I think we 
have voted . . . I’m not too sure, but I think we voted SPMC off. 
But if the officials — and no, in no particular rush — could 
provide that breakdown, that would be appreciated, Madam 
Minister. 
 
The film industry in general, and I guess I just want to ask a few 
questions, or at least this one about Minds Eye. And not 
exclusively about Minds Eye because I understand that’s a 
Crown Investments Corporation investment. We’ve asked 
questions about it at CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) and would continue to do so. 
 
But we know, we know that Minds Eye is having some 
difficulty. We know the government recognizes the difficulty 
they’ve had because they have written off their investment from 
four and a half million to five. We also know though that the 
government continues to — that CIC I should say — continues 
to, to offer this additional funding, assuming it could be 
matched by some other source, for Minds Eye. 
 
Our understanding is that the many other player . . . other film 
companies, some based in Saskatchewan — well the ones that 
we would speak to are based in Saskatchewan — they do have 
concerns about this one particular company continuing to 
access considerable support and assistance from the public 
sector, from the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I guess I’d ask the minister to . . . And I’m sure she’s done 
this. I’m sure she, too, has had meetings with these same 
companies who have had concerns, or phone calls, or 
correspondence from them. 
 
So how does she allay the concerns of those other important 
players in this industry who feel like the government seems to 
be perhaps too focused on one particular company? What would 
she say to those who have that concern and who feel that the 
government has picked winners and losers in this case and isn’t 
maybe treating everybody fair? 
 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m just trying to go from memory. I 
actually had the answers to some of this in my House book for 
question period that I sent upstairs. So I’ll go from memory 
here. 
 
In actual fact every company has the same ability to, based on 
their business plans, to apply for resources, depending on what 
it is their company is into doing. 
 
Now under SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) 
there used to be some film companies that access specific 
project funding. And we haven’t been doing that kind of 
investment under SOCO any more. But certainly under that, a 
great diversity of film companies actually had equity financing 
through there. I think in my recollection there was at least six 
different film companies, including Minds Eye, that got funding 
under the SOCO funding. 
 
(15:15) 
 
The difference, the main difference you’ll find between Minds 
Eye and the other companies is they’re not as large of 
companies and they aren’t involved with such breadth across 
the Canadian landscape on film production. So it is a different 
size of company. I guess it’s like the difference between the big 
oil and gas companies and the little mom-and-pop operations. 
There is a difference in the size of the companies, which means 
they access different funding envelopes. 
 
But right now we’re in the process of trying to determine what 
is the best route to establish some kind of a proper infrastructure 
for this industry in terms of financing because we would rather 
not be in the position of making one-off decisions. We would 
like to have an industry decision on how this industry is funded 
and grows. And the department is working on an analysis of the 
industry, how it’s funded in different provinces, what 
correlation that investment has to growth of the industry. And 
we’ll be bringing forward recommendations on how we should 
handle the further development of the industry in this province. 
 
But at this point we have mainly had more ad hoc investment 
tools. But I will just say to come back to the original question, 
that under the previous SOCO mechanism, at least, at least six 
different film companies had accessed financing. And I could 
get those names for you. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, through to 
the minister. If the minister could give us a brief outline on the 
cultural assistance program and the multicultural initiative fund. 
There’s different components that make up that fund. If the 
minister can give us a bit of a, I guess, an understanding of what 
that fund is composed of and what the purpose of the fund is 
there for as well. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What we were discussing is to make 
sure that it’s clear how the funding structure works in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
All of that money is under the Sask Lotteries Trust. And under 
the trust, as you would know likely, there’s three globals. 
There’s Sask Sport, Sask Parks and Recreation, and 
SaskCulture. SaskCulture then has under it multiculturalism. So 
all the decisions about that are made at that level, flowing from 

Sask Sport trust to the three globals and then down to the 
organizations they fund. We really don’t get involved at that 
level nor do we have that kind of detail. Now we could get an 
annual report of SaskCulture that would outline the funding in 
that area, but they provide us with an audited report and we 
don’t actually get involved in the management of their sector. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister . . . And I guess my questioning was going to go into 
that SaskCulture component of the funding. And there is a 
training and travel allowance component that’s in there as well 
and I don’t know if the minister’s familiar with the way that 
component functions and how that is funded. 
 
I guess I’ve got a situation here where there was a children’s 
choir group that was recognized for the province to be going to 
Ottawa and they were asking for some funding, travel funding, 
and they’re . . . and they were totally denied in the sense of that 
funding. And it’s put quite a hardship on to that group. There’s 
about $10,000 in there for funding that they required for the 
travelling expense and we’ve got 21 children now that are 
wanting to leave on June 26 that are having some problems 
putting that funding together. So I guess I . . . If the minister 
wants to comment on that I guess that was the area of 
questioning that I was going to go into. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is an area I do have some 
familiarity with because quite often people send the letters to 
our office as well and we likewise don’t have a fund. But you 
know, because this province is so active and we have so many 
skilled athletes, musicians, artists, writers, we get hundreds of 
requests for support for travel — hundreds. And I suspect if I 
get hundreds, I suspect they may get more than hundreds. And 
really there isn’t a funding envelope for this. 
 
Every group, unless perhaps the . . . Let’s say the federal 
government was having a big celebration and they paid for 
someone to come, but I think they don’t even do that usually. I 
think people come for the honour of it all. 
 
And quite often groups are involved in doing their own 
fundraising for travel whether they be individual artists and 
athletes. Certainly this issue was raised by the elite athletes in 
Canada who feel they’re undersupported in terms of their costs 
of participating in elite athletics. 
 
But as you know, there are more good and reasonable ways for 
governments to spend money than there is money. And the 
funding of individual travel, if one was really to go into that 
area, it would be . . . I think you’d be talking millions of new 
dollars. And that’s no reason to not have that discussion, but 
there isn’t an established funding for that kind of travel because 
there are so many people in choirs and everything else that it 
applies to. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
through to the minister. I have a form here that is an application 
form that talks about training and travel, so there is money 
made available for travel as well. And I guess I would be 
appreciative if we could maybe get a list of the people that did 
. . . qualified organizations that did qualify for this part of the 
component I guess as far as the training and travelling aspect is 
concerned, to see what type of organizations, what type of 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

individuals may qualify for, you know, for this type of funding. 
 
Because it’s somewhat ironic I guess when you get a children’s 
choir which does all kinds of fundraising and that’s the only 
way they function is through donations in the sense that when 
they have an opportunity of such and they’re recognized to 
represent the entire province, it’s not something that they’re 
going . . . taken their own initiative on to try and find a way of 
getting to Ottawa for the sense of their own need or their own 
interest, it’s something that the province itself have asked them 
to represent them on behalf of. 
 
I guess it’s a little disappointing that you find in an organization 
like this could be turned down flatly. Even if they would have 
got half of their funding, I think it would have given them the 
ability of send all the children, you know, to the . . . to that 
opportunity on July 1. 
 
Other than I guess that list or that informational package on 
that, I guess on the funding that’s made available, I have no 
further questions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just respond that although we don’t 
make those decisions, we will request that information for you 
and get it and then pass it along. But I will say I suspect a lot of 
these things, it’ll be that their funding is capped at a certain 
level and once they’ve given away what funding they have . . . 
 
And the other thing I might add is quite often we don’t pick the 
people who are representing Saskatchewan. They’re either 
picked through their, perhaps their choir association or maybe 
the federal government contacted them directly. So it’s not that 
we picked them to represent the province and then didn’t 
support them. Somebody has picked them, and I’m sure they’re 
very good. But I remember last year a Regina ladies’ choir sent 
the same request in. 
 
And so there is a big need in that area, a big legitimate need 
both in sports and in culture, but it’s an area that we would have 
to think about how we would priorize who would get that. And 
I’m certain if SaskCulture were granted more money to do that, 
they would think of how they would do that. I’m sure they’re 
not opposed to the idea. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good afternoon to the 
minister and good afternoon to her officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I was wondering if the Department of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation provides funding for the support of 
Batoche Days? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Interestingly enough we met with them 
not very long ago on some of their . . . But they were mostly 
talking to us about the prospects of centennial capital so we 
weren’t really discussing the operation side as much. 
 
But just from my knowledge of this event over the years, I 
know that they do receive money, I think directly, from the 
lottery system. I’m not 100 per cent sure of that but I’m pretty 
sure that they would receive some money from there. 
 
They do receive some money from Intergovernmental Affairs 
through the Aboriginal Affairs Secretariat. Through the casino 

revenues they receive 2 million for the Clarence Campeau Fund 
to support economic development. And I know that they use 
some of that for the tourism and economic development around 
Batoche. And as well they receive 120,000 to participate in the 
sport and culture sector. And I don’t know if they direct any of 
that to Batoche. 
 
So they have some, what would you call, global funding that 
they may in fact then redirect some of that money to Batoche. 
But the department per se does not give a grant to Batoche. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I just 
have a few questions here regarding the SCN. 
 
And I note that this is the second year SCN has conducted 
targeted fundraising activities consisting of on-air and 
direct-mail campaigns. This fiscal year the first campaign ran 
for 10 days last month. And what was the total collected from 
that pledge drive? And what was the targeted amount? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay. Now we’re addressing this May. 
The target was 17,000 and to date 10,000 has come in. But the 
experience with this has been that the money continues to come 
in over time, so that it would be a while before one would know 
whether the target of 17,000 is met or not. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, were all these public 
donations or did some come from the corporate sector? And if 
so, how much? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It would all be public individual 
donations. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What is the 
approximate cost of an on-air and direct-mail campaign, the 
average cost? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Right now the actual cost of the 
campaign is 20,000 but that was expected, that as the campaign 
started that people weren’t used to the notion of a Saskatchewan 
public broadcaster. If you remember the history of SCN, it 
started off in 1989 just as an education network and really more 
internal to schools and whatnot. I think in ’91 it started actually 
doing rebroadcasts of existing programs but didn’t have a 
particular Saskatchewan focus or a particular niche market in 
Saskatchewan programming. 
 
So what’s happening is, I guess, a parallel development of the 
Saskatchewan marketplace along with the people who support 
having that kind of programming available. And as well, while 
doing the fundraising, it also is marketing for the station itself 
so people can help understand what the purpose of SCN is and 
what kind of programming people can expect to see there at the 
same time as requesting their support. So it’s kind of a 
two-birds-with-one-stone kind of marketing. 
 
But it was fully expected that people wouldn’t leap from having 
no notion of direct support to SCN to a notion of becoming 
supporters. And I think it’s largely the membership of SCN, 
because people can subscribe and become members and get the 
program booklets and whatnot, I would think that a lot of the 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

 

people who provide direct donation right now would be people 
who are also members of the member-subscriber list. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, you know, I understand the 
advertisement, the marketing, and that for SCN, but at the same 
time when one is spending $20,000 and is only bringing in 
$10,000 to date, is that . . . How is that justifiable? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Actually from my long experience with 
fundraising — because nobody ever gets elected without being 
involved in fundraising — I find that the first year of a 
campaign often it’ll be 2 or $3,000 you make and that’s maybe 
even fairly good, but over time if you work on it and develop it, 
you will increase that amount with each subsequent time that 
you are consistent in the event that you’re running. 
 
So I don’t think any organization that raises money would have 
ever hit their target in the first year or even second year that 
they did their fundraising. It’s after it becomes established and 
accepted and becomes known to be a priority. So I think we’d 
have to wait a little bit longer to really see where this will go, 
but I suspect it will follow the path of a lot of other fundraising 
efforts, that it takes time to establish both the awareness and the 
customer base, etc., in order for it to really pay off for 
whichever organization is involved in fundraising. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
you’re right, we all have been involved in our own campaigns. 
And I’ve been involved in quite a few election campaigns — 
one of my own — and my first target I reached and exceeded. 
So I guess I . . . okay. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I understand that there are two more 
campaigns planned for the upcoming fiscal year. And could you 
please give us some details on to how long these campaigns are 
slated to run, when they’re slated to run, and what is the 
targeted amount for each? 
 
And while you’re seeking the advice of your officials I’ll take 
this opportunity to thank you and to also thank your officials. 
That will be my final question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There are three of these 10-day 
segments over the year. We’ve had one already. There’s one in 
the fall and then another one in early December. For the year, 
expenditures of 60,000 have been approved and the actual 
projections of revenue are at 50,000 — again referring back to 
the development of a funding base for the future. 
 
I think you would agree with SCN’s objective in this as they are 
trying to work towards more independence from government 
funding and they’re hoping to build their base. Now if we keep 
going on this for a while longer and that doesn’t seem to be 
growing then we would have to re-evaluate. But as long as we 
see growth in the donations that are coming in then it would 
seem that that idea is working. 
 
And to then say that I thank the members opposite very much 
for their questions, and thank my officials for being here today 
to answer them, and with that, Mr. Chair . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee report 
progress on the Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation, 

and proceed to estimates related to the Department of Learning. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 

Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On my left is Dr. 
Craig Dotson, the deputy minister of the department. Farther to 
Dr. Dotson’s left is Brady Salloum, executive director of 
student financial assistance. Behind him is Dr. Michael 
Littlewood, executive director school legislation and 
administration. And behind Dr. Littlewood is Kevin 
Veitenheimer, acting director of university services. Next to 
Kevin is Nelson Wagner, executive director of facilities. In 
front of Mr. Wagner is Dr. Margaret Lipp, executive director of 
Saskatchewan Learning. Directly behind me is Gillian 
McCreary, executive director of the department. And behind 
Ms. McCreary is Don Sangster, executive director of school 
finance. To his left is Kevin Hoyt, director of finance. And 
directly in front of him and behind Dr. Dotson is Wayne 
McElree, assistant deputy minister of the department. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good afternoon 
to the minister and her officials today. We look forward to the 
next hour and a half or so of opportunities to question and have 
responses to some of the issues that arise from the provincial 
budget as it affects the Department of Learning. 
 
Since this is known as estimates, I think maybe we should deal 
with some of the numbers that we can manage to get some 
explanation for some of the changes that happened in this year’s 
budget and maybe dispense with that first and then get in to 
some other issues, related matters. 
 
Madam Minister, I refer to page 92 of the budget in which it 
talks about subprograms, operational support, and I notice the 
number for this year is down about $257,000. Would the 
minister provide an explanation for the drop in that particular 
category? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The operational 
support basically has been maintained year over year despite the 
apparent reduction. The major reason for the reduction, the 
transfer of information technology related costs to the student 
support program has resulted in the lower overall funding 
required for the subvote. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Then is there a point, Madam Minister, in the 
budgetary documents that would show a corresponding 
increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. On page 94 of the budget 
document under student support programs (LR13), the 
subprograms under operational support, you can see about a 
600,000 increase from 2002 to 2003-04. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, we’ll move to another 
category, and I’ll try and do the arithmetic a little later. 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

The universities, federated and affiliated colleges, and 
educational agencies are the next item detailed under 
subprograms. Madam Minister, I’m wondering if you could 
give us for the $229.564 million that are listed there for those 
particular areas, can you give us a relative percentage 
breakdown for the different categories within that subprogram? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you for the question. We don’t have 
the percentages, but I’ll give you the figures. For the 
universities, the subtotal in 2003 and ’04 is 211.869 million; in 
2002-03 it was two thousand . . . two hundred and five million, 
six hundred and twenty-two, one thirty. In federated colleges 
for the years 2003-2004 it’s eight million, five hundred and six 
thousand . . . four hundred thousand; in 2002 and 2003 it’s 
8.046 million. Affiliated colleges, subtotal in 2003-2004 is 
618,520; in 2002-03 it’s six thousand and one, four hundred. 
Aboriginal and northern education in 2003-04 the subtotal is 
8.255 million; and in ’02-03 it’s 7.585 million. Miscellaneous, 
in the subtotal, is 315,000; and 2002-03 it was 368,970. For the 
two totals in ’03 and ’04 is 229.564 million. In ’02-03 it was 
two hundred and twenty-two thousand, two hundred . . . 
222.224 million. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Through the Chair to the minister. Madam 
Minister, I’m trying to make notes as quickly as I could, but 
you detailed I think one of the educational agencies. Could you 
give us an indication in a little more detail of what other 
agencies might be part of that educational agency’s component? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Which exact total were you wanting more 
detail on? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Just the educational agencies . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Under each category you want them 
listed? 
 
I gave you the headings of the categories, the universities, 
federated colleges, affiliated colleges. 
 
And the two that I think you’re interested in are the Aboriginal 
and northern education ones which is Gabriel Dumont Institute, 
Gabriel Dumont Institute with SUNTEP (Saskatchewan Urban 
Native Teacher Education Program), Northern Teacher 
Education Program, First Nations University of Canada, 
northern health access program, and NORTEP (Northern 
Teacher Education Program) student lease costs. 
 
And the miscellaneous is the Council of Ministers of Education 
and the Sask Institute of Public Policy. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you for that breakdown, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Let’s move to the urban parks. What is the Department of 
Learning’s relationship with and agreement for funding of 
urban parks? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As the minister responsible for the 
Meewasin Valley Authority, I can tell you that the grants that 
we give to the Wascana Authority and the Meewasin Valley 

Authority go to the U of R (University of Regina) for Wascana 
and to the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) for the 
Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
And the U of S and the U of R both have members sitting on the 
Meewasin Valley board and the Wascana board respectively. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, can you give us the benefit of 
your experience? How did that particular role for the 
universities, the two universities, come into being as part of 
those various parks authorities? Is it just because of their 
location or is there some other factor that’s involved in that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m just going to give you a brief history. 
The Wascana Centre Authority was the first authority to form in 
1961 or ’2 and this was a group that comprised the city, the 
province, and the university — and at the time the university 
was on College Avenue — and this was to look at a large urban 
park with a vision to have some green space in the city, in the 
centre of the city. 
 
Twenty years later Meewasin did the same thing with the same 
type of partnership for Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Is there some rationale though, Madam 
Minister, other than the location of the two institutions, for their 
ongoing participation with this park arrangement? It seems to 
me that the cost isn’t significant but when we’re looking for as 
many dollars as possible to go into the educational needs of the 
province, is this a priority area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This is a historical arrangement. I think . . . 
I’m hoping I don’t hear what I think I heard you say, is that you 
don’t want . . . you want somehow Meewasin Valley Authority 
and Wascana Centre Authority to not get the money that’s in 
the budget for them. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I don’t think that’s what I 
said at all. I think I asked if it was a priority item in terms of the 
realities with educational funding. I mean I expect that parks are 
an important part of landscapes of the two urban centres we’re 
talking about. But is there some other mechanism by which 
these parks can be funded other than taking money out of the 
Learning department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The short answer is there is only one 
provincial budget. The money for Meewasin Valley Authority 
and the Wascana Centre Authority, we’ve committed ourselves 
to supporting that, those two parks, and the money would have 
to be taken from somewhere else. If you have ideas about that 
you could perhaps share those. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Madam Minister, I’d be happy to share 
those ideas if your government was willing to entertain ideas 
from the opposition. But one day they ask for our suggestions 
and the next day the minister tells us to keep out of it. So I don’t 
think that that’s really a satisfactory arrangement. 
 
We are here to ask questions about education. What I’m asking 
about is the money that your department has committed to 
urban parks. And if you have a long-standing agreement that 
you don’t feel you can renege on, say so. But if it’s not an 
educational priority maybe there is a better and more 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

 

appropriate area for that money to come from. And I think that 
it’s up to you to defend this particular budgetary decision. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This funding arrangement is 
long-standing. The Department of Learning is merely the 
vehicle that the government supports the major urban parks, and 
it is a priority for us to have those parks. And like I said, it is 
just the Learning department is where the money flows through. 
The government has a commitment to fund those two. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, we’re looking at an increase 
in expenditures in interprovincial agreements of approximately 
$100,000. Can you tell us what agreements are involved here 
and why the cost increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. The programs — the interprovincial agreements 
programs — are optometry in Waterloo, occupational therapy in 
Manitoba, occupational therapy in Alberta, orthotists and 
prosthetists in BC (British Columbia), denturists in NAIT 
(Northern Alberta Institute of Technology), nuclear medicine 
technology at SAIT (Southern Alberta Institute of Technology), 
respiratory tech . . . therapy at SAIT, and our interprovincial 
agreement co-ordinator here at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology). 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister. For the 
programs that you’ve just mentioned to us, does this amount of 
money help pay for the actual cost of Saskatchewan spaces in 
those programs, or any other administrative cost that might be 
associated with it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes, that is the cost of providing the . . . or 
paying for the seats in those programs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — What is the minister’s impression of that 
amount of money? Do you think we’re getting good value for 
that? Is that a bargain by your estimation, or is it money that 
you’d rather not spend on these programs? Let me . . . I’d just 
like your opinion on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think this is very good value for our 
money. We don’t have the critical mass of students to support 
all these programs ourselves and we do need those human 
resources in the province. Much like Alberta, BC, and Manitoba 
send their students to our western veterinary college, we do that 
sort of sharing. And we think we do get good value for our 
money, and excellent students. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I noticed also, as 
we proceed down the page, the various items under the 
subprograms. I noticed that SIAST and SPMC have $1.59 
million more provided for their needs. And that represents 
about a 10 per cent increase over last year’s budgetary 
allotment. Could you indicate how that increase was necessary, 
where was it used, and why? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Chair, before I continue with 
the answer, leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(16:00) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. In the 
Speaker’s gallery we have today some visiting scholars, and the 
University of Regina International Liaison Office has given us 
information on these people that are with us today. And I’d like 
through you . . . introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, Amir Zarrati. 
 
And I’m just going to give you a little bit of information on 
these people and their very interesting backgrounds. Mr. 
Zarrati’s background is in civil engineering, hydraulics. Maybe 
he could stand. Oh, he’s not here? 
 
All right, then we have a Ms. Huanzahao Wang. Not here 
either? Okay. 
 
All right. How about Linkun Tan? Very good. Mr. Tan arrived 
in Regina in April of this year as the recipient of the Wan Li 
Visiting Scholarship. 
 
The Wan Li Scholarship was established in 1991 by Dr. Donald 
Wells to celebrate the honorary degree that was conferred upon 
Wan Li, then chairman of the National People’s Congress. The 
Wan Li scholar is appointed from the state administration of 
foreign experts affairs. 
 
Mr. Tan is studying in the Faculty of Administration and is 
interested in public policy analysis, government financing, 
human rights development, and human resources development. 
Welcome. 
 
Do we have ZhiWu Liang? Good. Mr. Liang is the dean of the 
chemical engineering department at Hunan University in the 
People’s Republic of China. He has come here as the recipient 
of the Hunan University Visiting Scholarship. Each year the U 
of R provides support for two Hunan University faculty 
members to spend a six-month period here to do research. Mr. 
Liang is doing his research in the Faculty of Engineering. 
 
Dr. Deliang Han? Hello. Dr. Han is the vice-director associate 
professor in the geology department at the China Ocean 
University. Previous he acted as project manager of the 
scientific research division at Ocean University in Qingdao 
where he worked on international co-operation and exchange 
programs. Since arriving at the U of R in April, 2003, he has 
been working as a researcher in the department of geology. 
 
And Mr. Jose Roman Torres Solis. Mr. Solis has taken 
advantage of his sabbatical from his responsibilities as dean of 
the Graduate School of Business at the National Autonomous 
University of Mexico to come to the U of R as a visiting scholar 
in the Faculty of Administration. 
 
Dr. Torres is the author of three books and several articles in the 
area of human resource management. He’s currently studying 
the labour market in the petroleum industries in Canada and 
Mexico. He has been honoured with the 2003 faculty research 
program award from the Government of Canada. 
 
Did I miss anybody? Very good. 
 
I’d like to welcome them all on behalf of the Government of 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chair, with leave to respond to the 
introduction. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to offer our 
words of welcome, and hope that our guests enjoy the 
proceedings this afternoon. This is a much more informative 
part of the day to attend the House. And we hope they will learn 
something from these few minutes of visitation here and that 
they’ll be able to take some good news back to the respective 
jurisdictions they have come from. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to play host — not just in this 
legislative Chamber but in the province — to our visiting guests 
and dignitaries. And we appreciate it when they take the time to 
come see us here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The increased operating cost at SIAST: the 
grant is up 1.982 million and the increase in SPMC costs is 
1.589 million increase. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I appreciate the numbers but 
I guess the bigger question is why were those numbers 
necessary? Why were those increases required? And where 
were those expenditures made? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The increase in the operating grant to 
SIAST is to reflect the increase in operations to deliver the 
programs that SIAST does at all four of their campuses. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well let’s go to the second part of the question, 
Madam Minister. What about the increase of expenditures to 
SPMC then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The increased numbers of the SPMC is to 
directly reflect the increase in energy costs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — That’s a fairly significant number, Madam 
Minister, and if we have those kind of increases on a yearly 
basis we’re going to be hard pressed to meet them I would 
think. 
 
Would you be able to give us any indication of what efforts 
might be undertaken by SIAST and Sask Property Management 
Corporation to keep those energy costs in check? Have they 
undertaken energy audits of all their buildings, and have they 
done everything possible to make sure that they’re using energy 

as efficiently as possible? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — First of all I’d just like to say that this was 
an unusual year for energy costs to go up. It was reflective of 
the world market; they don’t usually go up that much in any 
given year. And SIAST is currently engaged in a process of 
energy audits and energy management. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Let’s move down 
to the post-secondary capital part of the document. We see that 
last year there was about $3.5 million set aside. This year we’re 
talking about 23 million, 313 or 314 million. Now I understand 
that with the corporation that the provincial government put into 
place — the Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation — 
last year, and dismantling it this year, it’s going to throw those 
numbers into disarray. 
 
But would the minister please give us an explanation as to why 
the decision was made to abandon the financing corporation on 
such a short term of reference? The corporation was introduced 
with much fanfare a year ago and then 12 months later it’s 
abandoned. Would the minister be able to give us an 
explanation for that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — When we entered into the education 
infrastructure financing committee . . . commission, we had 
consulted with the universities and with the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), the school 
trustees, and had agreed it would be a one-year pilot. The Public 
Sector Accounting Board in October, around October of this 
past fall, made a recommendation that we no longer do it that 
way and we have then adjusted our way of going forward for 
education financing. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Is this, Madam Minister, in effect a recognition 
of the fact that summary financial statements are a reality for 
the future of the government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The way the province does summary 
financial statements is a question best addressed to the Minister 
of Finance. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I think that summary 
financial statements are most satisfactorily answered by the 
Minister of Finance. But this is your department and this is part 
of your documentation for the budget. And it indicates that you 
have gone to a different way of financing. 
 
You drop the — as a department and as a government — you 
drop the approach that you had been taking earlier of financing 
post-secondary institutions and now we’ve gone to a more 
realistic and more transparent approach. And I’m hopeful, 
Madam Minister, that having seen this particular change or 
reversal of position, a change back to what the government had 
been doing previously, that we can count on seeing this type of 
accounting in the future. 
 
I guess if there’s anything that will obfuscate or confuse the 
situation is when you bounce from system to system; and I 
don’t think that anybody in the post-secondary sector, or even 
in the K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) sector, can afford to 
not know exactly where they stand when it comes to capital 
financing issues. That’s a very problematic area for individuals 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

 

in this province and we have a lot of projects of great need. And 
I’m certain that people who are making decisions for the 
well-being of their students, either on the local basis or at 
post-secondary institutions, need to know exactly how it is that 
they’re going to finance their obligations on behalf of their 
students and their campus superstructure. 
 
Madam Minister, moving to expenditures by type, I see we 
have an increase in salaries of $331,000. And that, I assume, is 
salaries strictly within the post-secondary sector of your 
department. Could you give us a clear indication if that’s what 
it is; and if so, what particular groups are covered by those 
salaries? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Just before I answer your question, I just 
want to mention with respect to your last question about 
post-secondary financing and the unclear atmosphere that we 
may have created among post-secondary institutions, they are 
very clear about how they’re going . . . how they will access 
funding. They are not confused. 
 
We do have a . . . This salary one you were talking about, it’s a 
2.5 increase in salaries is to reflect the collective bargaining 
agreements and those increases that occur year by year. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, they’re salaries for staff 
within the department only? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I hate to jump around like 
this because it confuses us as well. 
 
But we were talking about that infrastructure issue and it 
appears to me that there is some confusion. We’ve had long 
discussions, apparently, with the Minister of Finance over this. 
And it appears that the program that was put in place for 
infrastructure spending in the program last year has somewhere 
in the range of 32,000 . . . I’m sorry, $32.4 million left for 
expenditure in this year and years forward. 
 
Can you tell us how that’s accounted for and where it’s 
accounted for? And maybe the breakdown between 
post-secondary and K to 12 projects. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — On page 16 of the Estimates, in Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation, it’s 32,400 and . . . 32 
million, sorry, 400 left. That breaks down to a carry-over for K 
to 12 of 15.41 million and post-secondary, 16.964 million. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, thank you. The money that’s 
dedicated for post-secondary, the figure you just gave me of 16 
million-some-odd dollars is not reflected, I assume, in the 
budgetary figures on page 92 of $23.314 million. If I 
understand it correctly, Madam Minister, the $23.314 million 
that is budgeted for this year for post-secondary capital 
expenditures includes $4.714 million in interest expense on 
money that was advanced previously, plus about $18 million, 
eighteen six in fact, in new capital money that is being 
transferred to post-secondary institutions for this year. 
 

So the 16 million you talked about just in your answer 
previously must be money that was carried forward from the 
financing program that was established last year, the Crown 
corporation financing initiative that was undertaken by your 
government last year, for projects for this year and into the 
future. Could you define for us what projects, and how much 
money? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The carry-over of 16 million is not in the 
23 million. It is all, though, fully committed and it has been 
committed to a list of 16 projects, the names of which we can 
supply to you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair . . . Deputy Chair, and to 
the minister and to her officials, welcome. And I’m pleased 
with the opportunity to speak, to ask questions again today. 
 
Madam Minister, we’ll look forward to your list of schools and 
projects that are going to be covered under last year’s education 
infrastructure Crown corporation, and as . . . also the list of 
projects that are going to be looked at this year. 
 
Madam Minister, there was an indication that there wasn’t 
really any concern or any mix-up that . . . between the two 
systems now that you’ve gone back to it being totally funded 
under the Department of Learning. 
 
And I can tell you one thing that is a problem is to school 
divisions that see that there’s actually less than . . . way less 
than half of the money spent on capital construction this year 
that there was last year. And it is impacting a lot of school 
divisions, so it’s not something that’s gone unnoticed. 
 
Madam Minister, what I wanted to speak to you about was a 
number of issues. First of all, the questions that I asked last 
week on mathematics and writing skills, one of the questions 
was what we were going to do to ensure that there was . . . 
students would exceed accepted provincial and national 
performances. Madam Minister, your answer at that time was 
that you were going to be working with department . . . with 
partners to address the results on a yearly basis. 
 
And then, Madam Minister, you went onto a rant about the 
Saskatchewan Party but never really answered the question. 
And I’ve had e-mails, and I’m sure you have had too, from 
people who were very concerned that you’d rather talk about 
politics than talk about the students of this province and talk 
about the math and writing skills. 
 
I’m wondering, the Indicators report used to be based on a 
yearly . . . came on a yearly basis and now they’re on every two 
years basis which of course gives people of the province less of 
an opportunity to know what’s happening. Can you tell me 
specifically what your department, now that you’ve had a 
couple of days to look at this issue, what you’re going to be 
doing to ensure that our children have the skills in writing and 
math that they need to enter into the global economy? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the department and 
myself take these matters very seriously but so does the whole 
education community. So we are doing specific things with our 
partners in the community, in the education community. 
 



1868 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

There’s a curriculum and instruction team that is examining the 
report to look for the causes and some useful strategies to 
address the issues. 
 
There’s also the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 
Subject Council which is looking at the issue. We’ve also got 
special recruitment financial assistance to recruit specialists, 
and in particular math specialists. We have an assessment for 
learning which is classroom specific. We have done grades 5, 8, 
and 11 in nine pilot schools last spring. 
 
And we do take this very seriously and we do have ongoing 
approaches that are almost too, too many to list. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and it is very 
important that we do hear the words that it’s important to your 
department. 
 
But at the same time, we remember that it’s been five years 
since we’ve had the first report saying that we were behind in 
our mathematical skills in this province. So whatever we’ve 
been doing in the last five years hasn’t been good enough. 
 
So I guess there has to be some more initiatives or more . . . 
another approach that has to be taken to ensure that our children 
are equipped they way they should be in order to compete in the 
global economy. 
 
Madam Minister, there are a couple of other issues that I’d like 
to deal with. And I don’t know how many more times we’ll get 
to be up in the next month, but I think I’ll ask you some of them 
right now. 
 
One is on the property tax commission that is going around the 
province, and I’ve had the opportunity to have been at a 
meeting and was very impressed with the work that they were 
doing. But in the long run the people that . . . the comments that 
were made at the meetings I was at and some of my other 
colleagues were at, it wasn’t just a matter of how we’re going to 
divide the money up between different assessment areas, but 
also if the government actually has a commitment to further 
funding of education. 
 
(16:30) 
 
I was concerned the first time we had an opportunity to speak in 
estimates and I asked about the covering teachers’ salary and 
you’d indicated that the salaries would be covered for the 
calendar year 2003 but nothing had been committed for 2004. 
And now we have this commission that’s working on the whole 
idea of who’s going to be paying for education. 
 
So I’m waiting to hear that your department actually has a 
desire to ensure that education is going to be paid for more from 
provincial coffers than from property tax; not just the ongoing 
daily operations but teachers’ salaries and the other issues. 
Minister, I know that you’re aware of the saying that education 
may be expensive but ignorance is a lot more expensive. So we 
have to ensure that this department looks at the issue. 
 
So can you tell me, can you promise the people of the province 
that education is going to be looked at with a lot more priority 
in the next budget, if your government is here, and that you’re 

going to ensure that the students are going to be ready to get 
into the workplace by your commitment to education? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. When our 
government comes back to make the next budget, we’ll 
continue to build on what we have demonstrated is a major 
commitment to education — $1.2 billion. 
 
When we talk about the portion of the education funding that 
comes from the property tax, that’s in excess of $600 million. 
The commission is looking at where do we best see that money 
coming from, not where it can be taken away from. Like we 
still need $600 million in education. So there is only one 
taxpayer in the province and we need to find out how best we 
distribute the money. 
 
The commission will give us recommendations, but we still 
have our government’s commitment to funding education. It’s 
our second top priority after health and we demonstrate that 
year after year and we’ll continue to do so when we put the next 
budget together. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, there are $660 million that 
actually is taken in on property taxes in this province — that’s 
people that are living not only in urban centres but in rural 
centres. And that’s how much money we’re expecting these 
people to pay for education. I don’t think they’re minding it, but 
what they are wanting to ensure is that we have the same type 
of commitment from the province that we have from the 
property owners. 
 
Madam Minister, the issue . . . One other issue in the area of 
facilities that I’d like to address is the Yorkdale School Division 
and the fact that Theodore School has made application or is 
making application to look at its own school division. And one 
of their concerns is the school at Theodore. 
 
I am wondering where your department stands on this issue, if 
you’ve had any contact with Yorkdale School Board or the 
committee, the ratepayers who are interested in having this 
school transferred to a new school division. What kind of input 
does your department have and are you going to be giving this 
school the support it needs to ensure that our children are 
educated in the way their parents want them to be, that their 
parents actually have some choice in education? And that is 
basically what the SchoolPLUS issue was about and the 
Community Schools — having parental input — so can you tell 
me where you’re standing on this issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Theodore 
has voted to establish . . . The Theodore electors have voted to 
establish a Catholic school division and the next step is a 
minister’s order to establish that division. The Catholic electors 
will then elect their own school board and when that school 
board is elected we respect the autonomy of school boards. It 
will be up to them to decide how to deliver school services to 
their students. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, through the cost-sharing 
agreements for building schools and for operating schools, the 
department has put a significant amount of money into the 
Theodore School over the years so there would be some . . . I 
would imagine you would agree that the department feels they 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

 

have some share or some responsibility for that school. So my 
question to you is: do you have any input or any say in where 
this school will go if the new school division is established? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The legal owner of the school is the 
Yorkdale School Division and it is up to them to decide what 
they do with that school. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. There’s one 
other issue I’d like to touch on before we go . . . one of my 
colleagues asks questions, and that’s the whole issue of FASD 
(fetal alcohol spectrum disorder). And I am very interested in 
hearing what your department is doing in this area. 
 
I do know that it’s an area where there’s been some agreement 
between six departments to work on the issue. We know that 
there’s two sides to the story, both the preventative side and the 
diagnostic side. And the education issue in the school system is 
something that I’m very, I’m very in tune to and I’m interested 
in your views on it. 
 
Could you tell me how much money Learning is spending on 
the issue of educational promotional for FASD, and if you’re 
spending any money on the diagnostic side of FASD? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Having had 
the FAS/FAE (fetal alcohol syndrome/fetal alcohol effects) file 
when I was the associate minister of Health, I do want to say 
that the promotion material that goes out about FAS and FASD 
is largely under the purview of the Department of Health and 
the Minister of Health, as is the diagnosis. What Learning does 
support is special education. And depending on the severity and 
intensity of the needs of the students, we have different levels 
of funding per student for that in our operating grants. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, which 
department takes the lead in looking at and handling the whole 
issue of FASD? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There’s different components to FAS and 
FASD and the approach to dealing with it, so we have an 
interdepartmental committee where each one of us brings our 
specific interests and expertise to the table. 
 
There is also a western and northern provincial and territorial 
protocol agreement that has a specific subcommittee dealing 
with FAS and FASD. As is in Health, it’s the western . . . 
started off with the Western provinces but now includes the 
North and it is also pooling resources across the provinces to 
deal with it from the health angle and also from the education 
angle. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I would imagine 
though for an initiative to go ahead somebody has to take the 
lead and someone has to call the meetings and someone has to 
be the one that says, I’m in charge of this issue. Can you tell me 
which department that is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Health actually is the lead department that 
chairs the committee. What I didn’t get to mention when I was 
up answering is that the Kids First program, which is housed 
now under the Department of Learning, is an assessment and 
screening tool for children and families in need and that’s also 

where we deliver some of our programs, through those targeted 
resources. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you tell me 
when in the education system, from what grade, do students 
start learning about the issue of FASD, and can you tell me how 
many students have been diagnosed with this disorder within 
the school system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This is part of our curriculum — the health 
curriculum that’s in Learning — and in grades 2, 3, and 4 the 
students are exposed to discussions about choices and lifestyles. 
And in the higher grades, like 7 and 8, they start getting into the 
risks associated with some of the addictions and some of the 
choices that they make and the effects on fetuses and children. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The other part of 
the question was can you tell me how many students are 
considered or diagnosed with FASD in the school system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m just going to give you the number of 
the high-cost students that we finance and that’s 4,552. There’s 
varying degrees and different diagnoses included in that. We 
don’t have a specific breakout of FAS or FASD or FAE; it 
manifests itself in so many different ways. We just have it 
captured under high-cost student support. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon to the 
minister and her officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I just wanted to ask, at this point has your 
government made a determination on whether there would be 
continued funding to the Bruno Campus, extension division of 
the University of Saskatchewan? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Bruno campus has not been 
historically directly funded through the Department of 
Learning; it’s the U of S that determines its funding. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I thought there 
may be some information coming from your officials in regards 
to the determination that had been made, because there was 
some deliberation going on as to whether or not the Bruno 
campus was a viable campus right now. And of course the 
community and the surrounding district have made very good 
use of that campus and are certainly hoping that there will be a 
positive consideration given to continuing the education that 
has been provided there in the last while. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to just move to a different line of 
questioning. I’d like to know what the relationship is of the 
Department of Learning to the newly named First Nations 
University of Canada. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I was very, 
very honoured to partake in the ceremony on Saturday at the 
naming of the First Nations University of Canada — the 
magnificent ceremony, a historic ceremony. 
 
And our relationship is the same with this entity as it was with 
SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College). Nothing has 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

changed with the name change. We are a minority funder; the 
major funding comes from the federal government. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
does your department or was your department asked for any 
help or information in the compilation of the MLA guest list to 
the grand opening of the First Nations University of Canada? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As far as we were aware this was the 
SIFC’s event, a third party event. They organized it and they 
had their own guest list. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, could I ask you when you 
received your invitation and whether you received that 
invitation . . . whether you received the invitation to your office 
here at the legislature or was it to your constituency office? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m not absolutely sure which office it 
came to. It’s in my minister’s office because I was . . . I think it 
came there because I was participating or asked to participate in 
the opening of the doors, so I was there in an official capacity. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, was your department asked for any assistance in the 
compilation of the guest list for the grand opening? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — My same answer, as I just said, is no. It 
was their own event and they set . . . they established their own 
guest list. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Now, Madam 
Minister, we want to move back to some of the other specifics 
concerning education available through the auspices of SIAST 
in the province. 
 
One of the interesting approaches the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology has taken in its delivery of 
programs, and they’ve done it with some pride over the past 
number of years, is a competency-based approach to learning. 
And I don’t think I have to explain that to the minister or her 
officials. 
 
But it seemed to me that that was an approach taken with 
considerable enthusiasm and reasonably good results. But on 
two or three separate occasions lately, I’ve had representation 
made to my office by students at SIAST who are fearful that the 
approach is going to be dropped — the competency-based 
method of learning is going to be eliminated and the approach 
will return to the more traditional classroom method. Can the 
minister confirm for us today that that is indeed the intentions 
of SIAST? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Each program at SIAST has its own 
advisory committee made up of, specifically, with industry 
support and participation. And those committees advise SIAST 
of what would best be the approach for that particular program. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Can the minister confirm for us today how long 
the competency-based approach has been employed at SIAST 
and what comparative relationship there might be to the results 
of that approach versus the traditional classroom approach? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — It’s difficult to describe the history of the 

competency approach since some programs have never had it. 
And the approach for delivery of a program is determined by 
the committee, the advisory committee, and it is based on the 
needs of industry at that point in time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I would think that if an 
industry advisory committee was making the call on this type of 
program, they would want a program that would provide them 
the very best, well-qualified candidates for employment in the 
private sector. And I’m not sure that that would necessarily 
eliminate the competency-based approach. 
 
I’m wondering, Madam Minister, if there isn’t a financial 
reason for making this decision. It seems to me that competency 
would provide a better, more well-rounded, and maybe a more 
efficient result in terms of the educational process for the 
individuals than the traditional classroom method. And I’m not 
so sure that industry would really want to make this particular 
recommendation. There must, I think, be some other reason for 
it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I said in my previous answer, the 
decisions about how the programs should be made are done on 
. . . in consultation with the advisory committee, which are . . . 
have industry representatives sitting on the advisory committee. 
And they make their recommendations according to what their 
industry sees as needed from the program. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, we’ve had this same concern 
brought to us by at least three different classes at SIAST. The 
most recent one, and I’m reading from a letter that was actually 
sent to you and a copy provided for me, this is from the 
Wascana machine shop program. We’ve also heard from 
automotive mechanics. We’ve heard from a couple of other 
mechanical specialties and I believe also automotive, I’m sorry, 
auto body specialties. 
 
And it’s apparent the students think that this is a much superior 
approach. And if they believe it’s a superior approach, it gives 
them a better basis for employment opportunities and it trains 
them more thoroughly and completely, what is the push then to 
move to the traditional classroom-style approach to training 
people in these areas of specialization? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m not sure how much clearer I can be. 
I’m not aware of any push for any one way or another. As I’ve 
said before, the decisions on how to deliver a program are done 
with the advice of the advisory committee. And that committee 
is comprised of industry representatives who will have their say 
in how the program should best be delivered to serve the needs 
of the students and the industry. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, has the industry given your 
office any indication of why it’s requiring these changes, then? 
Have they been in touch with the department, in any respect, to 
say, we’re unsatisfied with the program the way it’s been? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Traditionally the advice from the advisory 
committees goes to deans of the different programs and the 
program heads. They do not come to the department or to the 
minister. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I think that that’s an issue that’s going to have 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

 

to have further discussion at some future date, Madam Minister. 
Because, you know, I think if the results are in and the 
preference by the students for this approach is clear, I’d really 
have to hear from the industry that they do not want this before 
I could accept the fact that it should be changed. 
 
And if there is a financial constraint on SIAST or other similar 
types of institutions that compels them to make a change, I just 
need to know about that. But if the industry is saying they want 
a change, we ought to know about that through this discussion 
today. And I would be surprised if you have not heard 
specifically from the industry as to why they would ask for a 
reverting to the previous type of approach. 
 
Madam Minister, we’re running a little short of time today, so I 
do want to ask one other specific area of questioning. It had to 
do with a press release that was made by the union that 
represented instructors at SIAST where they cried foul about a 
government decision to provide three-quarters of a million 
dollars of job training money directly to a call centre that was 
indicating an interest in relocating to Regina. 
 
The unionized employees said that they could have provided 
that training through SIAST quite readily. The Minister of 
Industry and Resources, I think, said that he thought it was 
more propitious to give the money directly to the company 
involved and there was quite a disagreement between the 
minister and obviously the union on this particular issue. 
 
Madam Minister, may I ask why was not SIAST given an 
opportunity to provide this training and why was the $750,000 
given to the applicant directly? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The training that was involved was 
proprietary training for the company’s own staff and SIAST 
will be involved in the evaluation of the outcomes of the 
program. 
 
And I understand this is our last question, so I would like to 
thank the members for their questions and thank my officials 
for participating today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee report 
progress on Department of Learning and proceed to estimates 
on Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It now being near 5 o’clock, the 
committee will stand recessed until 7 o’clock p.m. 
 
The committee recessed until 19:00. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1845 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1845 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1845 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1845 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1845 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1845 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1845 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1845 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1846 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1846 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1846 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1846 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1846 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1846 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1846 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1865 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1866 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
 Romanow Commission Expenses 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
 Community Initiatives Fund Grants 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
 100th Anniversary of St. Peter’s Colony 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1848 
 Ile-a-la-Crosse’s New Multi-use Facility 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1848 
 Frenchman River Valley Gospel Music Jamboree 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1848 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
 Water Levels in Qu’Appelle Lakes 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1851 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1851 
 Telephone Service in Rural Saskatchewan 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1852 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1852 
 POINT OF ORDER 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1854 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1854 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1854 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1854 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1854 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Culture, Youth and Recreation — Vote 27 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1855 
  Eagles .............................................................................................................................................................................1855, 1862 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1858 



 

 

  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1861 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1862 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1863 
  Elhard ............................................................................................................................................................................1863, 1870 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1869 
 
 
 
 


