















































Hansard: March 27, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 205 
 March 27, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
number of constituents in the constituency of Cypress Hills who 
are very concerned about the government’s policy on renewing 
Crown grazing leases. And the petition they have asked me to 
present on their behalf today reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
communities of Abbey, Hazlet, Cabri, and Gull Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
residents of my hometown of Swift Current who are very 
concerned with the state of their current hospital and desiring of 
a new one. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, the petition is filled with names 
of residents of the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here, 
citizens wanting to improve Highway 42, hoping this 
government will because it’s the right thing to do. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens of Tugaske, Caronport, Marquis, 
Keeler, Regina, Moose Jaw, Eyebrow. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

again in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from Shell 
Lake and Parkside. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning taking necessary steps to have Crop 
Insurance reverse the 2003 premium increases; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 5 and 12. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 13 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: what was the final balance 
between revenues and expenses for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance in 2000, and were the funds from Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance transferred to the General Revenue Fund in 
this year? 

 
And I have similar questions, Mr. Speaker, for the past 10 
years. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 13 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: due to the dramatic increase 
of the elk herd in zone 50, will your department be 
increasing the number of bull and cow elk hunting licences 
for the fall of 2003, and if so, by how much? 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 13 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: how much funding did 
kindergarten programs receive in the fiscal year 1998-99? 

 
I also have similar questions for the fiscal years 1999-2000, 
2000-2001, 2001-2002, 2002-2003. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 13 ask 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: how much funding did 
licensed child care centres, that is child care centres and 
family child care homes, receive in the form of either 
subsidies or grants in the fiscal year of 1998-99? 

 
I also have similar questions for the fiscal years ’99-2000, 
2000-2001, 2001-2002, 2002-2003. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have two groups of guests today, and they’ve conveniently sat 
in the same gallery together. 
 
I’d like to take the opportunity to introduce to you and all 
members, the women’s group from the Salvation Army Regina 
Downtown Community Church who have come to view today’s 
proceedings. Maybe give a little wave up there — there they 
are; we had lunch together. And they are accompanied by their 
pastor, Captain Denise Walker. The women’s group strives to 
incorporate four areas into their programs: worship, education, 
fellowship, and service. And today the group’s program is 
educational. 
 
So I’d like all members to join me in warmly welcoming the 
Salvation Army Regina Downtown Community Church’s 
women’s group here today. Thank you for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And, Mr. Speaker, I started out with 
one group of movie guests and I see now that we have two rows 
of movie guests. But it is with great pleasure that I introduce to 
you and all the members of the House, John Ketcham of John 
Ketcham Productions. John, if you could give a wave. 
 
Accompanying Mr. Ketcham is Candice Fonagy, her daughter, 
Bobbie-Joe, as well as Ms. Valerie Creighton, CEO (chief 
executive officer) of SaskFILM. And I see in front as well, Mr. 
Gerry Sperling. I forget the other gentleman’s name . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. John will take care of you, 
Mr. Sperling. 
 
John Ketcham Productions will begin principal photography on 
I Accuse — a 3 million movie being shot in several locations in 
and around Moose Jaw and Regina. Mr. Ketcham who’s 
producing and directing this production also produced The 
Hurricane, an award-winning, true story starring Denzel 
Washington. 
 
I Accuse is based on a true Saskatchewan story. It captures a 
woman’s courage and determination to fight for justice. The 
film will include John Hannah from Four Weddings and a 
Funeral as well as The Hurricane, and Estella Warren of Planet 
of the Apes and Driven fame. 
 
Now they’re here today because in May 2001, SaskFILM went 
to Los Angeles to let people know about the Saskatchewan 
advantage, and that, Mr. Speaker, is a good thing. 

I ask all members to warmly welcome our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce one of my constituents, Gerry Sperling. And he’s a 
movie producer in his own right. And he has with him today 
two other movie producers who are working on a movie here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to introduce Kim Engelhart who is a producer from 
Oslo, Norway, and his partner in a production that’s taking 
place here, Freddie Braidy, who is from Hollywood. The movie 
they’re working on is Lost Angel and they plan to do three more 
movies in Regina in the Wings of the Dragon series. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I would like to join the 
minister in welcoming the women’s group from the Salvation 
Army Downtown Community Church. We’re very pleased to 
see you here and we would like to express our gratitude for the 
ongoing work that you do for the well-being of your 
community. 
 
Thank you and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to join the minister in welcoming the people 
involved in movie production here this afternoon. We on the 
opposition side hope that you enjoy the proceedings this 
afternoon and we hope that wherever your travels do take you, 
they are safe ones. So enjoy your stay here this afternoon. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming a special guest, Candice 
Fonagy. Her parents farmed just outside of Kipling. In fact her 
mother and I had the dubious opportunity of actually beginning 
our education in a one-room schoolhouse, moving into the 
larger community centre. 
 
So a special welcome to Candice and her daughter at this time. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Joining us today in the 
west gallery, our three very competent and capable New 
Democratic Party caucus employees. And I would like all 
members of the legislature to welcome Gail Fehr, Jannet 
Shanks, and Gail McNab. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Concern for Canadian Soldier 
 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this session many members 
have expressed an opinion on the situation in Iraq. We can all 
agree I think that in one way or another, either directly or 
indirectly, we are all affected by what is happening half a world 
away. 
 
In particular, I want to refer to a story in yesterday’s 
Leader-Post, a story about a Regina family that is very 
concerned for the safety of one of its members who is serving 
with the United States Navy. Alexis Dawn Dustyhorn is serving 
with a naval mobile construction battalion, the first Aboriginal 
woman to join these ranks. 
 
Although information about her unit’s location and activities 
are not clear, it is obvious that it could very well be in harm’s 
way. Her family is proud of her accomplishments thus far, and 
justifiably worried about her safety. 
 
I should add, Mr. Speaker, that we know of at least four other 
Saskatchewan First Nations youth serving in US (United States) 
units, and we wish them safe passage as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mention Alexis Dustyhorn in particular because 
her mother, Gail McNab, was formerly a member of my staff, 
as she was for the members for Cumberland and Saskatoon 
Southeast. Currently she works in our caucus office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all share Gail’s anxiety. We pray for her 
daughter’s safety and for the safety of all in harm’s way. Most 
of all, we desire peace for our fragile world. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to the Estevan Bordertown Bruins 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Estevan Bordertown Bruins carved themselves out a little piece 
of history this past Sunday becoming the first club to win the 
Saskatchewan Hockey Association Midget AA Championship 
three years in a row. In what turned out to be a classic 
barnburner of a game, the Bruins, led by the outstanding play of 
goalie Trevor Preugger, downed the Saskatoon Raiders 2-1 to 
clinch the title. 
 
Although they have accomplished a major goal, the Bruins still 
have some work to take care of. They began the South 
Saskatchewan Minor League hockey finals Tuesday night 
against the Weyburn Encana Wings. This team was really 
pumped when they learned they were going to play against 
Weyburn. This is a best of three game series with the third 
game, if necessary, taking place in Estevan on Sunday. 
 
Congratulations and best wishes to the Estevan Bordertown 
Bruins. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Qu’Appelle Valley Recognized by 
Harrowsmith Country Life Magazine 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Harrowsmith Country Life magazine has recognized the 
Qu’Appelle Valley as one of the top 10 places to live in rural 
Canada. It was selected, Mr. Speaker, because of its history, its 
natural beauty, its potential for small-scale agriculture, and its 
ability to provide a comfortable rural life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to represent a small part of the valley 
and pleased that I have had the opportunity to spend a fair 
amount of time in and around it. Mr. Speaker, anyone who has 
spent any time in the Qu’Appelle Valley will agree that it is 
indeed one of the prettiest places in the country, and a great 
place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the article notes that the Qu’Appelle Valley is one 
of Canada’s best kept secrets and with The Future is Wide Open 
campaign, it will be a secret no longer. It’s a wonderful place to 
live and work, whose assets include hobby farms, market 
gardens, and a relatively inexpensive price for land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to add to that list of the valley’s 
assets: its value for large-scale farming; its recreational 
opportunities; its fine, friendly people and their vibrant 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Harrowsmith magazine is absolutely right, the 
Qu’Appelle Valley is a great place to live. And notwithstanding 
the Sask Party’s disease of negativity — gloom and doom — 
this entire province is a great place to live and the future is wide 
open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Southwest Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well tomorrow the 
Minister of Finance will deliver the budget and the people of 
southwest Saskatchewan will be listening very carefully. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, our region of the province has been 
sending truckloads of money to this NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government. Indeed just last year in oil royalty revenue 
alone, the Southwest sent to this government $130 million. That 
is in addition to the gas royalties and the revenue from land 
sales for the oil and gas industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the people of the Southwest are particularly disappointed 
then that this government appears willing to ignore such 
important issues as the beef and ranching industry in the 
Southwest vis-à-vis the issue with respect to Crown land lease 
renewals. They’re disappointed that they seem ready to ignore 
the basic infrastructure needs of the Southwest. And they’re 
especially disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that this NDP 
government makes the people of southwest Saskatchewan beg 
for a service so basic as a modern, clean hospital facility in 
Swift Current. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, southwest Saskatchewan 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

sends enough oil royalty revenue in just 45 days to pay for the 
NDP’s share of a new hospital in Swift Current to serve the 
entire region. 
 
So on behalf of the Sask Party MLAs from southwest 
Saskatchewan and on the eve of the budget, we want to let this 
NDP government know that we’re watching. We know that 
they’ve been taking the golden eggs, Mr. Speaker, while 
they’ve been ignoring the goose, and the goose has had enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Doug Wilson Award 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on Tuesday night the University of Saskatchewan 
Students’ Union held its Excellence awards ceremony to 
recognize outstanding students, teachers, volunteers, and staff. 
 
Pat Atkinson, Jean Burgess, Gens Heliquist, Deb Hopkins, 
Diane Nicolson, Skip Kutz, Mel and Kate McCorriston, Peter 
Millard, Richard Nordahl, Neil Richards, Bill Slights, Judith 
Varga, the Honourable Justice Catherine Wedge, and Norman 
Zepp — or as they were known in 1975, the Committee to 
Defend Doug Wilson — received the Doug Wilson Award. 
 
Doug Wilson was a U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 
College of Education masters student whose degree was 
stopped because the College of Education said he could not 
supervise practice teachers because he was gay. 
 
The Committee to Defend Doug Wilson brought together the 
students’ union, the Federation of Labour, as well as individual 
students and faculty members. Its efforts ultimately led the 
university in 1979 to prohibit discrimination based on sexual 
orientation, and then to the expansion of The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code by our NDP government to include sexual 
orientation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I praise the efforts of the 15 members of the 
Committee to Defend Doug Wilson and congratulate them on 
their well-deserved award. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I wasn’t . . . Order. I wasn’t able to pick up 
whether the member was quoting or not, but at any rate I would 
just remind the member that use of peoples’ names who are 
members of the Assembly should be referred to by . . . as 
represent . . . the constituency they represent. 
 

Lakeland and District Citizens of the Year 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as all 
members of our honoured Assembly are aware, volunteerism is 
an integral part of Saskatchewan’s fabric. Women and men 
from every corner of this province give freely of their time to 
ensure that our local communities and our province is and will 
be a better place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is therefore a distinct pleasure today to be able 

to bring news to this House about the 20th annual Lakeland and 
District Citizen of the Year Award. Twenty years ago, when 
this event was first envisioned, the local organizers were unsure 
that such an event would have such a long-lasting effect and 
success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Saturday last, March 22, the good citizens of 
Lakeland honoured a dynamic couple whose love and 
commitment to Lakeland was honoured at its 20th annual 
Citizen of the Year banquet. William and Margaret Courtney 
have spent decades celebrating and promoting Lakeland, hence 
these two well-known and respected citizens were honoured, 
Mr. Speaker, last Saturday evening. 
 
Bill and Marg helped form the Lakeland and District 
Firefighting Co-op, the Lakeland Lions Club, were involved 
with the Lakeland Chamber of Commerce, and numerous 
events associated with these organizations. 
 
Although Bill and Marg are looking forward to handing the 
reins over to a new and equally committed group of 
Lakelanders, their example has set a standard for everyone who 
dedicates themselves to volunteerism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 
congratulating William and Margaret Courtney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Firm Wins SaskPower Award 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to inform the Assembly about one of the many thriving 
businesses in my constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. This 
company is Quality Steel Inc. 
 
This past February, Quality Steel was awarded a Power of 
Business Award from SaskPower in recognition of the 
important role that it plays in SaskPower’s success, as well as 
its contribution to the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
In 1991 Quality Steel began operating as an existing foundry 
that was previously idle. Quality Steel produces cast steel parts 
for the cement and mining industry as well as others. Quality 
Steel began with a staff of 16 and it now employs 52 people. 
 
Since 1993, Quality Steel has completed about $1 million worth 
of business with SaskPower. It supplies 150 different types of 
parts to SaskPower for its coal-fired electric generating stations. 
And, Mr. Speaker, approximately 80 per cent of Quality Steel’s 
output is exported out of Saskatchewan, with half of its exports 
destined for the United States. 
 
Quality Steel is further proof that Saskatchewan companies are 
competing and succeeding in Canadian and world markets and 
are representing this province very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating Quality Steel on their accomplishment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan people are absolutely outraged about the NDP’s 
negligence when it came to overseeing gaming revenue. This is 
public money. But how was it being spent? Trips around the 
world on the Concorde, luxury hotels, limousines, golfing, $800 
sunglasses. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, many First 
Nations people in our province live in poverty. 
 
The NDP allowed Dutch Lerat to blow nearly $1 million on 
extravagant personal expenses. It’s absolutely disgusting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dutch Lerat usually did not travel by himself. To 
the minister, did any government officials ever accompany Mr. 
Lerat on any of his trips? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
continues to press the issue that we’ve already discussed. 
 
With respect to the investigations that have been already carried 
out, the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) investigated. 
The Provincial Auditor investigated. There was another 
independent audit that was completed and, Mr. Speaker, the 
Justice department reviewed the entire file and found that there 
were no reasons for prosecution. 
 
Now I’m not sure how much further we need to go to explain 
that we’ve made a great deal of progress. We’ve addressed 
those issues and people have been held accountable, Mr. 
Speaker, and the matter should be resolved. I’m not sure where 
the member wants to take this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is incredible. No one has 
been held accountable. Dutch Lerat flies around the world, stays 
in luxury hotels, goes golfing, spends money on shopping. And 
at the same time, First Nations people in our province live in 
poverty and this minister and this NDP government thinks it’s 
okay. 
 
Well it isn’t okay. And the public is demanding answers and 
they have a right to have these answers because this is their 
money — this is public money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again to the minister. Will the minister provide a 
list of exactly who travelled with Dutch Lerat on his numerous 
trips? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, we have a forum through the 
Public Accounts Committee that has the legislative authority to 
call SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) to a 
hearing and if SLGA is called before the Public Accounts 
Committee, it will oblige. And that is the forum that this 
exercise can be carried through. 
 

Mr. Speaker, again I’m totally confused as to where that 
opposition is coming from. There’s got to be some dispute 
between their leader and their members. I’m going to quote this 
again from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix in a speech that the 
Leader of the Opposition delivered to the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) in February 2002. This article 
says, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the member continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — And I want to quote what the Leader of the 
Opposition told the chiefs of the First Nations in this great 
province of ours. The article says, and I quote: 
 

Hermanson praised (praised) the FSIN for running a 
successful gaming business and complimented it for 
addressing “governance challenges” at SIGA. 

 
Where are they going, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Again we have no answers from the NDP. I 
asked a simple question. No answers from the minister. That is 
why the taxpayers of this province are outraged — $800,000 
goes missing and no one is held accountable. I would like to 
read a quote from the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. And it 
talks about the use of public funds. And it reads: 
 

As a result, SIGA has reduced profits available for 
distribution to . . . First Nations Fund, community 
development corporations, and the General Revenue Fund 
of the Government. 
 

This is from the Provincial Auditor in fall of 2002 and he is 
talking about the present circumstances surrounding Liquor and 
Gaming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $800,000 is more than many First Nations people 
will see in their lifetime, yet this government allowed Dutch 
Lerat to spend that in one year. 
 
How did the NDP let this happen and who is going to be held 
accountable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite obvious that 
the members opposite have no appreciation of all the good that 
has been done through the agreement that we have with FSIN. 
When that member talks about losing money from the public 
coffers, she’s totally incorrect, Mr. Speaker. We have recovered 
$1.36 million. The $800,000 that is owed to SIGA, they are 
looking into it and have indicated that they will be looking at 
the possibility of taking action to recover it. 
 
I mean, Mr. Speaker, the numbers of people that are working as 
a result of our gaming agreement, the amount of money that 
comes into communities to help build communities and help 
people is very evident — hundreds of thousands of dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

Ms. Bakken: — It is the minister’s responsibility to ensure the 
proper use of public funds; $800,000 is missing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister says they’ve learned their lesson and 
everything is fixed. But that’s not true because 19 of the 
recommendations of the Provincial Auditor have . . . there were 
19 recommendations and only 7 of the 19 have been met. 
 
Last year — this is last year — SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority) paid $550,000 in unauthorized payments. 
They have improper accounting policies; their financial reports 
are inadequate; they make inappropriate sponsorship payments; 
they use money for golf fees and for golf memberships — these 
are the findings of the Provincial Auditor from fall of 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the NDP claim that the problems have 
been fixed? Have they learned nothing from the past? Why is 
Liquor and Gaming not doing their job and why is the minister 
allowing this to happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 
was reporting on the period ending March 31, 2002 — one year 
ago. Since that time the Provincial Auditor’s focus on 
outstanding issues that needed to be addressed were addressed. 
The significant benchmarks that were met allowed us to go 
back into negotiations for a gaming agreement. The sustainable 
benchmarks are continued to be worked on and there has been a 
great deal of progress made in that respect. 
 
So they’ve met their benchmarks, Mr. Speaker, for governance 
and accountability. As a result, SIGA has reduced its 
expenditures by millions of dollars and doubled, doubled its net 
profits that are going to benefit all the people of this province. 
 
So is there more work to be done, Mr. Speaker? Yes, there is. 
And we continue to work for them, with them, in mutual 
respect, Mr. Speaker, and that’s how we resolve issues and 
that’s how we continue to support the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The minister stands in his place today and says 
that things are fine and things are improving at Liquor and 
Gaming. Mr. Speaker, according to the auditor’s report last fall 
in 2002, and I quote: 
 

SIGA paid $400,000 to the FSIN and $150,000 to 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing (SIGL). Although 
Liquor and Gaming specifically approved these payments, 
we think the 1995 Casino Operating Agreement does not 
authorize . . . (these) payments. 

 
And further on it says: 
 

Management also told us SIGA paid $150,000 to . . . 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing) because Liquor 
and Gaming authorized SIGA to do so. 

 
The minister stands in his place and he tells us everything is 

fine. And yet his department is still authorizing payments that 
are not appropriate according to the Provincial Auditor. Will he 
stand in his place today and tell us what he is doing to correct 
these inefficiencies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the arrangements that came 
with the agreement in 1995 had certain opportunities to allow 
both SIGL (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing) and SIGA 
to work together to ensure that the licensing body of SIGA 
would be allowed to arrange an opportunity to license their own 
gaming issues, attend to their own gaming issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand what the member is saying, that there 
is a great deal of progress still needs to be made. And I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when the auditor reports in his next 
report, there will be recognition of significant changes. There 
will be recognition of significant amounts of dollars that will be 
flowing back to First Nations and to the people of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Public Health Concerns 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. There are concerns today 
that a case of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, may 
have turned up in Saskatchewan — specifically in the 
Saskatoon Health Region. The region announced yesterday the 
particular patient was being isolated and that precautionary 
measures were being taken as tests were being carried out to 
determine the nature of the illness and whether or not it indeed 
was a SARS case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister provide an update about this case 
and whether or not SARS has been confirmed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank 
the member for this question because I think it relates to an 
issue that’s of concern to all people in Saskatchewan, but also 
people in Canada and around the world. 
 
They are still doing the tests. Not all the tests have come 
through. But it appears that it is a suspected case and they are 
operating in that fashion. 
 
What happened in Saskatchewan almost two weeks ago, March 
14, was the chief medical health officer contacted all emergency 
wards, all of the medical health officers in the province to warn 
them about this notice that had come from the World Health 
Organization and the center for disease control. 
 
So the province has been in a ready state for almost two weeks 
now. There’s continued monitoring all the time right across the 
province. This particular case is being dealt with. And we want 
to basically assure everybody in the province that all steps are 
being taken to make sure that it doesn’t spread here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, SARS is proving 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

 

to be a highly contagious ailment. And the province of Ontario 
has announced extraordinary measures to fight the outbreak of 
the disease in their province. This includes an unprecedented 
number of quarantines and the declaration of a provincial health 
emergency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the seriousness of the situation and the 
potential for SARS to become a health concern in 
Saskatchewan, will the minister detail what plans are in place if 
indeed this patient’s diagnosis proves to be SARS, and is there 
detailed contingency plans in place in order to quarantine and to 
make sure that this does not spread beyond this initial case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What has happened in Saskatchewan, as I 
mentioned, is that approximately two weeks ago all of the 
medical health officers, emergency wards across the province 
were put on alert. All of the various procedures are available, 
including quarantine and these various things if they’re 
necessary. 
 
Obviously the work done when a suspected case shows up is to 
isolate that person to make sure that there’s no spread at all. 
That’s the stage that we’re at now. 
 
If something more does come, well then all of the appropriate 
steps will be taken. We have a very good public health system 
in Saskatchewan that deals with these kinds of cases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
spread of SARS in Canada and perhaps now in Saskatchewan is 
of course of great concern. But so is their growing concern 
about West Nile virus as we approach warmer months and 
particularly the mosquito season. The fact that the virus was 
detected in Saskatchewan last year means that people are 
preparing for its arrival again. And although no human cases 
were found in this province last summer, it is probable that 
there could be a human infection this summer. 
 
From the public health standpoint, will the minister explain how 
his department is preparing to deal with the potential of West 
Nile virus infection in this province this summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Approximately 
two years ago a provincial West Nile virus committee was set 
up. This is a coordinating group and basically includes SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), the health 
regions, Canadian Cooperative Wildlife Health Centre, 
Saskatchewan Health, Saskatchewan Environment, and 
Saskatchewan Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization. 
 
The plan is to develop a response. As we all know, the testing 
has taken place over the last two summers to identify where the 
West Nile virus has gone. On February 4 this year the 
Government Relations minister announced a $1.2 million 
funding to deal with West Nile virus. Everybody is working on 
how we’re going to respond to the concerns over the coming 
months as it gets warmer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister mentions an announcement in February when the 
government announced a funding program for municipalities to 
support efforts to control the spread of the West Nile virus, but 
there were no details about the nature of the programming in the 
announcement other than that the government would cost share 
on a 50/50 basis between the provincial government and 
municipalities. The announcement also indicated that the 
program was targeted to municipalities where the risk for the 
virus is high. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities are trying to make budget decisions 
at this time and I have been contacted by many of my . . . and 
many of my colleagues also have been contacted by 
municipalities wanting more details about this program. Mr. 
Speaker, will the minister explain exactly how the program will 
work and what municipalities are deemed to be high risk, and 
when will this information be made known to municipalities so 
they can plan their mosquito control program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. The program will 
include about $1 million that will be shared on a 50/50 cost 
basis with municipalities around source reduction and mosquito 
control programs, primarily larvicide applications. There will be 
$200,000 of the money will go for targeted programs where 
there’s especially a high risk of West Nile virus. The criteria 
have been discussed by Saskatchewan Health around allocating 
this mosquito control funding with SARM, SUMA, and the 
provincial West Nile working group. And the funding criteria is 
just being finalized right now, which is why some of the 
municipalities haven’t heard. 
 
It’s anticipated that the most comprehensive mosquito control 
programs will be around the larger centres but we anticipate 
where there are hot spots across the province, the money will go 
there. That’s how the whole program’s going to work and it 
should be announced very shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Finances 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s nothing I enjoy more than a good book, 
especially one written by a well-known Saskatchewan author. 
There’s a new book out that talks about how the current Premier 
and his government have messed up the province’s finances. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not by the Fraser Institute; it’s 
not even by the Canadian Taxpayers Federation; it’s by none 
other than the former NDP Finance minister, Janice 
MacKinnon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the past two years the NDP has been trying 
desperately to hide a huge deficit. But Janice MacKinnon 
clearly states that the NDP is running a deficit budget. Will the 
new NDP Finance minister finally admit what Janice 
MacKinnon is saying, that the NDP is running a deficit budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there have 
been many books written in Saskatchewan by politicians, and 
I’m sure that there will be more books written in Saskatchewan 
by politicians and former politicians. 
 
But the reality of the day, Mr. Speaker, is that we have had nine 
consecutive balanced budgets in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And stay tuned, Mr. Speaker, 
because tomorrow we’re likely going to announce the 10th 
consecutive balanced budget in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
the finances of the province of Saskatchewan, I will take no 
advice from the members opposite, recognizing their track 
record in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, if the minister won’t take advice 
from the official opposition, I’m sure he’ll want to take advice 
from the former Finance minister of that government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Janice MacKinnon talks about her decision to 
quit the NDP government. Just three weeks after the new 
Premier was sworn in, she said, and I quote: 
 

The new . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member will 
continue. The member will continue. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the member 
from Moose Jaw North, I am quoting from Janice MacKinnon’s 
book: 
 

The new government was going to increase spending by 8 
per cent when revenues were declining, which meant that 
balancing the budget would require a major drawdown of 
reserves so I would have to support a deficit budget — a 
deficit budget after all the years I spent fighting deficits. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Janice MacKinnon refused to support a deficit 
budget. That’s why she quit. Will the minister stand in his place 
and admit the 2001 budget is a deficit budget, the 2002 budget 
was a deficit budget, and tomorrow’s budget will be a deficit 
budget as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, since 1925, there has been something that 
worked like a fiscal stabilization fund. And the minister, the 
former minister of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, the former 
minister of Finance who is being quoted as having written a 
book, actually used retained earnings from the Liquor and 
Gaming Fund to balance budgets in the 1990s. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, every province in Canada has a contingency 
reserve or a fiscal stabilization fund of some kind and they 
utilize them so that we don’t get the wild shifts in taxation 
policy or deficit financing. This is prudent cash management 
and the Provincial Auditor has said that this government is very 
good at its cash management practices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, and some governments set up a line of credit that 
contains no money and they call it a fund. You know, that’s the 
irony here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not me calling this a deficit budget. It’s the 
former NDP minister of Finance, the minister who was largely 
credited with balancing the budget. Mr. Speaker, she says that 
drawing down reserves means you’re really running a deficit. 
 
That’s what the NDP did in 2001. That’s what the NDP did in 
2002. And according to the recent budget leak, that’s what the 
NDP is going to do in 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be nice to see the new minister set a 
precedent and tell the truth about how big is the deficit in 
tomorrow’s budget. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll advise the members 
opposite that the budget will be presented in these chambers 
tomorrow morning. I won’t be getting on a TV set in an auto 
mall to deliver the budget. I’ll be delivering the budget right 
here and all their answers . . . all their questions will be 
answered tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I will tell them today that I won’t take the criticism of the 
members opposite when we talk about the cash management or 
management practices of the finances of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. I will go to the credit rating agencies who have given 
this province 10 credit rating upgrades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll even look at 
the Fraser Institute who have praised the Saskatchewan 
government and its cash management practices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know what? I understand that even the Premier of 
Alberta is now talking about having a fiscal stabilization . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — There’s a big difference, Mr. Speaker. As I 
stated in this House last year, the Alberta fund has over $12 
billion of real dollars in it. 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — This is imaginary. This is a line of credit, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a line of credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Janice MacKinnon had one more reason for 
quitting. She wanted to rein in Crown Investments Corporation 
but the Premier wouldn’t let her. She said, and I quote: 
 

My goal was to move out some of the wheeler-dealers who 
have lost their sense of accountability to cabinet and 
caucus. 

 
Lost their sense of accountability. Doesn’t that sound familiar, 
Mr. Speaker? That’s how we wound up with the SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) scandal. 
That’s how we wound up with the SIGA scandal. No 
accountability. No responsibility. And people like Janice 
MacKinnon quitting because the unelected Premier gives more 
power to his unelected officials than to his cabinet ministers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how did the NDP get so far off track? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I invite . . . I invite the Finance critic 
across the way to take a thorough read — to take a thorough 
read of Ms. MacKinnon’s book. He ought to take a read of the 
first many chapters of that book, when Ms. MacKinnon talks 
about the record that was left behind in this province by that 
political movement. That’s the chapter he ought to read. 
 
He ought to read the chapters where Ms. MacKinnon talks 
about how close to virtual bankruptcy that group of men and 
women put the province of Saskatchewan. He ought to read the 
chapters that talk about how this group of men and women . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

New Child Care Spaces 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, our government believes that 
investing in our children is the most important investment we 
can make, and I am therefore pleased to announce to the House 
the largest expansion of child care spaces in the history of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, over the next four years we 
will be supporting the provision of 1,200 new child care spaces 
to Saskatchewan families. These new spaces are part of The 
Early Learning and Child Care Agreement signed with the 
federal government earlier this month. 
 
The new spaces will help us to meet two important goals: our 
continuing commitment to early childhood development, and 
our commitment to supporting working parents and parents 
within school or training. The federal investment of $800,000 in 
early learning and child care is modest but welcome in the 
2003-04 with increases over the following three years. 

However, because we believe this investment in our children 
and families is so important, I am pleased to inform the House 
that the province is investing an additional $2.2 million for the 
coming fiscal year which will bring the total investment in child 
care Saskatchewan for 2003-04 to 3 million new dollars in 
funding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this will allow us to develop 
500 of those 1,200 spaces in the first year. We will also increase 
early childhood services grant funding by $200,000 to address 
wage and human resource requirements associated with the new 
spaces. There are number of child care centres operating — 250 
child care spaces around the province — without the benefit of 
the early childhood services grant. 
 
And I want to commend those communities and individuals for 
their initiative in developing these spaces and for their 
commitment to the children of our province. 
 
I’m pleased to announce as well, Mr. Speaker, that beginning 
next week we will provide early childhood services grant 
funding for those 250 spaces. Mr. Speaker, this is in addition to 
the 1,200 new spaces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And, Mr. Speaker, in addition capital 
funding will be available in 2003-04 to support the development 
of new spaces, whether it be through building development, 
renovations, or ensuring facilities meet fire, health, and safety 
standards. 
 
The addition of the 500 spaces means that there will be almost 
7,900 child care spaces available to Saskatchewan parents by 
the end of the next fiscal year, supported by an annual budget of 
over $22 million. By 2007, there will be 8,600 child care spaces 
in the province. 
 
I’m also pleased to announce that beginning in June, parent 
subsidies will go up by an average of $20 per child per month to 
help parents afford quality child care when they go to work or 
improve their educations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan supports 
working families in a whole host of ways. We offer a $2,500 
child tax credit — the only universal tax credit in all of Canada. 
In addition, we offer working families the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement, the family health benefits, as well as 
the Saskatchewan Child Benefit. 
 
This child care announcement is just one more way our 
government supports working families and their children. Our 
children are our future and this government believes there’s no 
better investment. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments regarding the ministerial statement and 
the additional funding to child care spaces in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the government is 
certainly adding funding to their child care spaces, when over 
the next 10 years they expect to see a reduction of some 30,000 
students in the K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) system. 
However, Mr. Speaker, when we look at . . . on the one hand 
they’re talking about reduction of children, but it’s important to 
also realize that there are people out there who do need 
assistance in helping them raise their families. 
 
When you look at these extra expenditures, one has to ask 
themselves if the government would have moved ahead without 
federal funding. I think it’s important to realize, that I think if 
I’m not mistaken, that over the period of time, most of the 
funding will eventually come from the federal government for 
these child care spaces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well let’s recognize the fact that there are 
working families who need support, but also we need to 
compliment the families across this province who make choices 
of their own to be a single-income family so that they can 
provide the care for their families as well. 
 
So while we recognize that, we also acknowledge that there are 
individuals who need two . . . are both working parents to work 
and need some support, and in that regard we certainly 
compliment the government for these child care spaces. We 
trust that they will be treated equally and equitably across the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and provide 
responses to written questions nos. 2 and 3. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to question 2 and 3 have been 
submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased to have the opportunity to rejoin the 
debate on the Speech from the Throne, cut short a little bit 
yesterday on my comments because we were running out of 
time. But I’m very pleased to have the opportunity to rejoin the 
debate today. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say a few words about my constituency 
of Moose Jaw. It truly is a great community — great 
community pride, great community spirit. It’s a wonderful place 
to raise families and work but, Mr. Speaker, there has been 
some tough years in Moose Jaw. 
 
But I have to say over the last probably five years when you’re 
out and about around Saskatchewan, and other communities 
start to use Moose Jaw as an example of the wonderful things 
that can be accomplished, it’s with a real sense of pride that I 
represent that community which has built itself and promoted 
itself to a very successful spot in our province. 
 
Dream big, work hard, plan well. Mr. Speaker, a group of 
Moose Jaw citizens had a huge dream. They worked hard, put 
together some very good plans to rejuvenate our city, to build 
on the history and the assets that Moose Jaw as a community 
has. Those plans involved the whole community — municipal 
government, provincial government — but they worked hard — 
worked hard, planned well, and dreamed big. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, everyone knows how it’s paid off in Moose 
Jaw. And when we hear the promotion that’s going on across 
Canada about Saskatchewan’s future being wide open, Mr. 
Speaker, that rings true in Moose Jaw as it does in many other 
communities, if not all communities, across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been a very busy year and a half since I’ve had 
the opportunity to serve as Minister of Labour. And it’s gone by 
very quickly. It’s been busy but it’s also been very productive. 
And with the support of my government colleagues, we’ve 
made some very progressive changes to the province’s labour 
legislation — changes to labour standards, workers’ 
compensation, the increases to the minimum wage. It was a 
very busy year but a very good year for working people and 
businesses across this province. 
 
But as minister, Mr. Speaker, it’s distressing that the 
Saskatchewan Party continues to minimize the contributions 
that working people make in this province. Their comments of 
job killers and offering folks up to work for less than minimum 
wage are well documented. They have been talked about a 
number of times and they are in fact in Hansard. 
 
But now we see the Saskatchewan Party trying to put a little 
milder face on themselves now, Mr. Speaker. But those same 
old attitudes are still there and it isn’t working. People realize 
that they . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. You can’t 
change the spots on a leopard. 
 
Now we keep waiting to hear some details about some of their 
plans — any details, any plan. We’d be happy just to hear 
something. But no such luck, Mr. Speaker, they’re still out 
hiding in the bushes. We don’t hear anything but vague 
statements — democratic unionism, collaborative approach to 
collective bargaining. It kind of dawdles on and on but doesn’t 
really say anything. 
 
In fact, the Saskatchewan Party leader said in Hansard on 
March 20, and I quote: 
 

. . . a Saskatchewan Party government, not only in its first 
term but early in that term, will correct the unfair and 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

 

unbalanced labour laws in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Labour, besides being 
concerned at the extreme and divisive attitudes that the 
Saskatchewan Party puts forward, I wonder, when we live in a 
province where this government and the people of this province 
believe in balance and a balance of rights between — rights and 
wrongs, responsibilities — between employers and employees, 
I wonder what part of that balance don’t the Saskatchewan 
Party agree with. 
 
So is it occupational health and safety? Occupational health and 
safety ensures workplaces are safe and the end result is a more 
productive workplace. Is that something that the Saskatchewan 
Party feels is unfair? They don’t want safe workplaces for our 
citizens, our children, and our grandchildren? 
 
(14:30) 
 
Or is it labour standards that seems to bother them a little bit? 
All labour standards does, Mr. Speaker, is provide very basic 
workplace rules that regulate your hours of work, your days of 
rest, overtime, maternity leave, termination notice, making our 
workplaces more civilized and more progressive. Is that 
something that the Saskatchewan Party feels is not fair? 
 
Would they rather we were back in the industrial age, Mr. 
Speaker, where child labour, working seven days a week, no 
time off, no health and safety? Would the Saskatchewan Party 
consider that fair? 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, is it The Trade Union Act that really bothers 
the Saskatchewan Party? An Act that is built on the principles 
of our democratic process. Mr. Speaker, we live in one of the 
most democratic countries in the world. Freedom of speech, 
freedom of association are enshrined in the Charter of Rights 
and Freedoms. Democracy, Mr. Speaker; rights that we believe 
in and have lived by. Now which of these rights would the 
Saskatchewan Party take away, think are unfair? I would like to 
know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We enjoy a democratic process that sets Canada apart, the envy 
of many countries and many peoples throughout this world. But 
as usual all we get from the Saskatchewan Party is vague and 
evasive statements, trying to be a little coy. A comment the 
other day was, well elect me and just see what happens. That’s 
the kind of comments we get. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have worked too hard 
to build what we have and they won’t be taking that gamble on 
the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, one of my responsibilities 
over this past year with the reorganization of government was 
to have the privilege of becoming the Minister Responsible for 
the Status of Women. 
 
It’s been a tough year. We have gone through many meetings 
and spoke to many women’s groups — had some very good 
meetings in fact, Mr. Speaker. The changes are being well 
received and we’re continuing on the process, and we will 

continue to address the issues that are facing Saskatchewan 
women. 
 
One of the big things we did after having meetings all 
throughout the province was to organize a forum last November 
where women’s’ groups throughout the province came to 
Regina, spent a day discussing issues, looking at solutions, how 
best that we can work together to solve the issues and problems 
that are out there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last night when I was thinking of my 
comments today, the question came to me. So what have I 
learned over the year of being the Minister Responsible for the 
Status of Women? And, Mr. Speaker, the biggest thing that has 
struck me is that women throughout this province, no matter 
where they live, are committed and dedicated resourceful 
people that form an extremely important part of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I had the pleasure of travelling around 
the province on March 8. We were celebrating International 
Women’s Day. And, Mr. Speaker, to have the opportunity to 
travel around this province and meet with women, see the 
projects that they were working on, seen the celebrations that 
were drawing attention to the things they were doing in their 
communities was a wonderful day, Mr. Speaker. It truly was. 
 
This government believes in equity and we believe in the 
inclusion and the advancement of all citizens in this province. 
And the announcement that the minister just made, along with 
the Premier this morning, about the $3 million for additional 
child care here in Saskatchewan is one more step along that 
way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to have the ability to represent this 
portfolio and to be a window into government for women and a 
contact point for women throughout this province to contact the 
government. 
 
Now with women 50 per cent of the population — over 50 per 
cent of the population — I went through and tried to find 
something that the Saskatchewan Party had even said about 
women; any comments or policy that they had made. And there 
was absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. I couldn’t find anything 
except for one old quote from the Saskatchewan Party leader. 
When he was asked why there wasn’t more women candidates 
recruited for the Saskatchewan Party, the Saskatchewan Party 
leader said, it was difficult since, and I quote: 
 

Their concerns are with the home and (I quote) they don’t 
like dealing with conflict. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he said this in 1999. Now as offensive as it 
may be and as extreme an attitude as it may be and as out of 
touch with today’s reality as it may be, there is nothing said on 
record since then about women, from the Saskatchewan Party 
— 50 per cent plus of our population ignored; absolutely 
nothing said. It’s a disgrace, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — And it’s something that this government 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

will not ever agree to or stoop to. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has criticized our 
Throne Speech. They said it’s all old stuff, old hat. Well that 
just points to me their lack of vision. 
 
They have no vision. They have no ability to look at the big 
picture, to look at the wonderful foundation that this 
government has worked to build in this province, a foundation 
that will move us into the next century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to quote from an article in the Leader-Post a couple 
of days ago and it said, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The purring sound of a provincial economy powered by oil 
and gas revenue to better-than-Canadian-average growth 
this year could define the coming provincial election 
battleground. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to stand and 
support the Throne Speech put forward by this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
into debate on the Speech from the Throne on behalf of the 
people of Thunder Creek, people who go to their jobs and 
businesses, and work their farms and ranches every day, and are 
among the most productive people in this great province. 
 
The people of my constituency are not takers; they’re givers. 
They’re not complainers; they’re problem solvers. They’re not 
boastful; they’re modest. They’re not shirkers; they’re 
achievers. They’re not part of the problem in this province; 
they’re part of the solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the boundaries of Thunder Creek have been 
changed quite dramatically and at first as I became familiar with 
the changes, I felt regret that I would not be able to represent 
my fine constituents that I have represented since my election. 
Now that I’ve become acquainted with more and more people 
in the new areas of Thunder Creek, I realize that they are 
wonderful folks as well, just like people all over this province 
— people that inspire me, people that I believe in, and people 
that I have confidence in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe in Saskatchewan. I have confidence in 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan. I’m certain that 
we can be much more than we are, that we can create 
opportunity for our people, and that we can be one of the most 
prosperous and desirable places in North America to call home. 
And I believe that we can build a province where our children 
will want to make their lives and raise their families. 
 
I believe that Saskatchewan is naturally the richest jurisdiction 
in North America. We have within our borders huge oil and gas 
reserves. We are the world’s largest producer and exporter of 
potash, producing over 30 per cent of the world’s supply. 
 
Our uranium deposits are richer by several times over than the 
next richest deposits in the world. And like potash, we are the 

world’s largest producer and exporter of uranium, producing 
and exporting about one-third of the world’s supply every year. 
 
We have gold and diamonds and huge coal deposits and sodium 
sulphate, and we have 47 per cent of the farm land in this vast 
country. 
 
We have well-educated people with a superb work ethic. We 
share the longest unprotected border in the world with the 
richest nation on earth, the United States of America, with 
whom we have a special trading relationship. They want what 
we produce and they can pay for it. What nation or province or 
state in the world wouldn’t be happy to trade places with us? 
 
So I wonder, as you do and as others do, Mr. Speaker, why do 
our children feel that they have to leave to seek opportunity 
elsewhere? Why do so many of our more affluent seniors leave 
this province to retire? It doesn’t make sense, and the rest of the 
world must shake their heads in disbelief. 
 
I believe the answer to these questions lies in an examination of 
our history, Mr. Speaker. Near the end of the Second World 
War, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had over 1 million people and 
Alberta had a little over 600,000. Alberta chose a course of 
private enterprise at that time and things must not have looked 
very promising for them . . . not enough people, not near as 
much good farm land as we had, no oil industry — that was in 
Saskatchewan too — virtually no known mineral deposits, 
fewer cattle than Saskatchewan, fewer hogs than Saskatchewan, 
and at the time they owed a huge debt to the federal government 
which was in default. 
 
At that same time, with over a million people, Saskatchewan 
was the third most populous province in Canada. With our vast 
rich farm land, burgeoning young oil industry, flour milling, 
meat-packing, more cattle and hog production than Alberta, we 
were the crown jewel of Western Canada and the centre of 
power was moving westward every year. But we chose a 
different path. We followed a charismatic young preacher, a 
great orator, and no one who heard him would question his 
commitment to the province. Unfortunately he and his party 
were also committed to a socialist ideology as evidenced by 
their drafting of a document called the Regina Manifesto — a 
blueprint for a socialist society that is still considered to be the 
foundation upon which NDP policy is built. 
 
Among the ideals laid out in that Regina Manifesto is the 
elimination of capitalism. The Regina Manifesto can be found 
on the NDP Web site at www.saskndp.com under the history 
tab. We all know what has happened in Saskatchewan and in 
Alberta since then. We now have a little under a million people 
and Alberta has 3 million and building an infrastructure for 6 
million over the next 20 years. We deficit budget and Alberta 
has budgetary surpluses year after year. We have a debt that the 
government admits to of over $12 billion — and which is really 
over $20 billion if we include such things as unfunded pension 
liability — and Alberta has no debt. 
 
Our young people flee this province to find better opportunities 
for themselves and Alberta is the destination for bright, 
ambitious young people from all over the country and the 
world. 
 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

 

Mr. Speaker, the great CCF-NDP (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party) socialist 
experiment has failed. Government owns 46 per cent of this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Members, members . . . Order. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the great CCF-NDP socialist 
experiment has failed. Government now owns 46 per cent of the 
economy of this province and their only solution to our 
economic woes is to squander in excess of $100 million of 
taxpayers’ money annually in investments, both here and all 
over the world. 
 
Not only do most of the government’s investment schemes fail, 
but they also create winners and losers in the province and drive 
away potential private investors who do not wish to compete 
with the treasury of the province — investors who would bring 
new money to the game. New money is what is required to 
expand any economy. It’s not good enough to recycle 
taxpayers’ dollars into government equity positions and 
businesses and pass that off as a plan for economic expansion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — That is nothing more than a socialistic plan to 
gain more and ever-increasing control of a small economy. It’s 
not any kind of a sincere attempt to expand the economy for the 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s talk about just a few of the NDP’s latest business fiascos 
at taxpayers’ expense. 
 
Channel Lake, 1997. SaskPower got playing gas futures at 
extremely thin margins, a practice known as arbitrage. Of 
course they lost about $15 million at this — all taxpayers’ 
money, all taxpayers’ money. At the time Jack Messer, former 
NDP cabinet minister, was president of SaskPower. He resigned 
when this became known. Of course SaskPower didn’t mention 
this in their annual report in 1997 but when it did, when the 
information did come out, Jack resigned and left with a $300 
. . . $300,000 severance package. 
 
Guyana. SaskPower again, in 1997 under Jack Messer, invested 
a . . . planned to invest, to invest about 31 million I think in a 
decrepit power company in Guyana. Fortunately for the people 
of Saskatchewan, civil unrest broke out in Guyana and the 
government only managed to lose 2 million in that one. 
 
(14:45) 
 
NST (NST Network Services of Chicago), Mr. Speaker. With 
this one SaskTel lost the people of Saskatchewan about 16 
million. The company was set up to install fibre optic cable in 
the Midwestern United States, and through 1995-96 lost $16 
million of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money. And of course, 
typically, no mention was made in the annual reports of SaskTel 
for either 1995 or 1996 of these losses. 
 
SPUDCO, SPUDCO, Mr. Speaker. Losses of $28 million and 
climbing. I don’t need to explain to anyone in the province what 
SPUDCO is — the government’s aborted effort at expanding a 
potato industry. Not only did the government lose $28 million 

of taxpayers’ money in this investment, but lives were ruined, 
marriages broken, businesses bankrupted, and the private sector 
lost over $40 million in SPUDCO. 
 
All of this the government called a success and hid the fact . . . 
and hid the economic and financial structure of the SPUDCO 
corporation from the people of Saskatchewan for six years. 
 
Information Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker. Information 
Services Corporation of course is the NDP’s failed attempt to 
computerize our land titles system. The cost of this was 
originally estimated to be $20 million. Now at about 90 million 
over budget, we’re weighing in at $107 million of taxpayers’ 
money and still we don’t have a land titles system that works. 
 
SaskTel, SaskTel in 2001. Here’s some interesting facts about 
SaskTel in 2001. Four companies owned by SaskTel in the year 
2001 — Retx.com (Retail Energy Transaction Exchange) in 
Atlanta, tappedinto.com in Nashville, Craig Wireless 
International, and SoftTracks Enterprises — collectively lost 
$12.5 million that year. SaskTel of course did not break down 
which companies lost how much money, but SaskTel’s 
Navigata Communications lost 2.5 million and SecurTek lost 
1.3 million, bringing SaskTel’s 2001 losses in various business 
ventures to $16.3 million. All taxpayers’ money. 
 
Lately FarmGro Organics, a huge organic flour mill just out of 
Regina, a business that couldn’t possibly work with the kind of 
debt they were carrying, lost over $5 million of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ money. A venture that Saskatchewan people 
wouldn’t invest in but our government knew better. 
 
Ongoing — $20 million in a hamburger plant in Saskatoon in 
partnership with a company that had left $12 million in unpaid 
debts in Alberta; 15 million for a hog enterprise in northeastern 
Saskatchewan; 80 million invested in Australian 
communications and infrastructure, and the list goes on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is far from a comprehensive list of this government’s 
recent losing ventures by any stretch. We calculate the total 
losses from non-core Crowns alone in the last fiscal year is in 
the neighbourhood of $30 million. 
 
The core Crowns — SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy, and SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) — besides these four 
Crowns that everybody knows about, there are well over 80 
non-core Crowns, most of which lose at least some money 
every year. 
 
We, in the Saskatchewan Party, believe in the private sector as 
the engine of growth for the province and we have a 
comprehensive plan to grow the province by 100,000 people in 
10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — In fact the first test for any new policy of the 
Saskatchewan Party is: will it help to grow the province by 
100,000 people, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no mention in the Speech 
from the Throne about how this tired, old government led by 
this non-elected Premier plans to stimulate the private sector to 
expand the economy. And that’s because there is no plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is blessed with abundant resources. 
We’re the second-largest oil producer in Canada behind Alberta 
and the third-largest natural gas producer behind British 
Columbia. And I’ve already mentioned potash and uranium and 
other minerals. 
 
Right now Saskatchewan produces about 20 per cent of 
Canada’s oil. We have substantial recoverable reserves that 
have not even been tapped. We are on the last frontier . . . We 
are the last frontier in North America for oil and gas 
exploration. Now is the time to advance oil and gas exploration 
in this province. We have a shrinking window of opportunity to 
develop our great resource. The Kyoto accord, which this 
government supported, when fully implemented has the 
potential to seriously penalize oil and gas development. The oil 
and gas industry has a serious impact on the province’s 
economy. 
 
And we understand that companies need better incentives to 
explore and develop oil fields in Saskatchewan. We also 
understand that oil and gas companies have the potential to 
kick-start Saskatchewan’s economy by mobilizing quickly. 
 
Our plan will reduce royalties on new oil and gas wells to 1 per 
cent until capital costs are recovered. We will cut the corporate 
capital tax in half. 
 
We understand that we need to reduce red tape and government 
bureaucracy and our plan will create a single-window approach 
to obtain permits and clearances from all departments at all 
levels of government. We’ll arrange a seamless and simplified 
and uniform approach when it comes to taxes, mill rates, and 
environmental regulations. 
 
I acknowledge that we need to address oil and gas field power 
rates. They are among the highest in the country and far higher 
than commercial rates in this province. 
 
And we want to encourage cogeneration of power and the sale 
of excess power into the provincial grid at compensatory rates. 
 
We just need more oil and gas wells and mines in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t in all conscience take my seat without 
mentioning some remarks made by the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone this past Monday in this Assembly. That member 
talked about processing in the province and how we want to 
process our resources. 
 
But in 1992 he was a leader in an environmental lobbying effort 
that cost this province the uranium processing industry that we 
could have had — could have had. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — In so doing, Mr. Speaker, that member has 
cost the people of this province billions of dollars in good 

salaries, in government revenues, and in other spinoff to the 
private sector. 
 
How can he sit there, Mr. Speaker, and claim to represent the 
people of this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, he went on to say that he favours a phase-out of 
uranium mining in this province. Uranium mining is one of our 
largest industries and one that has huge growth potential. 
 
Is it any wonder that industry avoids investing in this province 
when a long-time government member talks like that about an 
industry that is one of the great engines of our economy, that 
provides fuel for power generation for a large chunk of the 
world, helps pay for our health care and education and social 
services and infrastructure? And an industry that provides 
high-paying jobs for our people, and particularly the people of 
our North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Greystone went on to 
criticize our American neighbours, and our former British and 
Australian allies as well, for their courageous efforts in bringing 
the butcherist tyrant Saddam Hussein to heel and for their 
efforts toward ending his brutal regime and disarming Iraq. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does that member not know that Saddam Hussein 
and his regime have murdered thousands of innocent people, 
mostly in the northern part of his own country and mostly with 
chemical warheads? And does he not know that the United 
States of America would defend us in a heartbeat from any 
enemy in this very dangerous world and may very well be 
called upon to do so? 
 
I suggest that that member, Mr. Speaker, just for once that he 
hold our enemies up to the same scrutiny that he holds our 
friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — That member goes on to praise the federal 
government and this NDP government for their cowardly stand 
on this matter. And, Mr. Speaker, let me simply say that I have 
never been less proud to be a Canadian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is a blueprint for disaster and a 
road map to oblivion, and I will not support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I take it as a great privilege that I have opportunity 
to stand here in this House and represent Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley, also that it is a rare privilege to have the opportunity to 
work with this government to help build what I see as a very 
successful and growing province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been representing the people of Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley now since 1999. When I was elected, I told 
them that I wanted to come into government to try and make a 
difference, to try and help this province build even faster and 
better than what we had in the past. 
 
I came in and joined a government where I saw people who 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

 

were committed to building a solid foundation, and that 
foundation we have continued to build on and we will see this 
province thrive and prosper for all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As a part of my constituency the town 
of Lumsden has been really a wonderful place to get to know 
people and to build relationship. And with the redesign of the 
boundaries, I will not be representing the town of Lumsden and 
some of the area around there any longer. And I will miss that 
relationship, Mr. Speaker. I’ve enjoyed working with those 
people, but I will also be happy to welcome the people of 
Normanview West who will be a new part of this constituency, 
and I look forward to serving them through many years ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech was criticized for not being 
flashy, for not having a lot of new ideas in it. But, Mr. Speaker, 
what I see this is as a foundational document that talks about 
building on a solid past and building a tremendous future for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have seen the economic development in this country . . . or 
this province just grow at a tremendous rate, outstripping in 
terms of growth per GDP (gross domestic product) even the 
province next door that our opposition members, the Sask Party, 
love to talk about. We have led in terms of economic 
development on many occasions and, Mr. Speaker, I think we 
are positioned to lead again. 
 
I want to talk about . . . a little bit of our nation and where our 
nation is going. I found an article from the Montreal Gazette 
called “How did we become the tiger of the North?” How 
exactly did Canada become the world’s developed economy . . . 
leading developed economy? Was it sheer dumb luck? What did 
we do right on the way to becoming number one? 
 
Such questions arise as the northern tiger continues its 
remarkable performance. After Friday’s employment report, 
55,000 new jobs were added in February. We’re the only — get 
this, Mr. Speaker — the only major economy in the world that’s 
growing. We’re running, as a nation, budget surpluses and 
we’re pumping money into social programs while everybody 
else is in deficit and cutting back. 
 
Now the National Post, which is not quite as extreme as many 
of the members opposite and the taxpayers’ federation and 
some of the other right-wing bodies around, the National Post 
has spent the last few years lecturing our federal government on 
the urgent need to cut spending, to lower taxes, and so improve 
productivity. Well I’m not sure the federal government listened 
and yet we are the tiger of the North. I’ll quote again, we’re the 
only major economy in the world that’s growing. 
 
Now we’ve been getting a lot of advice from the Sask Party, 
from the Saskatchewan taxpayers’ federation, from the Fraser 
Institute, from all kinds of institutions that tell us we should be 
doing that same thing — cutting programs, that we should be 
cutting taxes even more, and it’s that way that we’re going to 
grow the economy. 
 
Well let’s take a look. Regina Leader-Post, and I quote from 
Bruce Johnstone’s article, the Leader-Post: 

Saskatchewan’s economy will post 2.6-per-cent growth in 
2003 — slightly ahead of the national average of 2.5 per 
cent thanks to rising oil and gas revenues. 

 
(15:00) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is thanks to the foundational work that 
has been done by this government in setting the royalty rates for 
exploration that call people into the province to do even more 
work to help build this economy so that all the people of this 
province will prosper. 
 
That’s what this government is about. It’s that foundational 
work that will help build this province, and it will be on a solid 
base, Mr. Speaker. It will not be a house built upon sand that we 
would get from those people opposite. It will be a house built 
on a solid foundation for all the people of this province. 
 
Part of that foundation, I will say, is seen in the work that has 
been done in industry and resources. Let’s see what’s happened 
in the last while. We have had good, strong, sustained growth in 
oil and natural gas with record land sales and gas wells drilled. 
Natural gas production increased 4.6 per cent and drilling for oil 
and gas has increased by 188 wells. There has been an increase 
in this sector by 68 per cent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Sixty-eight per cent. Manufacturing 
shipments up 9.6 per cent — $563.2 million. Business 
incorporations up 16.7 per cent — $462 million. Home 
construction up 32.3 per cent in urban centres and one point — 
get this — 1.3 per cent in rural centres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Building permits are up by 44 per cent 
— $62.4 million. Retail sales increased 5.3 per cent — $909 
million. New car sales, 5.7 per cent. We have one of the lowest 
unemployment rates in Canada. And social assistance caseloads 
continue to drop, continue to drop to the lowest levels in almost 
a decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is incredible growth. This is a province that is 
on the move, a province that will prosper. 
 
Now let’s listen to what we get from the Sask Party. We get an 
empty slogan about growth. We get them talking about how 
they’re going to grow this province. They have to get in power, 
they say, so that they can restart the economy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, restart the economy? That means that 
somebody’s got to stop it —and we’re not stopping it so it must 
be them. If it’s got to be restarted, it’s because they’ll stop it. 
 
We are building this economy. We are growing this province. 
We have a plan. That plan is outlined in our Throne Speech and 
it is working for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There is optimism in this province and 
there is a momentum that we have not seen for decades. It 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

doesn’t matter what that former Finance minister says in her 
book. The planning that has gone on is solid, foundational 
planning that will continue to grow this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have tremendous opportunity in this province 
because we’ve got a way of seeing and thinking that is positive 
and hopeful. We used to be blocked by kind of a scarcity 
mentality. 
 
The chamber of commerce in this province identified how 
terrible the attitude problem was, and we see that negative 
attitude every day from the members across the way. Negative, 
doom and gloom — this will not grow the province. The 
chamber has made clear it will not grow the province. They 
understand that. 
 
And the last two years that we have met with them, Mr. 
Speaker, it has felt like a partnership. We are working together. 
We are growing and building this province successfully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people are seeing jobs here. They are moving 
back. We’ve got people coming in from Alberta, taking up the 
farm land in this province, and they are building and 
developing. As we see more continued growth, as I referred to 
earlier, we will see more and more and more people coming 
back for jobs. 
 
This Future is Wide Open program that is being talked about, 
not just in Canada but around the world, people are picking this 
up. They’re understanding what the possibilities are in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, this is a destination for people who want 
to work and who want to prosper. They will come here. This 
province is growing and will continue to grow because of the 
solid planning this government has done for the last decade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We will continue to see employment 
grow. Job growth means increasing population. 
 
No hollow slogan from this party. The NDP is committed to a 
plan that will make things happen, Mr. Speaker. This is no 
hollow slogan like we get from the people over there. This is 
about making a province prosper for everyone. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have also had a tremendous privilege to be 
a part of building the infrastructure for this economy. I am 
thankful for the opportunity that I have had to follow behind our 
past ministers of Highways and Transportation to help build this 
infrastructure. 
 
We have a Highways department that is second to none — 
people committed to making sure that we build the highways 
and the roadways that will help this province prosper. We have 
area transportation planning committees that have been set up 
around this province. Volunteers, people who love this 
province, who want to see it prosper, who come from all areas 
of the province, rural and urban, who are working together with 
us to identify the main economic corridors. Once those 
corridors are identified, once the priorities are set, then we work 
together to find out where we will build. 
 
And we build those highways, we repair them, and we’re taking 

the best of our technology, the best that this Department of 
Highways can offer. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, they offer 
tremendous good work. The work that they are doing and the 
resources that this government has provided over the last three 
years has enabled us to move ahead like we have never moved 
ahead before. And I am counting on that work continuing. 
 
We have seen developments in short-line rail. We have seen 
developments in twinning. We have seen a Prairie Grain Roads 
Program that has managed, with the help of people from SARM 
and SUMA, to identify those prairie grain roads that need to be 
built. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a province on the go. This is a province that 
is prospering for all people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And I am happy that this department is 
laying that foundation to help build the infrastructure. 
 
We have worked hard for these last few years to make sure that 
we are not working alone. We also work with the provinces of 
Manitoba and Alberta and British Columbia. We speak together 
with one voice on major transportation issues and we have been 
able to move the federal government in its programming. We 
were able to get substantial funding for twinning and we are 
looking beyond these temporary programs. As a body, the 
council of western ministers is clearly pushing to make sure that 
we will have a federally funded national highways program like 
every other one of the G-8 countries. 
 
It’s about time. The Prime Minister made it clear when he was 
here the other day that he recognizes that with their surplus it’s 
time that more money was put into highways and 
transportation. We will continue to build better, safer highways. 
Why? Because, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has been 
dreaming big, planning well, and working hard, and we’re 
building a future for all the people of this province. And I’m 
thankful to be a part of it. 
 
Thank you very much. I am in favour of this Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
again an honour for me to rise in this Assembly and respond to 
the Throne Speech on behalf of the people of the constituency 
of Estevan. 
 
But there are a couple of things I would like to mention first, 
Mr. Speaker. And I would like to congratulate the two newly 
elected members, the member from Battleford-Cut Knife and 
the member from Saskatoon Fairview. And as they know, they 
are making a contribution to this province in a way that very 
few people get to do and I think that they will or probably have 
already realized that it is an honour, but it’s also a very 
humbling experience. So congratulations to both of those. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as well I would just like to say a few things 
about what is happening over in Iraq. And just to say that our 
constant thoughts and prayers are with those serving in Iraq and 
no one does like war. And 9/11 left an indelible mark on all our 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

 

lives and there were more lives lost in the terrorist attack of that 
day than there were in 1991 in Desert Storm. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Kindersley 
mentioned Auschwitz in his speech the other day, it reminded 
me of a friend of mine who had visited there a couple of years 
ago. And her friend . . . pardon me, her son teaches school over 
there. And they went to Auschwitz and some of the things she 
saw and related to me were just grim reminders of what had 
taken place there. And the mood there is still a very sombre 
mood. And she expressed to me how we should all just be 
grateful that we live in a land of freedom. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I live about 25 miles from the US border and 
I’m very proud to have the United States of America as my 
neighbour. And they are always the first country to come to the 
aid of anyone in need. 
 
And through you, Mr. Speaker, I ask the members over there, if 
you don’t support George Bush and the United States in this 
matter, who do you support? 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I just like to say God bless Canada, 
God bless the United States, and God bless the troops serving 
over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech was empty, simply devoid of 
any vision. We have a tired, old government with 1933 
mentality. 
 
The government recently shuffled its cabinet and, Mr. Speaker, 
usually when you shuffle a deck, you keep the aces and you 
throw out the jokers but guess what? Mr. Speaker, in this 
cabinet, the cabinet of this unelected Premier, the aces are 
missing and they’ve kept all the jokers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in my constituency are very fed up with 
this government — from the ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) fiasco to SPUDCO. Huge cost 
overruns at ISC have made it comparable to the federal 
Liberals’ gun registration. SPUDCO has cost the taxpayers of 
this province at least $28 million and the list goes on. 
 
This is a very arrogant government with a total lack of respect 
for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the member from Regina Wascana Plains 
was responding to the Throne Speech, she was talking about 
health care and she said, I quote: 
 

So we know that people who need services get them. 
 
And I think perhaps she should have added, eventually. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a constituent who has been waiting 42 
months for a knee replacement and has written the minister, has 
not had a response from the minister. And I’m telling you, a 
comment like that is a slap in the face of this person and any 
person in this province who is on a long waiting list — the 
longest in the country. 
 
This same member said, and again I quote: 
 

We’ve recently reduced the PST to 6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who raised it to 9 per cent in the first place? It was 
this government. 
 
And this member went on to say also that there had been no 
particular questions about highways. I say, please don’t 
interpret that as satisfaction in the rural areas. Perhaps it is 
indicative of the quality of answers we get from this arrogant 
government and that minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — I wish the Minister of Highways would tour my 
constituency. I’d be happy to escort him out there, although I do 
insist we take his vehicle because I refuse to put mine over 
those roads any more than I have to. 
 
And there’s just a few, Mr. Speaker, that I have had comments 
on recently, and one in particular I’ve had a lot of calls on and a 
petition is circulating regarding the condition of Highway 47 
South. The people are fearful when their children are on those 
school buses travelling this stretch of highway. 
 
Other concerns, Mr. Speaker, Highway 13 south of Oungre, 
Highway 39 to North Portal — and these are both . . . or all 
three of these are links to the United States; Highway 18 west to 
Lake Alma, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways’ response when I asked 
him about Highway 47 South was, well, there’s mining being 
done in that area and perhaps when they’re done mining, you 
know, maybe we’ll have a look at it and we might be able to do 
something. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I remember last fall when I attended a CPA 
(Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) meeting here in 
this building, and the member from Regina Victoria was also in 
attendance at that meeting. And we were discussing the 
upcoming CPA convention that Regina is going to be hosting in 
2005. And the member from Regina Victoria expressed concern 
that there was no signage at the international border crossing at 
the North Portal entrance into this country to indicate that you 
are entering Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone knows when they are entering 
Saskatchewan. They don’t need signage. All they have to do is 
take notice of the condition of that highway . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and the windshields, that’s right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day I was looking at a copy of the 
Regina Manifesto, the CCF plan dated July 1933, reproduced by 
this Saskatchewan NDP government in February 2001 and 
actually on their Web site. What a scary document stating they 
will not rest content until capitalism is eradicated from this 
province. 
 
(15:15) 
 
One example of this was the NDP land bank. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I just thank goodness that they were thrown out of office before 
this dream came through. Surely, Mr. Speaker, these people 
can’t believe that socialism works. Every other jurisdiction is 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

tearing down the barriers, but lo and behold, this NDP 
government barricades every opportunity, working at putting 
their little blocks of socialism back in place. 
 
This is a government that accepts no responsibility whether we 
are talking about SPUDCO or Dutch Lerat. Mr. Speaker, what 
do you have to do over there to get fired? All they do is point 
fingers. No one accepts responsibility. 
 
SPUDCO cost the taxpayers of this province $28 million; Dutch 
Lerat misspent over $800,000 of taxpayers’ money, money that 
should have been spent to better the lives of First Nations 
people — $800,000. Mr. Speaker, that is not small potatoes to 
the people of this province, the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — I don’t know how the NDP classified this 
amount but they claim a $28 million loss in SPUDCO was a 
roaring success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government claims to support agriculture and 
rural revitalization. I beg to differ. For the last decade or more, 
this NDP government has shown no vision for the agriculture 
industry in Saskatchewan and has given up this province’s 
traditional leadership role in the development of national 
agricultural strategies and policies. Because of this, the federal 
Liberals has had opportunities to make decisions to counter our 
interest, with little or no resistance from this NDP government. 
 
Agriculture is a very important industry in this province and 
should not be used as an excuse for this government’s poor 
economic record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, this NDP government, is taking 
leased land from ranchers. They are hiking crop insurance 
premiums to the tune of 52 per cent. Is that supporting the 
agricultural industry? No, it is not. This party of land banks . . . 
Eradicate capitalism, that’s their plan. 
 
Well their plan does not fit well with my constituency or the 
other constituencies that we represent on this side of the House. 
And if the unelected Premier ever musters the courage to call an 
election, we will have many more members as we form 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has driven 
people off the farms. They’ve created such roadblocks that 
people in small town Saskatchewan cannot make a living. 
 
And just two or three weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Rosetown-Biggar, was in my 
constituency and we toured the Boundary dam power station, 
the Shand power station, and Luscar mines. 
 
We had the opportunity to ride on a dragline which was 
absolutely thrilling. This is a huge piece of machinery with a 
100-yard bucket. And to put that in perspective, Mr. Speaker, 
the operator of this dragline said it would take him three 
minutes to dig a basement. 
 

When the member from Rosetown-Biggar questioned as to 
what the cost of this machine was, the answer was between 70 
to $90 million. Mr. Speaker, that company is paying point six 
per cent corporate capital tax on that machine and they have 
more than one dragline plus millions and millions of dollars in 
other equipment. 
 
But the corporate capital tax, Mr. Speaker, on that one piece of 
machinery each year is at least $420,000 — $420,000 a year, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is a serious disadvantage in attracting 
new investment, business activity, and jobs to this province. 
And a Saskatchewan Party government will address this 
problem by cutting this corporate capital tax to point three per 
cent in the first term. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I would like at this time, if I may, 
I would just like to thank those responsible, the management 
and staff at the Boundary dam power station, the Shand power 
station, and Luscar mines for being gracious hosts when we did 
visit them. They were most accommodating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government that speaks of democracy should 
be reminded of their record in the 1999 nomination in the riding 
of Saskatoon Meewasin. The June 8, ’99 edition of the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix says, and I quote: 
 

The party executive did not . . . to be in a position where it 
had to defend such a record and it’s a safe bet that Premier 
Romanow would not have signed Sambasivan’s nomination 
papers. 
 

And I understand that there was another situation in the 1991 
election, Mr. Speaker, so perhaps the members opposite should 
practise a little bit of what they preach. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party in 1999 received 
more votes than that NDP government, and it’s the Liberals that 
are propping them up — the Liberals saved them from a 
near-death experience. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when asked what he thought of the former 
Liberal leader joining with the NDP government, the present 
Liberal leader, David Karwacki said that at the time, it was 
probably the right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that the Liberals are in the shape 
they’re in in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, member after member over there gets up and 
brags about the number of people who have left the social 
assistance caseload. And I hope those numbers are down 
because of the right reasons and not because these people have 
become so fed up with this arrogant government that they’ve 
packed their bags and left the province as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour, when she gave her 
speech a few minutes ago, she made some comments on 
women’s issues. And I would just like to remind her that the 
member from Watrous, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, 
as well as myself just today attended a noon luncheon at the 
Regina Inn and it was for the Regina Council of Women, Mr. 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

 

Speaker. And this group is celebrating their 108th birthday. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, neither the Minister of Labour nor any other 
MLA from the NDP government side was there so I hardly 
think that that minister is in a position to claim ownership on 
women’s issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that the Throne 
Speech went on for 55 minutes, the content was very limited. 
And when I think of the NDP, I think of the words of Helen 
Keller and they are: 
 

There’s one thing worse than being blind — that is being 
able to see — but having no vision. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — And with that, Mr. Speaker, I do not support the 
Throne Speech but I do, however, support the amendment. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to enter into the Throne 
Speech debate. 
 
First of all, might I, like many of my colleagues, acknowledge 
the good work that you do, Mr. Speaker. I’ve certainly 
appreciated your interesting interventions at times over the last 
several sessions in the legislature. And as a former seatmate of 
mine, we miss you down here. But you do a great job, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d like to also take the opportunity while I’m on my feet to 
congratulate the mover from Cumberland and just take a 
moment, if I could, Mr. Speaker, to say how much I’ve 
appreciated the good work that he’s done on behalf first of his 
constituency, but also on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And might I say, from a personal perspective if I could, I’ve 
enjoyed getting to know the member from Cumberland over the 
years, and probably having a better opportunity than some of 
the others on my side of the legislature to spend time with him 
in the northern part of our province, and on many occasions 
travelled together to and from our respective constituencies. 
And I want to thank him personally for all of the good work 
he’s done for all of us in Saskatchewan, but I think most 
particularly for First Nations and Métis people and northerners 
and really having brought their voice here to the Chamber. 
 
So thank you very much to him and congratulations on the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’d also of course like to congratulate 
the seconder of the Throne Speech, the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains, who also has represented her constituency very 
well over the years. And thank you for that good work as well. 
 
And of course I would be remiss if I didn’t take this opportunity 

to congratulate and welcome the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview and also the new member from Battleford-Cut Knife. I 
know they both represent very different philosophical views but 
they best . . . the interests of their constituents I am sure are 
uppermost in their minds, and they’ll do the very best job that 
they can. So congratulations to both of them. 
 
If I could, I think it’s appropriate as well, Mr. Speaker, on a 
daily basis, particularly those of us in cabinet but also MLAs 
were served very well by people who work behind the scenes. 
And I want to take this opportunity to thank Don and Fraser and 
Jennie and Jody and Kendra in my office here in the building. 
They put up with me with a lot of things, Mr. Speaker, provide 
me with a lot of information. And I think they often think I’m 
not able to absorb all of it and they’re absolutely right. 
 
But I want to thank them very much for the very helpful work 
that they do for me. And I think probably I don’t appreciate it as 
much as I should. 
 
And of course back in the constituency, I want to thank Susan 
and Adriane who have worked for me for years — and in fact 
particularly to Susan who has been my constituency assistant 
since 1991, who has been with me in my office from the day I 
was elected in October of 1991. So thank you very much to 
you, Susan. 
 
And to my family who . . . I know several of the members in the 
legislature on both sides have acknowledged that the support 
that you receive from family is very, very important — very, 
very important. And often we wouldn’t get through I think if we 
didn’t have that support and commitment either here or back at 
home. And I want to thank my wife, Virginia, and my children, 
Mayson and Meika, who have been just a joy. And it’s great to 
go home and to get away from the workday sometimes and just 
enjoy your family. So thank you very much to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And lastly in term of thank yous, I want 
to thank the people of the constituency of Meadow Lake, Mr. 
Speaker, who have sent me to this legislature for three 
consecutive elections now, Mr. Speaker, and I am humbled by 
that. It is a great honour and privilege to represent the 
constituents of Meadow Lake. It is a great constituency and a 
wonderful bunch of people and I’ve certainly enjoyed 
representing them. 
 
The area that I represent . . . I know that we all talk about how 
wonderful our constituencies are, Mr. Speaker, but I’m the one 
who’s actually telling the truth about the constituency being the 
greatest in the province. Mr. Speaker, it is, it really is the 
greatest constituency. 
 
It is hugely diverse. It is reflected, Mr. Speaker, in the many, 
many freshwater lakes that are there. It is reflected in the 
agricultural economy that’s in that constituency. It’s reflected in 
the tourism. It’s reflected, Mr. Speaker, in the . . . through the 
First Nations and the Métis communities, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
reflected in the forestry sector. We really do have a very, very 
diverse constituency. 
 
And I want to acknowledge those communities, Mr. Speaker. 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

First of all, the First Nations of Joseph Bighead, Ministikwan, 
Onion Lake, Waterhen, Makwa Sahgaiechan, and of course 
Flying Dust. Communities like Goodsoil, St. Walburg, Loon 
Lake, Pierceland, Paradise Hill, and of course Meadow Lake, 
Mr. Speaker. Dorintosh. All of those are great communities to 
represent. 
 
And I want to take the opportunity, maybe before an election — 
we never know when the election might be called, Mr. Speaker, 
but maybe before the election — I want to thank those 
communities that I was able to represent who will no longer be 
in the constituency of Meadow Lake after the next election, 
those communities of Pierceland and of Paradise Hill and the 
First Nations of Ministikwan, Onion Lake, and Joseph Bighead. 
It’s been an honour representing you. 
 
And also I want to take the opportunity to say that I look 
forward to representing, for many, many years to come, Mr. 
Speaker, the communities of Leoville and Victoire and the First 
Nations of Thunderchild, of Witchekan and of Pelican Lake 
First Nations, Mr. Speaker. Certainly it is and will be exciting 
representing those new areas which will become part of the 
Meadow Lake constituency. 
 
My constituency, Mr. Speaker, as I said, is made up of many 
First Nations. The Meadow Lake Tribal Council is a very 
exciting and dynamic organization in our community, Mr. 
Speaker. It represents five or nine . . . I should say, nine 
different First Nations that speak both Cree and Dene and, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re one of the most economically successful tribal 
councils, in fact I daresay, in all of Canada. 
 
(15:30) 
 
They are one of . . . In fact a lot of people probably provincially 
don’t know this but certainly in our community they know it, 
and I know at a not-too-long-ago chamber of commerce 
meeting that I was at, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council is in 
fact one of the largest employers of people, both Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal, in our entire community. And I want to thank 
them for their very progressive attitude and attitudes in working 
with First Nations and non-First Nations people, Mr. Speaker. 
They have really . . . they are a huge success story not only in 
our community but across Saskatchewan and across Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I have referred to this several times but 
not so much as the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation, 
but in some of my previous portfolios when I’ve been in 
meetings, particularly in Ottawa or larger centres in Eastern 
Canada — but most particularly in Ottawa. The Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council, I’ve been surprised to learn, has been referred to 
often down there as a model for success back here in 
Saskatchewan and one that can be used across Canada. And 
again for that, I certainly congratulate them. 
 
I would like to just congratulate as well my hometown, 
Goodsoil, Mr. Speaker, where by the way, my parents still 
reside out on the farm, John and Dorothy Sonntag, and they 
continue to be an inspiration to me and it is to them that I owe a 
huge debt of gratitude. My hometown recently . . . By the way 
it’s a community that’s growing as well, Mr. Speaker. Our 

whole area in northwest Saskatchewan is I think very lucky to 
be one of the . . . a number of the communities continues to see 
both economic and population growth, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
very exciting for me. 
 
In my hometown very recently through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program, we are in the 
process of building a brand new water treatment plant that will 
provide safe drinking water for the community of Goodsoil for 
years to come, and I suspect will probably create an 
environment for growth in that community for many years to 
come. 
 
I’d also like to, and if I could, thank the former minister of 
Learning and the current Minister of Finance, who was very 
instrumental and involved in what I am about to say. I’d like to 
acknowledge his participation in the announcement around the 
new North West Regional College. And I should say that I 
should, while I’m on my feet, also acknowledge the former 
minister of Learning before that as well, the minister from 
Moose Jaw . . . Wakamow? No, Moose Jaw North. So the 
minister from Moose Jaw North, he was . . . he also worked 
very hard on this and thank you very much to him. 
 
We’re about to build a brand new regional college in Meadow 
Lake which will be attached to the current joint use facility 
which again I say has been a huge success. It is a high school 
that is attached to what was the old SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) building where 
the Flying Dust First Nation actually participated in building a 
model and a school that is, I am told, the first of its kind in 
Canada— where there was actually funds through Indian 
Affairs that were directed off-reserve for the construction of a 
brand new facility; where there is a council created where 
representatives from the Flying Dust First Nation actually are 
involved in determining with the board of directors, with the 
school board of directors, some of the programming through the 
school. And it’s just a wonderful model and great co-operation 
between our communities. 
 
So to the former ministers of Learning and to the current 
Minister of Learning, who I suspect will be there for the grand 
opening, Mr. Speaker, sometime after the provincial election I 
suspect — although we don’t know that for sure because 
they’re constructing it very quickly, Mr. Speaker — I want to 
thank all of them and it’s just a . . . it’s just a wonderful thing to 
see that coming up in our community. 
 
The title of the Throne Speech, “A Vision. A Plan. A Future 
Wide Open,” Mr. Speaker, I think is very appropriate, Mr. 
Speaker. And the people of Meadow Lake have certainly seen 
that future already and they certainly continue to experience and 
will experience that wide open future into the future, Mr. 
Speaker, when they continue to re-elect New Democrat 
governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer if I could — this might seem a bit 
strange — but I want to refer to the guiding principle, number 
one of the Sask Party Resolutions Handbook. I found it on page 
5, Mr. Speaker, and I quote. It says that: 
 

Economic growth and job creation through the private 
sector, not government, as the engine of the economy; 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think my constituents are reasonable and 
pragmatic people, Mr. Speaker. And while they certainly 
acknowledge the huge contribution that the private sector 
makes to the economy, Mr. Speaker, they also are pragmatic 
enough to know that what really makes our economy work, Mr. 
Speaker, is partnerships — partnerships between the public 
sector and the private sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The partnership, Mr. Speaker, that my constituents recognize 
certainly is a partnership that . . . One of the most recent ones 
that I can reference is the partnership between Crown 
Investments Corporation, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, the 
Northwest Community Wood Products, and Tolko Industries 
out of BC (British Columbia). 
 
That partnership, Mr. Speaker, once it’s up and running — and 
by the way most of the construction is done already — will 
employ 260 people directly, Mr. Speaker. It has employed huge 
numbers of people right now already in the construction of that. 
It has employed huge numbers of local contractors. It has 
employed huge numbers of Saskatchewan contractors, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But if the Sask Party had their way, Mr. Speaker, that would not 
exist in my community. As unbelievable as it can be, the Leader 
of the Sask Party was in my riding about a month ago saying 
how he detested the notion that Crown Investments Corporation 
or the government would partner with the private sector. In my 
community, Mr. Speaker, he would say that. 
 
Well needless to say, after he left, Mr. Speaker, there was a lot 
of people that had a good laugh about that because they know 
about all of the great jobs that have been created through 
partnerships. And they know, Mr. Speaker, they know how 
success is built in communities — it’s working together, Mr. 
Speaker, with the public and private sector. 
 
In addition to that, certainly the Sask Party is opposed to 
partnerships like the ones we’ve just recently announced with 
the Government of Saskatchewan and the Flying Dust First 
Nation where we built a brand new, big provincial building, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The building was constructed with mostly local contractors. I 
understand there was a few from out of town but mostly local 
contractors. There was a requirement that — because Flying 
Dust First Nation owns the building — there was a requirement 
that they would have, as I understand it, a minimum of 25 per 
cent Aboriginal people employed. In fact, I’m advised that they 
had . . . over 50 per cent of the construction workers were First 
Nations or Métis people. And this was not by design. This was 
simply because the contractors hired the best employees around, 
and they are great employees, Mr. Speaker. They’ve done an 
amazing job. 
 
And I was privileged to have the Premier there, along with the 
chief of the Flying Dust First Nation, Chief Rico Merasty and 
the chief, the grand chief of the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, 
Chief Richard Gladue present for that opening. 
 
In addition to that, we had several of the elders. And I regret to 
say one of the elders who was there, Elder Ben Lachance just 
— who has been so instrumental in encouraging economic 

development within First Nations and within our communities 
— who just passed away yesterday unfortunately. And myself 
and the Minister of Environment will be attending his funeral 
on Saturday. But we will miss him terribly in our community. 
And it was just great that he could be there to see that opening 
that day. 
 
Certainly if the Sask Party is opposed to partnerships, they 
would be opposed to the partnership that we’ve created between 
ourselves and the town of Meadow Lake where we opened up 
eight new affordable housing units that give local people all 
kinds of opportunities. Apparently that should have been built 
by the private sector, but I know the people who are living in 
those affordable housing units are very appreciative of the 
partnership that now exists and will continue to exist for years 
to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly, and this one is really ironic you know, the Sask Party 
would be opposed to the partnership that created the Millar 
Western Pulp mill up in my riding, Mr. Speaker, that employs 
on a permanent basis, right directly, 200 local people. That 
partnership was created through Crown Investments 
Corporation and their government before. Certainly the 
financial arrangements were made . . . probably leave some 
question about the way it should have been constructed, but in 
terms of partnerships it’s a bit ironic that they would be 
opposed to that at the same time as of the . . . when they were 
government that they actually created that partnership. 
 
So to them I say, thank you for creating that partnership; it’s 
been wonderful in my riding. But again, a bit strange when the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party runs around my constituency 
criticizing the fact that partnerships would exist between the 
Crown Investments Corporation and the private sector because 
that’s exactly the partnership that they created in my own 
community. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, if I could just refer back to the 
principle number one again, if you could just believe them on 
the notion that this should be done all by the private sector, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, the problem is they talk the line but the 
record on this principle is anything but. 
 
Their record, that of the Sask Party and the Devine 
Conservatives and the Conservatives period — same thing, Mr. 
Speaker — their record says that they intervene in the economy 
to a greater degree than any governments have ever done 
before. They rack up deficits, Mr. Speaker, largely to fund lots 
of those interventions in the economy, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite 
amazing that this same party would now adopt as a principle a 
notion that they should not intervene in the economy and it 
should be left entirely to the private sector. It’s a bit ironic that 
they would say that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact as I pointed out, the people in my constituency would 
not agree with that and certainly have been appreciative that 
they’ve not held to that principle in the past and they’re 
certainly appreciative that our government is prepared to partner 
with the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look across the floor and we see a group of 
people with a dream of economic growth, they say, and of job 
creation through the private sector. But as I said, we haven’t 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

heard a single word that talks about a sustainable plan, Mr. 
Speaker, that would be able to afford any of the promises that 
they make. Certainly they talk about slogans that would say that 
everything should be left to the private sector and free 
enterprise and the government should just get out of the way. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the truth is they really don’t have any sort of 
a plan. 
 
Yesterday the member from Swift Current said that, first and 
foremost, their goal is to grow the province of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, that isn’t a plan, just saying that you’re going to 
grow. That’s just a slogan. I mean, it’s a good slogan. I agree 
with it. It’s a great slogan, but it sure is not a plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point is, Mr. Speaker, that the constituents of Meadow 
Lake know that partnerships and investments by the province, 
and investments by the province and certainly partnerships with 
our community is exactly what they appreciate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to very quickly, if I could, I want to very 
quickly if I could make several references to things that I’m 
very excited about with respect to the Throne Speech. In the 
Throne Speech one of the initiatives as minister responsible that 
I’m just really excited about is the ninefold increase in wind 
power generation over the next three years. You know, this is so 
popular across the province. 
 
Everywhere I go people say thank you to our government for, 
first of all, through SaskPower, building this but in addition to 
that, the partnership — by the way, partnership, I say — that 
we’ve entered into with the construction of the first windmills 
in southwestern Saskatchewan. It is, is and will be, hugely 
exciting for our province into the future. 
 
So for that initiative and many, many of the initiatives in the 
Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I say I will absolutely be 
supporting this Throne Speech. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to be back here in the Legislative Assembly again representing 
my constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
I first of all want to take the opportunity to welcome to the 
Legislative Assembly the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. I 
also want to take the opportunity to welcome the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview to this Assembly. 
 
The member from Cut Knife, as I understand, was the mayor of 
the town of Wilkie as I was the mayor of the town of 
Spiritwood. So the mayor from Wilkie and now the MLA will 
bring a great deal of intellect and knowledge to our party and to 
this Assembly. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Fairhaven who I knew — 
Fairview, pardon me, Fairview — I understand that he grew up 
in the Whitkow area which is now and possibly will be in the 
new constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook which I hope that I 
will be the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for that 
area. 
 

(15:45) 
 
But I just want to say to the member from Saskatoon Fairview 
that the . . . I know a lot of people from the Whitkow area, a lot 
of the Iwanchuks that he is associated and familiar with, as far 
as family. There’s good people from that area; they’re all 
Ukrainians. And my wife is Ukrainian, and man, can they cook. 
 
In regards to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, when I first 
heard the Throne Speech I thought why is the Lieutenant 
Governor actually reading it? I thought the Throne Speech was 
supposed to give some direction, some vision, some hope for 
this province. And what was in there, Mr. Speaker? Very little. 
In fact so little that the Premier didn’t even like it. 
 
I thought this Throne Speech would enhance what the 
government of the day, the NDP, would do in the future for this 
province. But it was lacking in every which way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that the paper that it was written on, 
which probably came from Prince Albert where you are part of, 
I’m sure they themselves would be disappointed that that paper 
actually was a Throne Speech where there was nothing in it. It 
was a waste of the paper that they actually made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regards to agriculture, my constituency is 
probably two-thirds agriculture, one-third forestry. 
 
Now with the boundary constituency changes that are coming 
about, I would have to say that the top third of my constituency, 
which is areas like Big River, Debden, Canwood, they will not 
be part of the new constituency that I hope to represent. And it’s 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because the . . . my critic area of 
forestry entails that area. But it’s not very far from my 
hometown of Spiritwood and I definitely will be going up there 
to keep the people up there in touch, as I have been throughout 
the last three and a half years. 
 
The biggest part of my constituency which is agriculture, and 
now the new boundary changes have put in the southern part of 
my constituency places like Whitkow, Hafford, Redberry, 
Blaine Lake, and all those areas right up to Rosthern — and 
those areas are all strictly agriculture. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we go back to last year, the worst drought 
in history was through that area. The farmers in that area were 
dismayed; they didn’t know which way to turn. There was no 
government or little government help in regards to agriculture. 
They felt like how the North feels when it comes to 
government, as being left out. 
 
The farmers in that area suffered from the lack of rain and 
moisture, and again this year, Mr. Speaker, with no snow, 
they’re going to have the same problems they did last year. 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the areas that I’m talking about this 
year with no snow will again have no water for their dugouts, 
they will have no water for their cattle operations, they will 
have no water for their cattle operations, Mr. Speaker. So how 
are they going to keep going? 
 
In talking to many of the elders — the older farmers in that area 
— they have told me that last year, last year . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the lights have 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

 

dimmed quite a bit and I’m just wondering, did the NDP pay 
the power bill? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the drought caused serious consequences to the 
people of that area. 
 
And furthermore the problems that we have in that area, we 
now have a problem with the Crown land leases. Now we’ve 
talked about this a few times, in fact my colleague, the member 
from Cypress Hills, has been asking questions regarding Crown 
land leases. The member from Humboldt has also asked 
questions, and I cannot believe the direction this government is 
taking on Crown land leases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech it says they’re going to look 
after the farmers a better way. Well how can they relate to the 
Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, in regards to agriculture when 
they turn around and do this to the farmers? 
 
You know something, Mr. Speaker, my deputy critic position is 
Aboriginal Affairs. The member from Humboldt’s critic 
position is Aboriginal Affairs. And this has bothered me for 
some time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, back in the late 1800s they talked about treaties. 
We, on this side, have said the treaties need to be honoured, and 
I can guarantee that members on the opposite side agree with 
me. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there was a treaty known as the Crow rate. 
That was to the farmers, a treaty. Where is it today? 
 
Mr. Speaker, also when we’re dealing with farm land Crown 
leases, farm land Crown leases, Mr. Speaker, which dates back 
to the early 1900s because my dad signed a 100-year lease 
which he’s still operating on. Was that not a treaty? I say to the 
Minister of Agriculture: is that not similar to a treaty that was 
signed in the late 1800s? You bet it was. 
 
The farmers of my constituency and farmers all over the 
province feel that they have a treaty when it comes to Crown 
land leases. And this government is taking that privilege away, 
them treaty . . . that farm land leases as a treaty to the farmer. 
They have been paying taxes for years and years and years and 
years as a stewardship people of that land. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in my area right now the farmers don’t know 
what to do because, first and foremost, there is no rain to fill the 
dugouts for their cattle operations, and now by the government 
standing up and saying you may not even have your leases. 
 
Tell me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what do you think the farmers are 
supposed to do? Is that how our present government, the NDP, 
feel about farmers? Is that what they say, we’re going to help 
the farmers by taking away more? Because that’s what they’ve 
done for years and years and years is take away more. 
 
It’s time to stop, Mr. Speaker. Our farmers are value-added 
people to this province. They create jobs. But they’re not going 
to create jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they haven’t got the land 
to operate their business on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, pardon me, I would like to 

read into the record two letters. One from the RM (rural 
municipality) of Medstead. And this lady writes as an 
administrator just to tell the people exactly how that area feels 
about farm land leases and what the government should do. And 
I quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The R.M. of Medstead No. 497 is writing to you to express 
their concerns over the recent letter we received from the 
Saskatchewan Landowners/Lessee Rights Group stating 
that the government is reviewing and possibly changing the 
existing lease policy on crown land. 
 
We, too, have a number of crown land quarters in this R.M. 
and our . . . (taxpayers) rely on this leased land to sustain 
their existing livestock herds. Without this leased land 
some of . . . (our new) farmers we have left will have no 
choice but to leave the area and find other means of 
supporting themselves. (In other words move possibly to 
Alberta.) This will just be another reason for people to 
leave the province. 
 
Somethings in this province should remain the same, one 
thing being the existing lease holder having the first right of 
refusal and first right to purchase crown land when the 
opportunity arises. Who else is going to keep this province 
viable . . . (if the existing taxpayer is not?) 
 
We trust your government will make a decision that will be 
fair to everyone involved and not . . . focus on third party 
interests. 

 
The second letter, Mr. Deputy . . . or, Mr. Speaker, pardon me, 
is from an individual from the Leoville area. Now this 
individual is in an area where it is surrounded by a lot of leased 
land. And he’s very, very concerned that where the government 
is going with this. And I would like to read this letter also, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Dear Premier Calvert: 
 
Some points to consider with regards to these Provincial 
Agriculture crown land leases. 
 
The early settlers came in and opened up the agricultural 
lands. The provincial crown lands were offered as grazing 
. . . (leases) for livestock to help farmers and ranchers 
maintain their herds. These lands were developed with 
fences, trails, dugouts in some cases for water management. 
This was done with extraordinary time, labor, and money 
investment. 
 
It is only fair that intergenerational transfers of developed 
leases be honored. 
 
If there are further TLE claims, they can take undeveloped 
crown lands. If outfitters or other interested parties want 
crown land, they too can be directed to . . . (develop) crown 
land areas. 
 
It is totally unfair (Mr. Speaker) that the right of first 
refusal would not be honored or offered to original lessees. 
Their work and management on the leases has been a vital 
part of their livestock operations and a major part in wealth 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

creation of this province. 
 
The transfer of leases to sons and daughters is vital to 
keeping them here in Saskatchewan and to maintain what 
has been built up . . . (for) so many years. 
 
It is of (the) utmost importance that we encourage rural 
population to . . . (maintain the) support the current tax base 
and further the development of agricultural economic 
enterprises (in this province). 
 
We ask your consideration in this matter for maintaining 
Saskatchewan’s future. 
 

Mr. Speaker, both those letters are concerned letters. And that is 
why these people are concerned with the operations that we 
have in this province and where the Minister of Ag is taking 
them. Because, Mr. Speaker, without Ag there is no small 
business. Without small business, the generation of new jobs, 
what is left as new money created for this province? We cannot 
rely, Mr. Speaker, on taxes and taxes and taxes because taxes 
are hurting this province, especially when we live right next 
door to Alberta who do not have a provincial PST (provincial 
sales tax) tax. 
 
The people that live alongside the Alberta side . . . And I know 
and feel for the member for Swift Current, my colleague, who 
says we have to do something with the PST. Well I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, I come from the town of Spiritwood and it’s 
unbelievable the amount of people that travel on weekends to 
Alberta to do their shopping. Why? Because of the PST. We 
have to change our tax policies. We have to if we want this 
province to exist. 
 
Our party, Mr. Speaker, is doing that. First and foremost we 
have a grow Saskatchewan . . . we’re going to grow the 
Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — That will bring more taxpayers to the 
province and keep the ones we have in this province. We need 
them to stay here in the province and that is why my leader is so 
prominent on the fact that we’re going to grow this province. 
 
You know something, Mr. Speaker. I’ve always maintained that 
government should be in government and run it like a business 
but stay the heck out of business. And that’s what we need in 
this province. We don’t need the government running the 
province; we need private enterprise to run this province. 
 
And our party, and our party will ensure that private enterprise 
is a driving wheel of this province and that’s what we need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third point I want to bring up is regarding my 
forestry critic area. And we know that the softwood lumber 
issue in this province and in this country of Canada hurts the 
forestry industry and it is not going to go away until the 
Americans resolve that problem. All I can say to the minister 
responsible for this is, I hope he’s on the case of the federal 
government to bring a conclusion to this problem because there 
are many jobs and lives and families in this area that rely on the 

forestry industry — especially in my constituency as it speaks 
now — that need those jobs. The softwood lumber industry has 
to be dealt with and solved, the sooner the better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again in regarding the Throne Speech, there was 
virtually nothing in it. I’m hoping, Mr. Speaker, that the budget 
speech coming out tomorrow will have more meat and potatoes 
in it than what was delivered here last week on Monday, 
because the people of this province, the people of 
Saskatchewan, need to know where this government is headed. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I, as always, am grateful 
for the opportunity to participate in the debate in this 
legislature. It is a high honour and privilege that is afforded to 
we who enjoy the confidence of our constituents and have the 
ability to speak in this most democratic of institutions. 
 
I want to, because I’ve not had a chance in this Throne Speech 
debate, Mr. Speaker, to do a few things initially. I want to first 
of all extend, through the debate in the Chamber, our thanks and 
congratulations to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor for her 
presentation of the Throne Speech in this Chamber. 
 
I want to extend my own very personal thanks and 
congratulations to the two members of government who moved 
and seconded the Throne Speech — one, our friend and 
long-serving member from Cumberland, the hon. member from 
Cumberland, the first, Mr. Speaker, the first Aboriginal person 
in the province of Saskatchewan to occupy an office in the 
Executive Council, to serve as a minister of the Crown. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, while the member 
from Cumberland has made a decision not to seek re-election, 
we know that he will continue to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, to contribute to the life of this great province 
through his own work, very much focused around education. So 
I want to thank very publicly today in the Chamber, the Hon. 
Keith . . . sorry, check that, Mr. Speaker; the member from 
Cumberland who has contributed so greatly to the province of 
Saskatchewan through his elected work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And equally, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
extend thanks to the member from Regina Wascana who 
seconded the Speech from the Throne in a fashion that said, in 
my view, what needed to be said about the future of this great 
province and the commitments and the hope and the optimism 
that is contained in this Throne Speech. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to this day very, very publicly 
thank the member from Regina Wascana for the tremendous 
leadership that she has shown in the voluntary sector initiative 
in bringing forward a policy — a plan that you’ll be hearing 
much more about, Mr. Speaker, in the days and weeks to come 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

 

— to celebrate and to strengthen the tremendous voluntary 
sector which is Saskatchewan. You’ll know, Mr. Speaker, we 
have per capita more volunteers than any other province in 
Canada. That is a tremendous strength of our province and the 
member from Regina Wascana has brought us a report that talks 
in consultation with the community, that gives us a clear path 
forward, and as I say, you will be hearing more about that in the 
days and weeks to come. And I want to thank the Regina . . . the 
member from Regina Wascana for her work in that regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Then, Mr. Speaker, I do want to take a 
moment also to welcome the two new members of the 
legislature, the new member from Battleford-Cut Knife and the 
new member from Saskatoon Fairview. I wish them both very 
well in this, their first session. They have both, if I may say, 
appointed themselves very well in the early days of this session. 
It is my prediction, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 
Fairview will have a long, long career in provincial politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And it is my prediction, it is my 
prediction, knowing the good folks of Wilkie, that the new 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife will have a long, long career 
in municipal politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — My congratulations to both for, I think, 
well-thought campaigns in the by-elections, and deserving wins. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, before I move more directly to the Throne 
Speech I want to, as most members have an opportunity to do in 
the Throne Speech debate, and that is to thank the constituents 
of Saskatoon Riversdale for the privilege they afford me to sit 
in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you this. In my experience of this great 
province of Saskatchewan — and I have opportunity to see 
every corner of this great province — in my experience of the 
province of Saskatchewan and all of our constituencies’ 
members, I believe that the constituency of Saskatoon 
Riversdale is the most culturally diverse, culturally rich 
constituency in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s my view, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I say this. This tremendous future 
that lies before the province of Saskatchewan, this future which 
is wide open, is a wide open future for the constituency of 
Saskatoon Riversdale. Why is that, Mr. Speaker? Because the 
constituents of Saskatoon Riversdale, the people of Saskatoon 
Riversdale — indeed the people of the entire west side of 
Saskatoon — are a people who are seizing their own future. If 
we have challenges, we have answers in the community, Mr. 
Speaker. And I can see that wide open future. 
 
I see a new school in Montgomery. I see a new elementary 
school being built in Montgomery. 
 

I see the new White Buffalo youth centre on 20th Street. I see 
the tremendous work that’s going on with Aboriginal young 
people, particularly in the White Buffalo youth centre. I see the 
art project, the mural that now adorns the White Buffalo youth 
centre. 
 
I see the Little Chief fire station . . . the police station, the old 
garage now converted to a community police station serving the 
needs of our community. 
 
I see the Arbor Green Development in Riversdale, the Arbor 
Green housing seniors in Riversdale, making long-term 
retirement homes in my constituency. 
 
I see, Mr. Speaker, on a weekly basis, the work of the 
Riversdale BID (Business Improvement Development), the 
small business community. 
 
I see the work of the Enterprise Zone that has been established 
in Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
I see the cultural festivities that are springing up: the Dragon 
Boat Races, the Victoria Park Festival. 
 
I see the new infrastructure that the province has teamed with 
the city of Saskatoon and the federal government in managing 
traffic on the west side of Saskatoon. 
 
And what I see is a future that is wide open for the constituency 
of Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to turn my attention to the 
Throne Speech, a speech that, the vote which will come later 
this afternoon, I will be exceptionally proud to stand and 
support, Mr. Speaker. A speech that is based on vision, Mr. 
Speaker. A speech that is based on vision. 
 
Now later in my remarks I will be making some comparisons 
between this speech and this vision with what we’re hearing 
from Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition these days. 
 
But I want to start, Mr. Speaker, by talking about the vision — 
the vision of this government, the vision that is laid out in the 
Throne Speech, the vision which, Mr. Speaker, I believe is a 
vision shared by the vast majority of Saskatchewan people. This 
vision, Mr. Speaker, to quote directly from Her Honour’s text in 
the Throne Speech: 
 

(This) vision is (of) a province of opportunity, where the 
future is wide open to those prepared to dream big, plan 
well and work hard. 
 
It is a vision (reads the Throne Speech) of an expanding 
economy from which no one is excluded. 

 
“. . . an expanding economy from which no one is excluded.” 
Mr. Speaker, in this Throne Speech, we make that statement 
with great confidence in the future of the Saskatchewan 
economy — confidence that is based not in empty rhetoric, not 
in empty promises or slogans, but confidence that is based in 
the realities of today. 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

And I want to speak a bit about the realities of the day, realities 
that have come about in the last two years. We have gone, Mr. 
Speaker, from a situation where we were losing jobs in this 
province as if jobs were going out of style. We have reversed 
that, Mr. Speaker. We have reversed that so in the last five or 
six months we have led job creation in all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — A situation — a situation, Mr. Speaker 
— where there are now 10,000 more people at work than there 
were a year ago in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: —A situation, Mr. Speaker, where we have 
seen in recent months an 80 per cent increase in oil and gas 
drilling in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a situation where it was 
recorded just yesterday in the daily papers of Saskatchewan that 
venture capital investment in Saskatchewan led all of Western 
Canada last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of 
Industry and Resources stood in this House yesterday and said, 
this is a province on a roll, he was absolutely correct. This is a 
province on a roll. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
tell members opposite, I want to tell members of the public, this 
is a province on a roll but we have only just begun — only just 
begun. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you why 
this is a province on a roll and why this is a province with a 
future wide open — because here in Saskatchewan we 
understand what builds success in our province. And if I may 
say, there is one political movement, one party, and one 
government that understands this secret of success in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The secret of success in Saskatchewan in an expanding 
economy is an economy that is the mix — the mix of a healthy, 
strong private sector, private investment, new money, new 
investment coming in, new investment private coming from our 
own people in communities. 
 
It’s a mix that includes a strong public sector that believes in 
strong public services and strong public infrastructure. And if I 
may say, Mr. Speaker, a strong Crown enterprise sector to 
provide the basic utilities and needs of the Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And the true secret, Mr. Speaker, the 
true secret in Saskatchewan of an expanding economy — and, 
Mr. Speaker, I could document this from 1905 to present — is 

the mix, the mix of the strong private investment and the strong 
public sector in partnership, Mr. Speaker. That’s the mix that 
works in Saskatchewan. And it’s working today. 
 
But I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. Of all of the words 
contained in the Throne Speech — and I know, I counted them; 
there are several thousand — Mr. Speaker, of all the words in 
the Throne Speech, the words that stand out for me are these: 
when this government sets as its vision the following: 
 

. . . an expanding economy from which no one is excluded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Our vision, Mr. Speaker, our vision of a 
great Saskatchewan and an expanding and growing in a future 
wide open is a vision that will not exclude anyone — not 
exclude anyone. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, as evidence of our commitment to 
opening this future to all — not just to some, not just to friends, 
but to all — was an event that I participated in this morning 
with the minister of community resources and employment, an 
event where today we made commitment to the largest single 
increase in child care spaces in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — An announcement which says, Mr. 
Speaker, we have resources made available to us through a 
growing and expanding economy, new income tax resources, 
new resource resources. Some of those resources, Mr. Speaker, 
are going to our children and our parents because that is 
investment in a wide open future. 
 
And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, with a very particular thing in 
mind here, we want to ensure that our parents have the ability 
— have the ability — to access employment and access 
education. And we want to ensure that the youngest of our 
citizens have the opportunity for early childhood development 
and early childhood education because when we build strong 
children, we build strong adults and we build a wide open 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now just as an aside, Mr. Speaker, just 
as an aside, just as an aside, I have not heard one word, not one 
word from the party opposite about the support for child care, 
daycare, or for their parents — not a word. Not a word, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker — you will know this, members will 
know this, and many of our public will know this — in addition 
to the support that we’re providing for those parents and 
children who will utilize child care, we are supporting all the 
families in Saskatchewan because no one’s to be excluded here. 
We have crafted and now put into place the only, the only 
universal child tax credit in the nation of Canada. The only 
province to do it — available to all of our families, all of our 
citizens. 
 
And we have crafted in Saskatchewan an employment 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

 

supplement program, a health supplementary benefits program 
to ensure that those of low income, to ensure that those who 
have few financial resources in our province are able to escape, 
escape the social services trap that used to exist. And we’re 
seeing hundreds and thousands of people moving from 
dependence to independence because we believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that this expanding economy should be one that is open to all 
and not just to a few. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker — I want to 
say, I want to put it on the record, I have said it in a thousand 
speeches, and I want to say it in the legislature — it is the view 
of this Premier and this government that there will not be social 
progress in our province without economic progress. There will 
not be social progress without economic progress. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the folks opposite, we also 
believe there should not be economic progress without social 
progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The economic progress that we’ve seen 
. . . The economic progress that we are achieving in record 
numbers is an economic progress that must benefit the people 
of our province and not just a select few that happen to be 
friends of a political party. That’s the plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there is so much 
more to opening the future, and an open future for our great 
province, than just economics, than just expanding an economy. 
As important as that is, there’s more. Mr. Speaker, we need to 
preserve this God-given, beautiful environment that is the 
province of Saskatchewan, not just for us, not just for our 
children, but for many generations to come. That is the future. 
That is the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, as an aside, I have listened, I have read the 
Hansards of the Throne Speech debates. I hear nothing, not a 
word from members opposite about environmental 
sustainability or plans to build and sustain a green 
Saskatchewan. We have a Throne Speech that commits to the 
vision of a green Saskatchewan. That’s the difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker . . . and, Mr. Speaker, 
you will hear more from us about creating a green 
Saskatchewan, much more in the days and weeks ahead. And 
it’s not just preserving the environment. You are going to hear 
more from this government in the days and weeks ahead about 
immigration, about welcoming people from across Canada, 
from around the world, to this province. 
 
You are going to hear more from this government about 
SchoolPLUS and Kids First and community schools. You’re 
going to hear more about that. 

You’re going to hear more, as I said earlier, about the volunteer 
sector initiative. Stand guard, keep tuned, you’re going to hear 
more. 
 
You are going to hear more from this government in the coming 
days and weeks about Team Saskatchewan, when we will 
partner . . . partner with business and partner with our municipal 
partners to speak to the nation and perhaps even to the world. 
 
You will hear more in this session, as a result of this Throne 
Speech and the budget that will be delivered tomorrow by the 
Minister of Finance, you will hear more about investments in 
publicly funded medicare in this province because we are 
building and sustaining medicare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You will hear more, Mr. Speaker, you will hear more about our 
commitments to education, to community schools, to 
pre-kindergarten, to our post-secondary institutions. And again, 
Mr. Speaker, you’ll remember last year, you remember the 
debate in this House when we committed to capital needs of our 
educational system. What did they do over there? They opposed 
us; they voted against it. They opposed us every day. 
 
Well I repeat, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that they will say or 
do that will prevent this government from investing in the 
educational needs of our young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, you are going to hear 
more, as a result of this Throne Speech, you are going to hear 
more about this government’s commitment to building the 
infrastructure, the public infrastructure of Saskatchewan. You 
are going to hear more about our investments in the highways 
and roadways and the rails of Saskatchewan. You’re going to 
hear more about that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again a bit of an aside. I make this 
commitment today to the House. If somewhere over on that 
opposition, during the course of this entire session, they can’t 
find one question for the Minister of the Highways and 
Transportations — we’ve gone two sessions, not one question 
to the Minister of Highways and Transportation — I make this 
commitment: if we don’t get a question some of these days, I’m 
going to stand up myself and ask the minister a question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So you’re going to hear a whole lot more 
about our highways and roadways and rails. You’re going to 
hear about our public investments and infrastructure. You’re 
going to hear more about our infrastructure in the economy of 
today — the new infrastructures, the digital cellulars and the 
high-speed Internet, extending high-speed Internet to 
communities across the province. You’re going to hear more 
about that. 
 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, this government, this province, 
has the capacity to deliver high-speed Internet service to our 
smallest communities for one reason — one reason alone, when 
no other province in Canada can do it — because we have a 
publicly owned, publicly administered telephone company. 
That’s our reason, Mr. Speaker. 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The very company, Mr. Speaker, the 
very company these people would sell as soon as they got to the 
benches of government. You can mark my words on that. 
 
You’re going to hear more, Mr. Speaker. In this session, you’re 
going to hear more about delivering and developing the 
livestock industry, particularly the feedlot industry in this 
province. You’re going to hear more in this session about the 
ethanol industry. You’re going to hear more about mining and 
mineral expansion. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because this is a government that believes 
in this province; a government that believes in its potential; a 
government that believes that the future of Saskatchewan is 
wide open — wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it has been, it has 
been an interesting debate. For those who follow the legislative 
debates, it has been — if I may say — an interesting and 
illustrative debate in this House since the Throne Speech debate 
began. 
 
I have listened on a daily basis. I have not heard one new idea, 
one new idea, from the Saskatchewan Party in this legislature. 
Not one new idea other than the sloganeering and plan — 
so-called — that we’ve heard over the last now, I don’t know, 
18 months. 
 
Now it is illustrative, Mr. Speaker. I have in my hand here a 
Throne Speech that runs to some 21 pages, that only begins to 
talk about the plans this government has for the future of the 
province — 21 pages. 
 
Well I have in this hand the plan of the Saskatchewan Party. 
One page — one page, Mr. Speaker. Now I notice members. . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . oh, the minister has it right. I notice 
what’s happening about their plan. The letters are getting bigger 
— that’s what’s happening. The letters are getting bigger. Look 
it, now you can almost read it from where you sit, Mr. Speaker. 
The letters are getting bigger. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell members this. I have a son 
who plays in a band, a rock band, and when they’re playing a 
concert or a gig I know what goes on there. When they can’t 
think of anything new to play, they play something they’ve 
already played — they just play it louder. That’s what they do. 
 
Now I look at this. And this is like when you’ve got nothing 
new to say, what do you do? You just say it a little big bigger. 
There’s nothing new here, Mr. Speaker. There’s nothing new 
here. 
 
We’ve heard this, we’ve heard this so-called plan. It’s a plan 
that says all you’ve got to do is cut all the taxes — cut the taxes 
particularly for the corporate folks — cut all the taxes, you 
know, you sell off some of the Crowns, and I tell you what, you 
get rid of labour legislation that protects workers, and somehow 
this is magically going to turn into 100,000 people. Well we 
know what the experts have said about it. 

Now maybe, maybe, I’ll give them the benefit of the doubt. 
Maybe there’s more to their plan than they’re saying. Now it’s 
interesting though because I see here in The Estevan Mercury 
from January, where the member of Estevan was speaking to 
her own chamber of commerce. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did she say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well she said I have to apologize, 
friends, I have to apologize to the Estevan Chamber of 
Commerce. Now I’m going to just quote here, Mr. Speaker, 
from the newspaper. She said she’s “not able to be very specific 
regarding her party’s stance and ideas regarding a number of 
provincial issues.” She said why. Did you hear her say why? 
 
She answered it. She answered the why right here in the paper. 
She said, well because if she says anything about their ideas, 
we’ll steal them. Let me make it perfectly, let me make it 
perfectly clear to the legislature today, let me make it perfectly 
clear to the member of Estevan and to her leader and all of her 
colleagues: go ahead, talk about your plans because I tell you 
what, we’re not going to steal your plan to cut Social Services 
by $50 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’re not going to accept your plan to 
freeze funding to education and health care. We’re not 
accepting any of your plans, Mr. Speaker, the opposition’s 
plans. We’re not going to accept those plans which would 
privatize health care delivery in Saskatchewan. And for sure 
we’re not going to accept their plans to sell off our Crown 
corporations, STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company), 
SaskTel, you name it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one other thing, one other thing, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’re not going to steal from that party. We’re not 
going to steal their commitment, their now rock-solid 
commitment that they will never, never invest equity 
investments with a private sector company. 
 
Now you know this is exactly what their House Leader said in 
his own . . . (inaudible) . . . They will never do it; they will 
never ever do it. Well, Mr. Speaker, they won’t do it. 
 
If we had that policy in place, there’d be no spa in Moose Jaw. 
There’d be no Mitchell’s in my own constituency. There’d be 
no Great Western Brewery. There’d be no millions and 
hundreds of millions of dollars flowing into the treasuries. 
 
No, we’re not going to accept their plan. And I think I should 
say now to the newly elected member from Battleford-Cut 
Knife who suggests that we should, as government, invest in a 
spa in Wilkie. Well he should talk to his House Leader, he 
should talk to his leader and say, what’s the policy here? Should 
government invest or government not invest? 
 
Mr. Speaker, with due diligence we will partner with 
Saskatchewan people, we will partner with Saskatchewan 
companies, and we will partner with investments outside the 
world . . . outside the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my time, my time has 
elapsed. Let me say this. The other thing we will not adopt of 
the policy of the Saskatchewan Party is to reject the democratic 
wishes of people in our communities. That’s the other thing we 
will never ever accept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a party, for a party that will not accept the 
democratic desire of its own party members, how could that 
party be trusted to accept the democratic choices of the people 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me finish. I’ve been travelling the country — 
Central Canada, Western Canada — speaking about the 
tremendous wide open future potential that is Saskatchewan. 
Speaking about our great resources, speaking about our people, 
speaking about the great potential. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I finish each one of these presentations 
outside the province with these words, a small quote from a 
recently graduated young woman from the University of 
Regina. She said this of our tremendous province, she said of 
our great prairie, she said the following: 
 

The prairies are earth’s window, open wide to a blue sky, 
no matter what the season. Wind piling dust on to new 
frontiers, (but) never collecting to make a hill. But the 
vastness and the openness is not desolate or lonely; it is 
(our) home. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is the vision of this government that the 
future is wide open and this will be home to ourselves, to our 
parents, our grandparents. It will be home to our children; it will 
be home to their children. It will be home to all who want to 
come, dream big, plan well, and work hard. 
 
And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, because this Throne Speech 
supports that vision, I will stand in my place and support it this 
day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s very interesting to stand and listen to the Premier talk about 
vision because, Mr. Speaker, the vision that this government 
under his leadership has brought to the province of 
Saskatchewan is increased debt and deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Since the member, Mr. Speaker, has 
taken over the leadership of the NDP, which propelled him into 
the premiership without the mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan, we have seen this province drop into debt, Mr. 
Speaker, by a further billion plus dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
From the leaked document that his Minister of Finance leaked, 
Mr. Speaker, we see that is going to grow by a minimum of 
another $400 million, Mr. Speaker. Putting this province further 
into debt, Mr. Speaker, at the expense of the children of the 
future, Mr. Speaker, is not a vision for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, just to be average in 
Saskatchewan means we will grow by 100,000 in the next 10 
years — the Saskatchewan plan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I would like the members to come to order. 
Members, pursuant to rule 14(4), it is my duty at this time to 
call for the vote. 
 
The motion before the Assembly is the motion for an address to 
Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor . . . Order. Order, please. 
Order . . . 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 
 

The motion was moved by the member for Cumberland, 
seconded by the member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
The division bells rang from 16:31 until 16:39. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Calvert Addley Crofford 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Thomson Junor 
Nilson Atkinson Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Yates McCall Iwanchuk 
 

Nays — 24 
 
Hermanson Toth Julé 
Krawetz Draude Gantefoer 
Bjornerud Elhard Wakefield 
Stewart Harpauer Eagles 
McMorris D’Autremont Wall 
Huyghebaert Dearborn Brkich 
Wiberg Weekes Lorenz 
Hart Allchurch Hillson 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — With leave to move two motions 
respecting the Throne Speech. 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2003 

 

Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also 
move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 92, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty, and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:44. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................205 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................205 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................205 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Lorjé...........................................................................................................................................................................................206 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Concern for Canadian Soldier 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................207 
 Congratulations to the Estevan Bordertown Bruins 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................207 
 Qu’Appelle Valley Recognized by Harrowsmith Country Life Magazine 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................207 
 Southwest Saskatchewan 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................207 
 Doug Wilson Award 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................208 
 Lakeland and District Citizens of the Year 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................208 
 Saskatoon Firm Wins SaskPower Award 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................208 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................209 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................209 
 Public Health Concerns 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................210 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................210 
 Provincial Finances 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................211 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................212 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................213 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Child Care Spaces 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................213 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................214 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................214 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................214 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................216 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................218 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................220 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................223 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................226 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................228 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................233 



 

 

 Recorded division .........................................................................................................................................................................233 
MOTIONS 
 Address be Engrossed and Presented to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................234 
 Ways and Means 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................234 
 


