















































Hansard: June 09, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1529 
 June 9, 2003 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Justice to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Sitting 
beside me, to my left, is Mr. Doug Moen, the deputy minister 
and Deputy Attorney General. And to my right is Murray 
Brown, the acting executive director of public prosecutions. To 
the left of Mr. Moen is Betty Ann Pottruff, the director of 
policy planning and evaluation for the Department of Justice. 
 
Behind Mr. Brown is Rick Peach, the director of law 
enforcement operations. Behind me is Mr. Gord Sisson, director 
of administrative services. Behind Mr. Moen is Elizabeth 
Smith, the executive assistant to the deputy minister. Behind 
Ms. Smith, actually behind Mr. Sisson, is Jan Turner, the 
executive director of community justice. 
 
And also sitting at the back are Susan Amrud, the executive 
director of public law; Rod Crook, the executive director of 
courts and civil justice division; Keith Laxdal, the associate 
deputy minister of finance and administration; and Gerald 
Tegart, executive director of the civil law division. And those 
are the officials that are present in the legislative Chamber. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good evening to the 
minister and his officials. Mr. Minister, I have a variety of 
questions again this evening for you. As well, some of my 
colleagues will enter into questioning. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to first begin by asking you how many 
seats are available in the College of Law for the year 2003. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I believe there are approximately 105 to 
110 seats for first year law students, and probably a similar 
number for second or third year although the number of 
students sometimes drops off so that there is a lesser number in 
the upper years, maybe 90, something like that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right. Mr. Minister, in reference to first year 
students, how many of those seats are awarded to Saskatchewan 
residents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is roughly 70 per cent in province and 30 
per cent out of province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And how many of those 
seats then would be awarded to out-of-country students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It would be a very small number. In any 
given year it would certainly be less than 5 per cent, if any. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Mr. 

Minister, from your point of view and your knowledge, is there 
a sense of satisfaction from students within this province as to 
the ability for them to be able to access those seats? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think there probably is, generally 
speaking. There are many applicants for law school who are not 
admitted to law school, so in that sense there are always some 
applicants who would be disappointed. But generally speaking, 
you know, persons who have an aptitude for the law are 
generally able to get into law school. We haven’t heard a lot of 
complaints that law school is inaccessible on the basis of the 
number of positions available. It may be inaccessible to people 
who are not considered to be suitable candidates for law school 
because of either low marks or low performance on the law 
school admission test. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, I would appreciate, Mr. Minister, if your officials 
could compile the numbers for me in regards to the number of 
students from Saskatchewan that are able to access those seats 
or have accessed them in the last, let’s say, three years, as well 
as the number of students from out of province that have 
accessed those seats, and also from out-of-country students. 
And I know that sometimes those numbers are not always 
available at hand during estimates, but I would appreciate that 
information. 
 
Mr. Minister, just on another vein here, I would like some 
clarification on the laws regarding bankruptcy in this province, 
specifically bankruptcy pertaining to farmers. It’s my 
understanding that if a farmer goes bankrupt, that there is 
something incorporated into the law that protects them from 
losing all of their assets and so they may maintain assets that 
would allow them to continue their operation so that their entire 
livelihood is not just finished. 
 
And I understand also that there is a certain period before a 
farmer’s credit rating can be approved again in the province, 
and I’m wondering if you can inform me of what that time 
period would be. What I’m referring to is before . . . the time 
period that would lapse before a farmer could, in fact, get a line 
of credit from a banking institution again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, first of all I would say to the member that, yes, if a 
farmer goes bankrupt there are certain assets that would be 
exempt from seizure under the provincial Exemptions Act. The 
Bankruptcy Act, of course, is a federal statute but it recognizes 
provincial lists of exemptions, and then the province has The 
Exemptions Act. And then additionally the farmer would be 
protected under the farm security Act which would have certain 
provisions with respect to how the financial institution could 
interact with the farmer, taking the land away. There would be 
certain measures that had to be . . . certain rights that had to be 
extended to the farmer. I believe it’s a three-year leaseback and 
the like and then the right of first refusal. 
 
Now in answer to the other part of the question, when could a 
farmer re-establish a line of credit. Well the first part of the 
answer would be, if the farmer went bankrupt the farmer would 
have to be, I think, discharged in bankruptcy. That is, the 
bankruptcy court would have to give the farmer a discharge in 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

bankruptcy so that the farmer was no longer in a position of 
being a bankrupt. Once that happened, I believe the farmer 
could go out and establish a line of credit or another 
indebtedness somewhere else. 
 
And whether or not the farmer would be successful in that 
regard would not, I think, be so much a matter of law as a 
matter of contract with the financial institution. In other words, 
if the bank or credit union or other financial institution wanted 
to establish a line of credit, they could do so. If for some reason 
they didn’t see the farmer as creditworthy, that would be a 
matter of their judgment more than the law. 
 
So I think the crucial answer really is, is the farmer discharged 
from bankruptcy or not. And if the farmer is not discharged 
from bankruptcy, the timing of which would be up to the 
bankruptcy court, then the farmer really couldn’t establish new 
credit. But if the farmer was discharged in bankruptcy, then the 
farmer certainly, I think, could establish new credit, but the 
financial institution would have to approve that. So it would be 
a matter of finding a bank or credit union that was willing to 
lend the farmer the money. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Minister, I find this very interesting and so your response 
leads me to a further question here. What would be . . . To your 
knowledge of the banking institutions and their regulations and 
so on, what would be needed in order for a bank to reconsider 
establishing a line of credit for a farmer? You know, if they are 
discharged from bankruptcy they must be required to meet 
certain conditions in order for that to happen. Could you outline 
for me those conditions as far as your understanding is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well it will vary from financial institution 
to financial institution, but generally speaking the financial 
institution would look at the farmer who had been discharged in 
bankruptcy and ask itself the question, are we secured for the 
loan or the line of credit? 
 
And so they would be looking at one of two things. The first 
thing could be assets. Does the farmer have some assets to put 
up by way of security, which the farmer would have acquired 
subsequent to the discharge in bankruptcy or have been left 
with after the bankruptcy because some items might be exempt? 
 
And the other thing they would look at, of course, would be the 
income of the farmer, what is the income of the farmer likely to 
be. 
 
And if they felt that the assets or the income, or a combination 
of those two, would give them security that the loan would be 
paid off, then they would extend the loan to the farmer. 
 
And, of course, in some instances the farmer might be in a 
better position to get a line of credit after discharge in 
bankruptcy than before because the debts of the farmer at least 
would have been dealt with in the bankruptcy. So that the 
farmer might be going to the financial institution and although 
the farmer would have gone bankrupt once, at least there’s no 
debts outstanding. 
 
And if there’s some security, perhaps in the family, for 

example, that there’s money with other family members, then 
they might be able to assist the farmer in establishing a new line 
of credit. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, it makes 
good sense that a banking institution would be considering 
assets as well as income in order to re-establish a line of credit 
for a farmer. 
 
However, it’s come to my attention from a constituent that in 
Saskatchewan the minimum waiting period to re-establish a line 
of credit is 14 years. And it has come to my attention too that 
every other jurisdiction in this country requires only a 
seven-year waiting period. So I’d ask the minister if he can 
verify that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I should say that what the member is 
referring to I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the report that is 
kept by a private credit reporting agency, which is not an arm of 
the government but just a private firm or a number of private 
firms that keep records. 
 
And the member . . . I think what the member is getting at is 
that under the law of Saskatchewan, the credit rating reporting 
agency has to wipe out the negative implications on a credit 
rating after 14 years. And the member is correct that in some 
provinces I believe the rule is after seven years they take the 
negative things out. 
 
And now I should say that the fact that there are negative 
references on a credit rating do not preclude a financial 
institution legally from extending credit. But they may not wish 
to from a practical point of view because the bankruptcy, for 
example, is recorded there. 
 
And in terms of the length of time that it can be recorded in 
Saskatchewan, it could be recorded for 14 years after the person 
went bankrupt. In some provinces that number would be seven 
years and I understand that it has worked that way in 
Saskatchewan for some decades — many years — and so there 
is that difference in our law. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, I’m wondering why the discrepancy 
between Saskatchewan . . . or the discrepancy of regulation and 
law for Saskatchewan as compared to all of the other provinces 
in Canada. I can understand that there is, I guess, a time where 
the recording of the bankruptcy can be on file for 14 years, and 
so be it. 
 
But what that seems to do for farmers that are trying to 
re-establish a line of credit is whatever the bank is that they 
may be applying for that line of credit to would look at their file 
and look at their record. And if it’s still on record that they are 
under . . . they are facing bankruptcy, then of course they 
wouldn’t be able to establish a line of credit. Their reputation 
would not be re-established. 
 
So why is it that in this province there’s a 14-year period of 
time where that stays on record as compared to every other 
province in Canada where it only stays on record for seven 
years? 
 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

 

(19:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think that’s a very good question. 
It’s a provision that, you know, wasn’t brought in by this 
government or maybe even the previous government. It’s been 
there for a long time. But having said that, I think we need to 
take a serious look at it and maybe consider even in the next 
legislative session changing the law so that it says seven years 
rather than 14. 
 
Now I should say as a practical matter that if I have been 
bankrupt — which I hasten to add I haven’t been, in case 
anybody’s wondering — but if I have gone bankrupt and I go to 
the bank, the bankruptcy may or may not be on my credit rating 
record at the credit reporting agency but the financial institution 
may ask me if I’ve ever gone bankrupt. I don’t think there’s any 
law that says they can’t ask. So as a practical matter, my banker 
might know I have been bankrupt in the past in any event. So 
what The Credit Reporting Agencies Act says wouldn’t 
necessarily be the be-all and the end-all. 
 
But getting back to the question, well why is it like this, the 
only answer is, that’s how it originally was put into our 
legislation or it has been for a long time. But having said that, 
from my point of view, I don’t see why, if it would be helpful to 
people, we couldn’t change the law to be consistent with some 
of the other provinces which say seven years. And I’ll ask my 
department to bring that, to consider that, and unless there’s 
some reason why they can’t, to bring that forward as part of 
their next legislative package which they normally prepare over 
the summer. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I’m happy to hear that because I think it’s important 
for all legislation to be reviewed and looked at and to make sure 
that we have, I guess, fairness and as much as an advantage in 
this province with updated legislation as people in other 
provinces would have. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to be asking you some questions about, 
I believe it’s called The Matrimonial Property Act that we 
brought into this legislature — we passed in this legislature, 
rather — I’m not quite sure; I’d say two years ago. 
 
I’ve had some comment from people throughout the province 
about the implications of that Act, and I’ll just go to the heart of 
the matter. It’s my understanding that this provincial 
government brought The Matrimonial Property Act into being 
in order to be in line with changes to the Divorce Act federally. 
So I’d ask the minister if that’s correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, no, the change was not made to 
comply with the Divorce Act in the sense that, under the 
Constitution of Canada, marriage and divorce are matters within 
the competence of the federal government so that the Divorce 
Act is federal. But matrimonial property is under provincial 
jurisdiction so that each province has their own matrimonial 
property Act. 
 
Now there have been some things happening at the federal 
level, partly driven by court decisions as to what is, you know, 
what is a marriage for the purpose of things like the Income Tax 
Act, the Canada Pension Plan Act, and so on. And so those have 

certainly influenced what the province has done. But strictly 
speaking, the provinces are responsible for matrimonial 
property legislation. 
 
I should say that now The Matrimonial Property Act is The 
Family Property Act because it used to apply to people who 
were legally married and it would say — I mean legally married 
in the traditional sense — and it would say, if you’ve been 
married, then this is what happens to your property when you 
split up. Now it’s called The Family Property Act because it 
really has rules applying to any couple that have lived together 
in a conjugal relationship for at least two years. And that could 
be a couple traditionally, legally married in the traditional 
sense; it could be a couple that have lived together common 
law, and that couple could be either an opposite-sex couple or it 
could be a same-sex couple. And of course the courts have 
informed governments that they require governments to treat 
people more equally than before, and they have struck down 
laws that do not recognize conjugal relationships of people who 
are unmarried or people who may be of the same sex. 
 
And so governments, ours and others, are trying to comply with 
the imperative of that, and also comply with what are 
considered to be, by many people, social norms — that many 
people live common law today and that they will acquire certain 
rights by doing so. And so that’s the reason why The Family 
Property Act is structured the way it is. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, there really 
are some major implications under this new law — this Family 
Property Act. And I guess again your response begs more 
questions about what is marriage, what constitutes common 
law, what is a conjugal relationship. 
 
Now I’ll just start by asking you first — because the changes 
were made to accommodate people that were not in the 
traditional marriage but in a common-law marriage or a 
same-sex marriage as well as common law between gender 
differences — so what constitutes common law in 
Saskatchewan? Could you give me the definition of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I should say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that in terms of what constitutes marriage, that is within the 
jurisdiction of the federal government to decide. But in terms of 
what a relationship means for particular purposes under 
provincial law, there will be different rules depending upon the 
law we’re talking about. 
 
For example, with respect to The Family Property Act, for that 
to apply a couple would have had to live together in a conjugal 
relationship for at least two years, and then that Act would 
come into play. But as I understand it with respect to pension 
plans and whether one would acquire certain rights under 
pension plans, those might come into effect if a couple had 
resided together for one year only, and the reason is pension 
plans have to be consistent with the Income Tax Act of Canada. 
And that Act, as I understand it, says that there are certain rights 
if people have lived together for one year. So the same 
definition would apply or the same rule would apply for 
provincial purposes as well. 
 
So if it’s for the purpose of pensions, there’s a one-year rule; for 
the purpose of family property, there’s a two-year rule. For the 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

purpose of child support, there would be a two-year rule. That 
is, if a couple resided together — let’s say one of them had 
children already from a previous relationship — and then that 
couple was together for a few years and split up, the couple . . . 
or the person with children might go after the other person for 
child support, even though they’re not married, if that person 
had been living in the household and had stood in the position 
of a parent for those children for at least two years. 
 
So we have these rules that tell us when do property rights 
come into effect, when would child support obligations possibly 
start, when would there be some consideration under a pension 
plan — let’s say if one person dies, whether somebody should 
get survivor’s benefits. That rule would be one year. I think 
under the Canada Pension Plan Act they’ve had a one-year rule 
for some years, if my memory serves me correctly. 
 
So those are the rules we have. In terms of the definition of 
marriage, that is not something that we have jurisdiction over. 
It’s something that the federal parliament would have 
jurisdiction over, as guided by the courts. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I believe that, 
or to my knowledge there is some discretion left to the judges 
of the courts in this province as to how to define common law. 
So I’m not interested right now in questioning marriage 
relationships that might split or child custody. What I am 
considering and what I’m asking is in reference to family 
property and property rights. 
 
Now if in fact it’s true that the judges have some leeway to 
make a determination on what constitutes common law, then 
that . . . I would assume from that finding that there is no real 
definitive wording in the Act that would define common law. 
And if there’s not then it has to be up to the judge to determine 
it. 
 
So when it comes down to judges determining what common 
law is, there is a great variation based on what the judge thinks 
to his knowledge might be a relationship where two people 
have spent enough time, but not necessarily time under the 
same roof even, but that they have spent some time together and 
have given each other the indication that there has been some 
level of commitment here for a year or two. 
 
So I guess I’ll just go back to asking you, is it in this province 
of Saskatchewan under the auspices and the direction of a judge 
to determine and define what common law is in any given 
situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s 
accurate, that it’s up to the judge in any given situation to define 
whether there is a spousal relationship and whether that has 
existed for two years because these things will often be a matter 
of fact; questions of fact will arise. 
 
For example, it is not uncommon to see a man and a woman, let 
us say, who are not married, cohabiting in the sense that they 
share a residence but they cannot be said to be in a spousal 
relationship. They could be what are commonly referred to as 
roommates or perhaps their relationship may have another level 
to it, but they may not themselves consider themselves to be in 
a spousal in that sense. 

So it really is a matter of, a question of fact and the judge in 
many instances will have to make a determination whether 
these two people have indeed intended to commit themselves to 
a relationship which would be considered spousal. And I don’t 
think you could ever get away from the fact that this will 
always require some judicial discretion where there is a dispute 
between the parties. 
 
Obviously there are many instances where people will have 
lived together common law for many years and they’ll both 
agree that well yes, we lived together as man and wife. There 
will be other instances where they may be together but they will 
disagree as to the nature and quality of their relationship. And 
there will be other instances where people reside together and 
the relationship has a certain quality at the beginning, perhaps 
roommates, and develops into a different sort of relationship. 
And there may be a factual argument as to what sort of 
relationship it developed into and when that occurred. 
 
So yes, you’ll get into these difficult factual disagreements and 
in our system that’s why we have judges. They have to listen to 
the parties, listen to other parties who may have observed the 
relationship or heard what they had to say about one another, 
and then make a determination whether this was a spousal 
relationship or whether it was some relationship having a 
different kind of quality. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, there has 
been a case in Saskatchewan that shocked me, frankly. The case 
went like this. 
 
Joe met Jane and they began a relationship. And that 
relationship did not take them to a point where they lived under 
the same roof, where they lived in the same residence, or even 
the same building, but they spent enough time together for two 
years. For instance, they went on holidays together and they 
also spent weekends with each other but that was about it for 
two years. They introduced each other to family members, each 
other’s family members. And then there was a breakup of that 
relationship. 
 
(19:30) 
 
And the female in this case sued the male for property rights, 
you know for . . . suit for assets that were existing in his name. 
And in fact this woman was granted that suit; she won this. At 
the same time this man was yet married to someone else. He 
wasn’t divorced. 
 
And so it’s just very interesting how that would work because I 
think if this is the law that we have in the province right now, 
and it’s subject to discretion by a judge and that judge may or 
may not award something to the person that is in a common-law 
relationship like that, it has great implications, and I think for a 
lot of people. And subsequent to the case that I’d heard about, 
and in fact one of the lawyers that I know was advising people 
of this because I mean it can have far-reaching effects for many 
people. 
 
So I’m just kind of wondering if there’s any . . . Like the 
guidelines, for instance, for the judiciary must be, I would 
think, more succinct than to give them sort of a blanket ability 
to make a call at their own discretion. 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

 

And I also understood, Mr. Minister, that The Family Property 
Act, as I’d mentioned when I began my questioning, was an Act 
that came in in this province in preparation for a change to 
regulations in the Divorce Act, I believe it was, federally. And 
then that Act, federally, did not go through. 
 
And we are sitting now in this province with this piece of 
legislation that is not in line with the federal legislation anyway. 
And also we’re sitting with implications like this. So I wonder 
if the minister would comment, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to make it clear that, you 
know, I can’t comment on specific cases that may have been 
decided by the courts. But obviously in the case that the 
member’s referring to, the judge decided that there was a 
spousal relationship for two years and one of the parties, at 
least, disagrees with that. But there are rights of appeal if the 
judge is incorrect. 
 
I do want to make it clear that the judges do not have a blank 
cheque. They have to determine that two people have lived in a 
spousal relationship for two years — not six months or a year 
but two years — and that they’ve been living together in effect 
as spouses. And that’s a matter of fact. 
 
And the member is correct that people have to be cognizant of 
what the law is and what their obligations may become and 
what their liabilities may be if they get involved in a situation 
where they live with another person, whether they’re already 
married or not. 
 
And I would say that it’s important for everyone to realize that 
living with another person is a serious, large, important step. 
And when you make a decision to live with someone as a 
spouse, whether married or not, you must give some thought to 
it and what the legal implications may be — point number one. 
 
Point number two, there are what are called prenuptial 
agreements. If people wish to contract out of the implication of 
the law, The Family Property Act, they can sign an agreement 
saying, it doesn’t apply to us. But if they don’t sign that kind of 
agreement, then some implications may flow. 
 
But I just make the observation that in the last 20 years, I would 
say society has changed a lot. Some will like it, some will not; 
but the reality is people do live together quite commonly 
without being legally married. 
 
And the public expects governments to respond to social reality 
and to say, for example, if a couple have lived together and 
they’re not married but maybe they have a child, that certain 
rights must be assured, say, for the mother of the child if the 
relationship ends, whether or not they’re legally married. 
 
And that’s just a reality of modern life. And some people will 
be very vulnerable, they’ll be vulnerable spouses, and they need 
to be protected. 
 
And so I don’t disagree with the member that the law is 
changing. The law is somewhat complex; it relies upon the 
judges to make certain determinations. But the reason that the 
laws change is because society has changed. And people are 
living in ways that are different than the ways that they lived in 

the past, in many more cases than used to be common. 
 
And so that is the reason why the law has changed to recognize 
people that live together common law and to give them some 
property rights after a certain length of time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I guess when 
The Family Property Act came into being in the province, the 
intent at least that was . . . the intent of that piece of legislation 
was to change the law to include provisions for fairness as far 
as division of property and so on in respect to same-sex 
couples. 
 
But the implications I think went a little bit further than most 
people realised in that, you know, when you have now 
common-law couples who are also subject to that change and, 
you know, what constitutes common law or the lack of 
definition for common law really does pose, I think, a problem. 
And I think that’s something else that should be and could be 
worked on. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to just move my questioning to the most 
recent Ombudsman’s report, and it’s just a matter of interest on 
my part. The Ombudsman made some reference to . . . Well 
actually her report contains some recommendations that 
reflected on the condition of the prison facilities here, or 
correctional institutes. So one of her recommendations certainly 
implied that she thought it would be a good idea to renovate the 
Regina jail or else have a new building. 
 
And I’m wondering if your department has done any kind of 
analysis and assessment on what it might cost for renovations or 
for rebuilding the facility entirely? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, my department would not be at all 
engaged in that because it is being done by the Department of 
Corrections and Public Safety, and I know that the minister in 
charge of Corrections would be pleased to answer that question 
in his estimates. It’s not something that falls under my 
department. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in reference 
to child custody in this province, there has been I think a lot of, 
a lot of engagement in the need for . . . engaged talk in the need 
for children to be able to testify by a tape recording. And I’m 
wondering if there is . . . if that is permissible, if that’s accepted 
in courts. 
 
I’m wondering also whether or not there is an age 
differentiation as far as the testimony acceptance. Like, how old 
would a child have to be before their taped testimony would be 
accepted by the courts, or if in fact age even makes any 
difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my officials advise 
me that yes, the evidence of a child 14 years or under can be 
videotaped and admitted on that basis under the evidence Act. 
And there’s consideration being given to raising that age to 18 
to be consistent with I believe the federal legislation, the Youth 
Criminal Justice Act . . . or actually the Criminal Code that 
allows similar evidence for people under the age of 18 years. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You said 14 and under. 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

So I’m wondering if you can give me the minimum age that a 
testimony would be received. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that there is no set minimum 
age. The question would be for the court to determine whether 
the child had some understanding of the process and the 
importance of telling the truth. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d 
just like to switch over now. I’ll switch my questioning to the 
sex offender registry and the possibility of that happening 
within the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve had some interesting question and answer 
periods on the sex offender registry and I hold before me today 
a press release from Newswatch that has some response from 
Minister Nilson to my question. 
 
And the question that I had asked during question period, first 
of all, was referring to the need for the province to set up a 
database, and a minister other than yourself responding and of 
course responding the same way that the Minister of Justice 
responds: the federal government is setting up a sex offender 
. . . a national system and they were working on that since last 
December, when they introduced legislation to make that 
happen. 
 
Now the other part of the response from one of the government 
members on your side of the House was, our officials are 
working together with the federal people on setting up this 
process. We’re doing that so that we can have a system that 
covers the whole country. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d just like to get into some more . . . some of 
the intricate details. And I’d like to ask you, in working with the 
sex offender registry, with the other provinces, with the federal 
people particularly on setting this up, I’d like to ask, you know, 
what was the process that you went through? What kind of 
discussion took place as far as the mechanics of setting up the 
sex offender registry? What was necessary for the provinces to 
do? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all 
of the provinces were involved in the planning and development 
of the legislation that is currently before the federal parliament. 
And they were involved in developing the criteria for the 
registry and the structure of the legislation. 
 
I’m also advised that when the legislation is passed, the 
provinces will have to play a role with respect to the 
implementation of the legislation in the sense of training of 
police and other officials to actually register and make entries 
onto the registry of sex offenders, also dealing with the police 
and the courts in terms of anything else that may be required to 
have a name go onto the registry. 
 
The idea — and the legislation was introduced in December of 
last year — is that there will be a national sex offender registry 
which will establish a sex offender database on the Canadian 
police information computer, require those convicted of specific 
sex offences or offences found to have a sexual component to 

register following a court order for registration. So in other 
words, the judges which operate in each province will have to 
make an order that certain people be included in the register. 
 
Offenders will be required to register within 15 days after the 
order is made, if not in custody, or within 15 days from the 
release from custody. So the probation officials that operate in 
each province will have to ensure as a condition of either 
sentencing or release that the offenders actually get down and 
register themselves. 
 
The length of registration will vary depending upon the offence. 
The offenders are required to keep information — addresses, 
telephone numbers, and so on — current. So if they deal with 
provincial officials with respect to probation, we will have to 
make sure that if they change their address that that goes into 
the registry. So there will be some monitoring and work that 
provinces will have to do. 
 
And so the provinces have been involved with respect to both 
the legislation itself and will be involved in terms of the actual 
on the ground implementation and operation of the system to 
make sure that the offenders do what in fact they’re supposed to 
do, and to make sure that the courts and probation officers are 
aware of all the situations where someone must have their name 
and address on the registry. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I wasn’t quite so 
interested in what the registry would be like. I was quite aware 
of that quite some time ago, of the fact that offenders would 
have to register themselves and that kind of thing and what kind 
of material would have to be contained, or information rather, 
would have to be provided to the police. I recognize that. 
 
What I was wondering is if in fact it is true that officials are 
working together at this time and have been for a year since the 
feds pointed out that they were going to have a national sex 
offender registry — and it would seem to me that provincial 
officials in saying that they’re working together would be able 
to explain what kind of . . . the nature of the work — what kind 
of input did each province have? 
 
Obviously Ontario has set up their own database and so has 
Alberta and, I believe, Manitoba. So if those requirements were 
there for each province to get that material ready so that in fact, 
when the legislation is passed, you’ve got a working . . . 
something that’s workable here, why wouldn’t the provinces 
then . . . all the provinces do that? Get their database ready and 
have it ready for entry into the national registry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I would like to point out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, only Ontario has a sex offender registry. Alberta and 
Manitoba do not have sexual offender registries. They simply 
don’t. 
 
And what Ontario and . . . or, I’m sorry, Manitoba and Alberta 
have are certain disclosure systems, which we also have in this 
province pursuant to legislation that was passed in 1996. We 
have a public disclosure system. And if the way in which police 
recommend public disclosure is through a Web site as they’re 
doing in Manitoba, I believe, then that can certainly be done 
here as well. 
 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

 

But I’m answering the member’s assertion that somehow there 
are all these sex offender registries elsewhere. Well there aren’t. 
There are some provisions with respect to public disclosure. We 
also have legislation concerning public disclosure. 
 
The officials have been working with the federal government to 
develop a national system. And the reason for that, as I’ve 
indicated in this House before and in the media, is that sex 
offenders are mobile — they may move from Calgary to 
Vancouver to Saskatoon — and we need a national registry. 
And what that is is really an investigative tool for the police, 
that they can monitor the whereabouts and track the movements 
of sex offenders so that when problems arise, that may assist 
them in locating the perpetrator. 
 
Now having said that, we also know, and we’re seeing in 
Toronto now where there’s a horrible situation, notwithstanding 
a sex registry, that there is a predator on the loose who has 
killed one child and there’s speculation that he has — he, I’m 
assuming, could be she — that person has attempted to pick up 
other children, notwithstanding the sex registry, which brings to 
mind the importance of other measures, that is educating 
children, informing them of the need not to go with people they 
don’t know, of keeping people together and not having children 
alone and vulnerable to predators. 
 
And in that regard I want to say, as I’ve said before, that we 
pursue a number of measures to try to protect children from 
sexual predators, including release conditions for people who 
have been convicted of sex crimes, peace bonds that people 
may be required to enter into, The Public Disclosure Act which 
I’ve mentioned, the national flagging system which alerts 
prosecutors across the country to consider a dangerous offender 
application or a long-term offender application if a particular 
person is before them, and also dangerous offender and 
long-term offender designation, which are applications that we 
make as the Crown to have people held in jail as dangerous 
offenders. 
 
And as of March 20 of this year, for example, there were five 
applications before the courts to have accused people declared 
to be dangerous offenders, which would mean that they would 
go to jail and not be let out. And other people have been found 
to be dangerous offenders — since 1975, a total of 26 — and 
those are people that are locked up and not let out. So there are 
those things that we do. 
 
I think a national sex offender registry would be one tool that 
would assist the police. It would not be a panacea or an answer 
to all problems. There would be the need for vigilance at the 
community level by parents, by teachers, by other people 
having contact with children, and there would be the need for 
government to take the steps that I’ve described in dealing with 
people that we know to be sex offenders. 
 
So a national sex registry, we support it. In fact it came about as 
the result of a resolution put forward by Saskatchewan to the 
federal and provincial ministers of Justice. It is one thing we 
can do. It will not be a complete answer and we need to take a 
variety of other measures to protect children from sexual 
predators. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

Mr. Minister, I’m well aware that Saskatchewan definitely did 
put forward their desire to see a national sex offender registry 
and I think I’d remind the minister that that happened after the 
opposition initiated and prompted the government to do so. But 
nonetheless it was done and I’m very pleased that the necessity 
for that was put forward by the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But it remains, Mr. Minister, that Manitoba and Alberta and 
Ontario have set up a Web site. Now, Mr. Minister, you’ve 
made the comment, just a moment ago, that it’s important for 
communities to be vigilant. A Web site, with high-risk 
offenders on that Web site, high-risk offenders that are in this 
province, their picture and their description and their 
whereabouts, would assist the community in being vigilant and 
aware. I think that that’s the least that we can do. 
 
As you mentioned, none of these measures are a total panacea 
in themselves as far as addressing the danger that is at hand for 
children and residents of Saskatchewan. But I think it’s 
incumbent upon us to make sure that we do everything possible. 
 
So if we had a Web site set up, which I understand from the 
other three provinces is not a very costly measure, we would be 
able to provide the public with that awareness tool. It would not 
be costly and it could be — all of that data that’s entered in 
there — could be used for the national sex offender registry. 
 
So I’m at a loss as to understand why we wouldn’t in this 
province set up that kind of Web site. Can the minister tell me 
why his NDP (New Democratic Party) government is refusing 
to do this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I should point out first of all that with 
respect to sex offender notification through The Public 
Disclosure Act, which was passed by this legislature in 1996, 
there have been two states in the United States, namely 
California and Alaska, who have had those programs thrown 
out entirely by the courts on the basis that the notification on 
the Web site was too broad and went beyond the purpose of the 
legislation. 
 
So one concern that our province has had has been that the 
legislation has to withstand constitutional challenge. And that’s 
something that’s considered with respect to any legislation. 
 
Now the other point I want to make is that The Public 
Disclosure Act, so that there’s no misunderstanding, allows 
disclosure to the public that there is a sex offender in the area. 
The question is whether the notification should be to a given 
area and a given community or whether it should be on the Web 
site which goes to the world at large. 
 
One of the fears . . . well there are two fears and from a 
practical sense that have gone along with this. One fear is the 
fear of vigilantism — that notification to the world at large may 
cause a vigilante response to someone who has been a sex 
offender, perhaps has not reoffended but is living in the 
community. And one of the goals of the correctional system of 
course is to rehabilitate people where possible. 
 
The other fear is that you make life so difficult in the 
community at large and the entire world that you drive sex 
offenders completely underground, so that in other words, 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

instead of living in the community, having their whereabouts 
monitored by the police, and notifying the community as 
opposed to the world at large, but monitoring the person, that 
you just lose track of the person because they find the weight of 
the whole world who has been notified about them, you know, 
is coming down on their shoulders. And it isn’t out of any 
sympathy for the sex offender in that sense, but from a practical 
point of view. 
 
(20:00) 
 
I’m advised that the people working under The Public 
Disclosure Act, determining what the appropriate level of 
disclosure should be, have advised against Web site disclosure 
for the reasons that I’ve indicated, that they think public safety 
is better enhanced by a limited disclosure to people in that 
community as opposed to Web site, and that’s some of the 
reasoning. 
 
Having said that, these are matters that should be obviously 
carefully considered, and experience will be had in Alberta, 
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Ontario, and this is a new area 
and we will learn the best way to do these things and also we 
will learn that some ways may not be the best way to do these 
things. 
 
What I would undertake to do is to monitor progress in this 
regard as we move forward, while at the same time reminding 
everyone that the sex registry and the notification will not make 
everybody safe, that there are a variety of things that need to be 
done to try to keep people safe and it requires the response of 
people at the community level, educating children, not leaving 
them unsupervised in certain situations, and so on. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, I think that there is every member in 
this legislature as well as just about every sensible, thinking 
person in this province that would agree that there are a number 
of measures that have to be taken to ensure that our children are 
not in danger of being assaulted by sexual offenders. 
 
But I also know that there has been education of many children 
and a lot of those children are still in danger because the actions 
of a sexual offender are often ingrained into the way they are. 
And there is a propensity for repeating that offence and that has 
been proven by social scientists that this is not . . . this is not a 
behaviour that is easily rehabilitated. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I’m not referring to sexual offenders after 
the first offence. I’m referring to having a Web site set up for 
repeat offenders that are considered high risk and that are still 
able to serve a sentence in jail and then be discharged. 
 
A point in case is Karla Homolka. It looks to me like from what 
we’re hearing in the news that they are going to be released. 
There is no requirement for their registry anywhere. There is 
nothing, unless we take some measures provincially like a Web 
site, to notify the general public that these people may be in 
their area. And I think it’s the very least that we owe our 
children, as well as all citizens of our province, to ensure that 
they have a fighting chance to know who is in their midst and 
how to be aware of that, and vigilant. 
 

And so, Mr. Minister, I’m thinking also that if Alberta, 
Manitoba, and Ontario have set up a Web site and they’re 
taking the initiative to do so based on their belief that a 
province has got to do everything that it can possibly do to 
ensure the safety of its citizens, why then would our province 
not take the same measure? 
 
And I understand some of the reasons that you’ve given. But 
they just don’t kind of cut it with me, I guess. Fear of vigilante? 
Well I’m sorry. I mean, that might be a concern; there’s no 
doubt about it. 
 
But I think on the other end of the spectrum we’ve got to 
remember that children also have a right to be protected. And 
we’re not looking as much at that right of children if we’re 
forever finding reasons why we should be protecting an 
offender. 
 
So I know that’s not your intention to protect an offender. I’m 
just saying that the action we take to deal with these matters 
really does reveal whether or not we’re protecting children or 
we’re protecting an offender. 
 
And so I’ve said a whole lot here and I’m just kind of 
wondering if the minister could maybe comment again as far as, 
I guess, the right of children, the right for society to be 
protected and therefore the necessity of a provincial government 
to take action, every action they can, to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want the member 
opposite to know that the police and the prosecutors work every 
day to protect children. The police and the prosecutors consider 
it a very important priority to protect children. There is no one 
in this legislature that doesn’t think it’s important to try to 
protect children. 
 
And as I have said to that member repeatedly — but I will 
repeat it again — we don’t just pay lip service to protecting 
children from sexual predators. We are taking action to protect 
children from sexual predators. I want the member to know that 
the public prosecutions division of the Department of Justice 
has within the last 10 years conducted more dangerous offender 
applications than it had cumulatively in all previous years, that 
is the previous 80 to 90 years. 
 
The member says, well if somebody has repeatedly sexually 
abused children, then certain steps should be taken and she’s 
referring to notification and so on. I’m saying to the member, as 
I have said repeatedly, when someone repeatedly sexually 
abuses children we do not cut any slack in the Department of 
Justice. We apply under the rules to have them declared a 
dangerous sexual offender and to have them locked up. 
 
And for the information of the member, we have obtained in the 
last 10 years 22 dangerous offender designations. Those are 
people that are locked up for good and 15 long-term offender 
designations in the last five years. There are nine more 
dangerous and long-term offender applications pending. 
 
Public prosecutions has also identified 21 other cases — these 
are now before the courts — where a dangerous or long-term 
offender application might be made in the event of a conviction. 
In other words we’re watching people who have been convicted 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

 

of abusing children. We say, if they’re convicted again, we’re 
going to apply to have them locked up for good. And we don’t 
cut them any slack. 
 
And what I want to make clear to the member is, no one takes 
this lightly — no one — on that side of the House or this side of 
the House. And the prosecutors don’t take it lightly and the 
police don’t take it lightly. And we all abhor that in our society 
and all across the country these kinds of offences occur. We 
take steps to try to prevent them. We take steps to deal with 
them and I’ve identified some of the steps. 
 
I also indicated to the member today, and I’ve indicated before, 
there is a national flagging system of potential dangerous 
offenders maintained using the police computer system. 
Saskatchewan participates in that network to ensure that 
dangerous, potential dangerous offenders are identified and 
tracked no matter what jurisdiction they happen to be in. 
 
In other words if we have a dangerous offender, we co-operate 
with the other provinces to say — or someone might be a 
potentially dangerous offender — this person would be 
dangerous; if this person comes up in your system, talk to us 
about what they may have done before and let’s try to make 
sure they don’t disappear into some other jurisdiction. 
 
And since January 1996, we have flagged 52 Saskatchewan 
offenders on the national flagging system. We also . . . Through 
the prosecutions, we’re committed to the early identification of 
cases in the criminal justice system which might warrant a 
dangerous or long-term offender application in the event of a 
conviction. 
 
What I’m trying to say is, these matters are not easy. There’s no 
state that can all the time be watching every person to make 
sure that they’re not doing something wrong. And there are 
people that are doing things wrong. 
 
But what I object to is the implication in the question that 
somehow the system does not take the rights of child victims 
seriously because somehow someone’s more concerned about 
offenders. No. We’re concerned about complying with the 
Constitution for sure, and doing things in a lawful manner. 
 
But if there is any way that we can protect children by having 
somebody convicted and locked up, and if they do it again by 
locking them up for good, not only do we want to do it, we are 
doing it. We are doing it. And I’m going to underline that 
because I’ve said it many times that we’re doing it; we doing it 
more than we have in the past. 
 
And my point is there is no one in this House that doesn’t take 
this matter seriously. And there is no police officer, no 
prosecutor that won’t do everything we can do to protect 
children from being victims of sexual crime. 
 
That is the position of the member opposite. That is my 
position. It’s the position of every member of the House. It’s the 
position of the Department of Justice. It’s the position of every 
prosecutor in this province. And it’s the position of every police 
force in this province as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the 
reiteration that everyone in this legislature, every member of 
this legislature care about children has not been disputed by 
myself. Mr. Minister, what I’m saying is it’s necessary to take 
some actions that we need to take where we see that there may 
be a way to protect even better. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, my reference is when I make the comments to 
you about what yet can be done, and my reference to other 
provinces and what they are doing, I want to be considered 
seriously. 
 
And I’m looking at these other provinces — Manitoba, Alberta, 
and Ontario — who have set up Web sites. I believe that the 
members of their legislatures are also just as concerned. I 
believe that they’ve looked at all of the laws they have in place 
and all the activity under that law that is taking place to protect 
children. 
 
But for some reason, Mr. Minister, there are people there that 
still believe that even more should be done, and a public 
awareness tool is one of those things that we can do. A Web site 
is a public awareness tool. It helps people protect themselves. 
 
Yes, the police and the prosecutors are doing a great job. I have 
no doubt about that and I agree with you on that, but I also 
recognize, as every one of those police officers out there — 
prosecutors, judges, everybody in the province that is in the 
system that deals with this matter — recognize that when an 
offender is released from prison, there is no tracking in the 
system, no way of tracking where they go. They can up and 
take off and no one knows. They don’t know where they’ve 
gone and they have no obligation at this point to make 
disclosure to the police force in the next community that they’re 
going to, of their whereabouts. 
 
So that’s not in place yet because the national sex offender 
registry is not in place. I believe that we have a lot of measures 
in our system that are working to a degree, but they’re parts of a 
workable solution for this. We need to incorporate other parts 
that will make it even safer. 
 
And I’m just asking that the province consider that there are 
most likely reasons that other provinces, like Manitoba and 
Alberta and Ontario, put in a Web site. I think they believe that 
it would be a public awareness tool to ensure that people in our 
communities could protect themselves. So if the minister would 
care to comment, I would be happy to receive his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as I tried to indicate to the member 
earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1996 this legislature passed The 
Public Disclosure Act. That Act allows for the disclosure to the 
community of the presence of a sex offender in that community. 
 
Since 1996 there have been 17 situations where disclosure has 
been approved under that Act. In other words, the community is 
notified . . . I should say 17 applications and 13 approvals for 
disclosure. So the community has been advised of the presence 
of a dangerous sexual offender, or a sexual offender . . . well in 
every case they would be dangerous in that sense, but not so 
declared by the courts perhaps. 
 
But the difference here is, the member says well just post it on 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

the Web site and out it goes. And instead we ask a committee 
that’s comprised of community members what they think is the 
best way to disclose it to the public. It isn’t a matter of whether 
it’s disclosed or not disclosed; it’s what steps are taken. 
 
(20:15) 
 
And my officials advise me that, for example, if there’s a sex 
offender in a given community, the school will be made aware 
of that. The daycare centres will be made aware of that, other 
places where children may congregate. There may be posters 
put up in the area. There may be notification in a publication 
like a newspaper. There may be notification electronically 
through the airwaves. There are a variety of ways that people 
can be notified. So yes, Manitoba does it also through the 
Internet and it’s on . . . there’s a Web-based notification system. 
 
What we do in this province is to ask the committee what would 
be the best way to notify the community. Now my 
understanding is if they wanted to say, well alert the world by 
putting it on the Internet, well they could do so. We ask them 
what their advice is for the protection of the community. They 
come up with the suggestions and they’ve done so in 13 cases. 
 
Now if there are any cases where there’s a sex offender present 
and a possibility that they will reoffend, the system is in place 
to bring about public disclosure. What we’re talking about is 
whether there is . . . whether it’s a necessary prerequisite that 
the public disclosure be on a Web site. And in 13 cases the 
community has said, well here’s how we think you should 
disclose. And we work with the community in that regard as the 
legislation contemplates. 
 
And frankly I think that what you should do is target the 
warning to the community that is in danger, not . . . It doesn’t 
matter to me if it’s on the Web and somebody in Singapore or 
Beijing can read it. It matters to me whether the community 
concerned is aware that that person is present. And I understand 
there may be notification of other police forces where the 
person may go to as well, but it’s targeted as opposed to just 
kind of a shotgun approach on the Web. 
 
But as I said to the member before, if the committee of lay 
people — public advisers I think — in communities has been 
incorrect in the way in which people are notified, if there are 
better ways of doing it, then we should monitor it. We should 
look at it always with the intent of having the best system to 
protect children from sex abusers. 
 
I can tell you that the committee, you know, is . . . has a clergy 
person on it, someone familiar with victim services, senior 
officers with the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), 
Regina and Saskatoon police services, a psychologist, a retired 
judge, and an individual who works with victims and 
communities and offenders, as well as a lawyer. And they’re 
people of experience that try to figure out what is the best way 
to notify. And we can have disagreements over, well, is this in 
fact the best way to notify or is there something else you should 
do? 
 
But I just want everybody to understand there’s no sort of 
cavalier attitude that, well we’re just not going to do this. There 
is an attitude that we think, based upon the advice that comes 

from the community, this is the best way to — in the short run 
and the long run — to protect the community. This is what we 
think we should do. 
 
I’ve tried to explain why. If indeed experience shows that there 
are better, more effective ways, then we can change the way we 
do it. But it . . . The attempt will be made to do it in the way 
that will most effectively provide protection to each community 
concerned, and not necessarily to jump on every bandwagon 
that may come along. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, what 
you’re describing is certainly a good thing, what is now taking 
place. But it occurs to me that public disclosure for every 
high-risk sex offender is not mandatory. It is the position of the 
committee that you have referred to as to whether or not that 
offender is going to be subject to public disclosure. And so that 
certainly does not cover every sex offender. 
 
The fact of the matter remains, Mr. Minister, and I reiterate that 
this kind of a crime and this behaviour is always dangerous; it’s 
repetitive. In the cases of high-risk offenders — that’s why 
they’ve been labelled high-risk offenders — is that they have a 
propensity to continue this thing over and over again. And in 
the meantime, the damage to those lives of children that are 
offended and sexually assaulted is a lifetime of anguish, trauma, 
and damage that not only has social costs, as you well know and 
we well know, but certainly has high financial costs. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I guess you know we could probably go on 
debating this for some time. I know that it’s an important issue 
for the entire Assembly, but I would draw to your attention, Mr. 
Minister, that one of the organizations in this province that have 
done a study of the financial costs of sexual assault, sexual 
trauma was Tamara’s House in Saskatoon. 
 
And the cost is phenomenal. It’s like three to four times the cost 
to the health system of people that are dealing with sexual 
trauma than people that do not, to say nothing of the 
productivity of the lives that have been damaged. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’ll just leave you with that and I just wanted 
to ask you one more question in reference to the sex offender 
registry and then I’m going to turn the questioning over to my 
colleague, the member from Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell me what the status is right now as 
far as you have been advised as to the retroactivity of the sex 
offender registry? Are they going to have a retroactive 
provision in place so that offenders that are in prison right now, 
upon their release, will be entered into that registry as well as 
offenders from the past that are out there right now in the 
public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want to say to the member in answer to 
the first part of her question — and she’s right; we could debate 
it for a long time — but I think it’s important to know that 
every single month, as people are released from the federal 
institutions, we monitor what offence they’ve been convicted 
of. And if it is a sex offender and if there’s no parole officer 
meeting with that person regularly, we apply for a 
recognizance, you know, a peace bond, to the court requiring 
that they report to the police regularly and also make their 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

 

address known to the police. We apply to the courts to do that 
and we do that dozens of times each and every year. 
 
And I think that’s important to know that we don’t ignore 
people that we consider to be at high risk. If they are at high 
risk to reoffend, we take steps to have them meet certain 
requirements. And if they’re at very high risk, we take steps to 
have them declared a dangerous sexual offender, as I’ve already 
said. 
 
Now we’re also supporting the establishment of the national sex 
offender registry. And the member asks a very good question, 
which is: well what about applying it retroactively? And we 
have . . . I understand that my predecessor already at a meeting 
of the federal, provincial, and territorial Justice ministers has, 
along with other provinces, said that that registry needs to be 
enhanced to apply it retroactively in some cases; and that we 
support that. 
 
We will continue, as I indicated to the member in the House last 
week, I believe, to take the position that the present federal law 
should be enhanced and that it should include some retroactivity 
provisions. 
 
And so we’re supporting getting going with the national sex 
registry, first of all. And we’re working to make it stronger than 
it is now. But as I’ve said repeatedly, we are doing a variety of 
other things. We are taking action on a variety of fronts, 
through the courts, with the prosecutors, with the police, to do 
everything we can to combat sex offenders who prey on 
children. And we will continue to do so. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, if this 
province took the position with the previous minister of Justice 
that it should be retroactive and you mentioned that other 
provinces took that stand, why wouldn’t the federal government 
do that then and have that as a provision of the national sex 
offender registry now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised by the officials that a separate 
process would have to be devised which does not currently 
exist. Let me explain. With respect to people who are convicted 
— as of today or when the legislation is finally passed and 
proclaimed — of certain sexual offences, we know that those 
offences, those offenders can be placed in the national sex 
offender registry. Because it will say if you’re convicted of this 
crime, you go into the registry and certain things happen. 
 
Retroactivity is a little trickier because who do you say, who 
may have been convicted of something 20 years ago, should go 
and register themselves? How do you do that? How do you 
locate them? How do you find them? 
 
In some cases the offences will have been different. Some 
offences of a sexual nature in the Criminal Code today have 
different names, different circumstances than before. Some 
sexual offences used to exist . . . some sexual acts that were 
offences before that are not offences today. Today there may be 
some Criminal Code provisions that didn’t exist before. 
 
And so from a practical perspective, you can see that you would 
have to be able to tell the police or someone would have to 
notify somebody that here’s a body of people that have been 

convicted last year and going back 50 years — 30 years from a 
practical point of view, I suppose — go out and get those 
people, find out where they are, get them to register. And how 
to do that is not necessarily that simple from an administrative 
standpoint. 
 
Also, from a legal position, what offences over the years are 
you talking about that if somebody was convicted of, they 
should have to register? And so from a practical point of view, 
it’s easy to say somebody that’s convicted tomorrow or in the 
next year can register. We know who they are; we know where 
they are; we have them before the court. 
 
Not so easy to say, everybody convicted in the last 30 years, 
come and register. I mean, we don’t have them before the court, 
we don’t know where they are, whether they have the same 
names, whatever, and so it’s slightly more complicated. 
 
Having said that, we’re willing to work with the federal 
government to bring forward provisions that would have some 
retroactive impact. But what we want to do now is take those 
steps which are practical and which can be taken now on a 
national basis and proceed with that and work to figure out how 
you would apply that retroactively and bring the other people 
in, some of whom may have been out in the community for 30 
years and they’ve never reoffended at all. And you can, you 
know, you can judge that on the basis of whether they’ve been 
charged with any offence and whether they have any further 
record. 
 
So that is the thinking primarily of the federal government is, 
well fine, tell us we’re supposed to do this and now explain to 
us exactly how we implement that. And I think it’s that kind of 
problem that they have. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And welcome to the minister and 
his officials. This may not be of consuming interest to them all 
but it might be to one or two of them. New Jersey is leading by 
2 to 0, and the election’s almost a tie. So now that we’ve got 
that out of the way, we can deal with some other issues. 
 
What is the province’s relationship to the chief firearms officer? 
What involvement do they have with him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We have no relationship with the chief 
firearms officer; that is a federal official. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. Do all provinces then have a chief 
firearms officer? And if they don’t, how come do we and they 
don’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to make it clear, we have no 
chief firearms officer. We have not had since 1998. In 1998 we 
said we would not enforce the national firearms legislation. We 
have no chief firearms officer, period, full stop. Some 
provinces, I think still do; we don’t. We’re not enforcing the 
national Firearms Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I believe Ontario has come 
onside with also not enforcing it along with a number of 
Western provinces. And I’m wondering if that particular topic 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

comes up when the Justice ministers from across Canada get 
together, to sort of see if they can work through a way to keep a 
rather ridiculous law, which seems to be falling apart on a 
regular basis, from just becoming a millstone around everyone’s 
neck. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I’m sure it does. But I have to say 
that, you know, what has happened is that the provinces that are 
opposed to the national Firearms Act — which are British 
Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, and I 
believe Nova Scotia — have been very clear from the outset 
telling the federal government that we don’t think this is a 
practical, workable Act. And I’m advised Newfoundland also 
today came out in opposition to it. 
 
But the situation that we have been confronted with is the 
federal government not listening to any arguments of any of 
those provinces. I mean we’ve been all the way to the Supreme 
Court on this issue. 
 
And we will continue to maintain the position that we take 
which is that it would be far more practical to use the money 
that is spent on the national firearms registry and enforcement 
of that system and target that to actual criminals and crime. We 
think that the public would be better served and would be safer 
if we did that than they will be under the national Firearms Act. 
But I have to say that the federal government has not listened to 
us or the other provinces. 
 
The member’s question is, do we raise this with the federal 
government? Yes, we do. In fact I recently, within the last 
several weeks, sent another letter to the federal minister in 
charge of that Act who’s now the Solicitor General. But we 
don’t seem to have their attention even though the evidence 
now seems quite clear that everything that has been said about 
the impracticality of that Act seems to be borne out by 
evidence. But it seems to be a case that the federal government 
is at this point unwilling to admit that this system is falling 
down like a house of cards. 
 
But we’ll continue to take the position we’re taking. We’ll 
continue not to enforce the Firearms Act through prosecutions 
in our province although the federal government can certainly 
hire their own prosecutors, and I suppose they will, to enforce 
it. And we’ll see what happens. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, 
Deputy Chair. I notice in the gallery a friend who is certainly no 
stranger, well no stranger than usual in this House, the current 
member for North Battleford. 
 
Judging by his attire tonight, I would say that he got confused 
and thought in fact it was a Saskatchewan election that had 
happened. But indeed it was New Brunswick. I would 

encourage him to certainly return to the House in proper attire 
at least until after the election when he can get comfortable, 
dressed in his shorts again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Department of Justice 

Vote 3 
 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And probably a fine introduction. 
I would imagine that the NDP will look about as threadbare as 
the Liberal member does after the next election. 
 
To the minister: I think one of the major issues in Saskatchewan 
in the justice area at present is the situation in Saskatoon. And I 
would like for the minister to comment on his awareness and 
involvement in that situation because I think it’s very crucial in 
that it involves basically an issue of public faith in our justice 
system, so it’s an issue that’s highly critical to our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I assume that the member by referring 
to the situation in Saskatoon is referring to the deaths of 
Aboriginal men who have been found frozen to death in the 
vicinity of Saskatoon. There’s some other issues in Saskatoon 
relating to the police chief and the police union which we’re not 
involved with at all in the sense that it really is a matter for the 
mayor and the police commission and the city council in 
Saskatoon and the police union to deal with. 
 
With respect to the other situation, as the member described it, 
we’re very concerned with the situation because there are 
unanswered questions. And so we’re doing a couple of things 
. . . well more than a couple, actually. 
 
One thing that we’re doing is in the year 2000 we referred the 
entire situation to the RCMP. We said we want all of the 
allegations, any suspicious circumstances surrounding events in 
Saskatoon to be investigated. That investigation is being carried 
out by the RCMP. That investigation continues today. That’s 
one thing that’s happening. 
 
Secondly, we have had a series of inquests into the deaths of, I 
believe, two . . . four, four Aboriginal men. There have been 
four inquests. 
 
Thirdly, charges have arisen in the case of Darrell Night who 
was taken out outside Saskatoon, did not die, but walked back 
to Saskatoon. And two police officers were convicted, 
sentenced, and jailed as a result of that incident. 
 
As well, we have called for a public inquiry into the death of 
Neil Stonechild which will be conducted by Mr. Justice David 
Wright commencing I believe in September. Certain 
preliminary matters are occurring with respect to that inquiry 
already. 
 
And as well we have created the commission on Aboriginal 
justice, a commission that is not looking into these cases 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

 

specifically but into the relationship between the Justice system 
and Aboriginal people in our province with a view to making 
recommendations as to how that might be improved. 
 
And so we’re taking a very active role with respect to these 
matters. We take them very, very seriously but we’re not just 
talking about it, we’re taking action. We’re taking those steps 
I’ve described. And I’ve made it very clear that if there are 
other steps that should be taken in due course, those steps will 
be taken as well. Because as long as there are unanswered 
questions about these matters we will consider the matter to be 
open; we will consider the matter to be worthy of investigation. 
 
If there’s any way that we can uncover the truth about questions 
that aren’t answered we will make every effort to do so. The 
difficulty of course is we can’t promise that we will always find 
the answers because sometimes some things occur where 
nobody ever knows the answer. But I can only say that if there 
is some way that we can assist finding the answer we’re 
determined that we’re going to do so. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you and I guess I asked a question that 
had two parts to it, and we’ll probably get into the Saskatoon 
Police Association and the police commission in a little while if 
we don’t run out of time. 
 
There is a component to the part we’re discussing right now 
which I think is very disconcerting and you mentioned that in 
your answer in that it has been in the public’s mind coloured as 
a totally Aboriginal issue which it isn’t. And I would hope that 
as the research takes place you will probably find out that there 
were other individuals who were not Aboriginals who were 
taken outside of the city and allowed to go for a walk as well. 
 
And I think that’s important for the minister to note and to put 
some effort into. Because as we’re concerned in this issue with 
the race relationship component to this, and it’s a very critical 
issue, I think it can be, to some extent, be diffused as just a 
racial issue by recognizing the fact that this happened to people 
who were non-Native. 
 
Now I’m aware of one of those, but the person’s not prepared to 
come forward because he was taken out on a cold winter’s day 
because he was just being totally drunk, disorderly, and 
ignorant. He was fortunate enough that he got himself a ride 
back into town and basically told some of the people he met 
he’d learned his lesson. He would never do that again. 
 
Now that’s not a good way to teach anyone a lesson. But for 
those reasons he’s not prepared to come forward and say 
anything about it because that’s part of his history he’s blocked 
off. 
 
But I’m sure if the research is done they will find more of those 
issues. And I think that’s important to put into the mix so that 
this doesn’t become a situation where we say this is strictly a 
race item, which up to this point it has been unfortunately 
because the four people that you mentioned were Aboriginals. 
And so I think when the public looks at that at this particular 
point and draws that conclusion, they’re probably correct in 
doing so. 
 
But there is more information out there, and I’m wondering if at 

this particular point the minister is aware of any of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, I would say to the member that these 
matters are of concern to the RCMP and also the Saskatoon 
police force. And if there is someone who has information 
about, you know, inappropriate behaviour on the part of the 
police, that they should come forward with that information. 
And that’s how we get to the bottom of these things. 
 
People have to be prepared to report to the RCMP, in this 
instance, which is investigating this area, so that the RCMP can 
put things in proper perspective if indeed there is some 
perspective other than the one that’s been put out there. But that 
will certainly depend upon people coming forward. 
 
And I guess I would say that if there are people that have been 
wrongly treated in the way that the member has described, then 
if there’s more than one — that one person apparently doesn’t 
want to come forward, the member says — if that was a regular 
occurrence, then my feeling is that people would come forward 
and tell the RCMP. And if they haven’t done so they should, 
because the RCMP needs to know that. 
 
And so I would just say that. And if people don’t come forward 
and something has happened then the RCMP will make their 
decisions based upon what people actually tell them. They can’t 
make decisions based on things that may have happened that 
are not brought to their attention. 
 
(20:45) 
 
I also can indicate that people can come forward as confidential 
informants. You know matters can be brought to the attention of 
the RCMP on a confidential basis. 
 
And if the member needs further elaboration with respect to 
that, I’m sure he could contact my office and we would be able 
to assist in that regard. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And as I said, I think it’s 
important that that information becomes part of the whole story 
so that it does not become a race issue as it is at present. 
 
Earlier on when I put that question there were two components 
to it, and the minister seemed to be rather hesitant in becoming 
involved in the other situation in Saskatoon which is where 
their police commission, I believe, had 95 per cent negative 
votes from the police association and the chief was down in 
about the 90s. Now that’s major. 
 
We don’t ever expect that things are going to be 100 per cent in 
favour. They never are. But when you get basically the whole 
police force not having faith in their police chief and in their 
commission, who’s supposed to sort of regulate that and deal 
with it? Where, you know, do the people of Saskatoon go and 
say what kind of confidence can be had in what’s happening 
when there are these kinds of major divisions that have taken 
place in the policing of our community which is supposed to 
provide the safety for the community? 
 
And I do think at some point the minister may have to get 
himself involved in that situation and I would for like him to 
comment on that. 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in answer I should explain to the 
member in the House that the responsibility for local policing 
lies with the municipality — in this case Saskatoon. In other 
words, it’s not a provincial police force, it’s the Saskatoon 
Police Department. 
 
And so the member says where do citizens go if they have a 
concern? They go to their mayor; they go to their city 
councillors — they are the employers of all of the police in 
Saskatoon and the police chief. They go to their local police 
commission which is responsible for the police force. And 
that’s where they go. There are structures in place. 
 
But if the question is, do I as Attorney General run the 
Saskatoon police department? No, I don’t. And I don’t have the 
authority to hire a police chief or a police officer or to fire them. 
That’s not my place. 
 
Now certainly we’re concerned about the administration of 
justice in the province and we will monitor a situation to see if 
things are being done the way they should be done. 
 
But in terms of a local disagreement between an employer and 
an employee association, it’s up to those parties to resolve that 
kind of disagreement; and it’s up to the mayor and the city 
council and the police commission in Saskatoon to determine 
matters within their local jurisdiction. And that’s the answer. 
 
It’s not a matter of shirking responsibility or anything like that. 
It’s a matter of recognizing that there is a local authority. It’s 
the city of Saskatoon and they have the authority under The 
Police Act to have a police department. They do. It isn’t run by 
the province; it’s run by the city of Saskatoon, which has a duly 
elected mayor and a duly elected city council which is 
responsible for policing in that community. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And to the minister, I’m quite 
aware of what he’s just all told us. However, in all other aspects 
of municipal government when things start falling apart 
seriously, the province, because it’s given that jurisdiction, also 
has the responsibility to sort of deal with it. But I take it at this 
particular point the minister does not want to deal with that or 
make any particular comments and so we’ll let that be as it is. 
 
I have one more question and then I’ll turn it over to the 
member from Last Mountain-Touchwood because he has one or 
two questions to the Justice minister as well. 
 
Some months ago I came across a justice magazine — and I’ve 
mislaid it so I can’t bring it here to sort of dictate which one it’s 
from — which had a number of articles in there, three or four of 
them written by people outside of the province and within the 
province, about the concept of unifying federal and provincial 
courts within the province. Part of that would be to eliminate 
the confusion by the public, possibly to also provide better 
services. 
 
And I’m wondering — knowing that some of the other 
provinces are interested in it — what the position of our 
minister is as far as becoming involved in this process because 
other provinces are looking at it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well firstly I should say that there is no 

province in Canada that has unified its provincial court with the 
federal court. And it’s something that would require the 
co-operation of both the province and the federal government. 
 
We do not see the unification of the courts as a high priority. 
We believe that the court system works well in Saskatchewan, 
both the provincial court and the Court of Queen’s Bench, and 
the Court of Appeal but that’s not a trial court. But in terms of 
the trial courts and combining the two of them, no province has 
done that. It’s not a priority for us. 
 
Having said that, Alberta has some interest in doing that. The 
federal government would have to agree. We would monitor the 
situation and see if there was some advantage to doing that. 
Whether or not there is or whether it would improve service to 
the public, we’re not convinced. 
 
It’s not a high priority. We’ll watch developments in other 
provinces and monitor the situation but it’s not something that 
we’re committed to at the present time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I understand that 
the personnel within your department that’s responsible for the 
transport of prisoners to and from the courts were recently 
issued with side arms for in performance of their duties. 
 
My question is to you, Minister, is when were they issued side 
arms? What training did these personnel undergo before they 
were issued the side arms? Were there adequate policies in 
place to govern the use of side arms? And were the 
psychological assessments done on the individuals before they 
were issued with side arms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, Mr. Deputy . . . 
or Mr. Chair, they have not been issued the side arms as of yet. 
They are in training. Before they get side arms, the training is 
conducted by the RCMP and yes, it does include psychological 
testing. You have to pass the psychological testing and be 
trained before you are issued a side arm. And the psychological 
testing has been done. The training is underway but it’s not 
completed and so the side arms have not yet been issued. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the Minister. Minister, does your 
government have a policy on the use of defensive weapons in 
the public service and, if so, when was that policy developed 
and how . . . does it cover all aspects of the use of defensive 
weapons in public service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the policy employed by government 
in terms of deciding whether to issue firearms to, for example, 
prisoner escort, deputy sheriffs, or conservation officers and so 
on, is basically a risk assessment. Is there a real potential that 
the person in the public service could be harmed in a significant 
way in the course of his or her duties? That’s the first question. 
 
The second question is if there is a risk of significant harm, then 
are there measures short of firearms that would effectively deal 
with that harm such as batons or other defensive weapons? 
 
And so there’s a two-step sort of analysis. One is, is there a 
significant risk? If so, can it be dealt with reasonably without a 
firearm? If not and a firearm is needed, then what conditions 
should attach to that such as training and psychological testing? 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

 

And that is the policy that’s employed by the Department of 
Justice. 
 
And if they get to the point where they conclude that there’s a 
risk, that only firearms can really deal effectively with the risk, 
there’s a way to train people. They will make a 
recommendation to the cabinet that firearms may be necessary 
and the cabinet then will deliberate on that recommendation and 
make a decision as to whether the firearms should be issued. 
 
I could also add that there’s an occupational health and safety 
component to this. In other words, The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act guarantees to workers in the public service and 
elsewhere that they should have reasonable safety. That’s not 
what it says but something to that effect. And employees can 
complain if they feel that they’re forced into a workplace 
without adequate safety measures. And sometimes part of the 
consideration will be whether the occupational health and safety 
people say, really there is a risk here and something should be 
done about it. And that would certainly help to inform the 
government in making a decision in that regard. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, on that area of policy is it your 
department, the Department of Justice, that administers the 
policy for all government services as far as the use of defensive 
weapons, whether it be side arms or batons? 
 
And also in the area of, you mentioned risk assessment, is it the 
Department of Justice that does the risk assessment? You 
mentioned that under The Occupational Health and Safety Act 
employees can make application to their employer saying that 
they feel they are working in unsafe conditions and so on, and 
you mentioned that a risk assessment is done. Is it your 
department that does the risk assessment? 
 
(21:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, it is the law enforcement services 
branch of the Department of Justice that would conduct that 
kind of assessment. 
 
And with that, Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the members of the 
opposition for their questions this evening. And I’d like to thank 
the members of the Department of Justice that are here tonight 
for the very good assistance they provided tonight; and also for 
the very good work that they do throughout the year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman. I move that the committee report progress on the 
Department of Justice, and that we move to the Department of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I 
would like to introduce, to my immediate left, Barry Martin, 

who is the associate deputy minister of policy and programs. 
And right behind Barry is Fred Antunes, who is director of 
operations, planning and business support. To Fred’s left is 
Mike Makowsky, manager of transportation, trade and logistics. 
 
To my right is Stu Armstrong, who is assistant deputy minister, 
operations. Behind Stu is Terry Blomme, who is executive 
director for the southern region. Immediately behind me is Don 
Wincherauk, who is assistant deputy minister, corporate 
services. And behind Mr. Wincherauk is Andrea Fisher, 
operations assistant engineer. And I welcome them and look 
forward to the questions from members opposite. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, it’s been a while 
since we’ve had the opportunity to examine the estimates of 
expenditures in your department and there are a number of areas 
that we . . . I would like to explore this evening and there are a 
number of specific issues that I would like to receive some 
information and so on. 
 
But one of the first things that I have to deal with this evening is 
the area of the Grasswood Road and No. 11 Highway 
interchange, south of Saskatoon. I understand that there may be 
some changes in access to some of the businesses located along 
that particular stretch of highway. I understand that there was 
some . . . a lengthy discussion with the owners of the businesses 
that are located in that particular area prior to some of the 
changes that were done to that intersection two or three years 
ago. 
 
I wonder, is there . . . is your department planning on closing 
some of the off-ramps and accesses, particular to service roads 
and so on, particularly on the east side of the No. 11 Highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, I 
think it’s important to note that on that intersection to improve 
safety, we spent about over $3 million to make the intersection 
much safer and that funding came from the Centenary Fund. 
 
The particular access that I believe the member is referring to 
was an access that was put in north of the intersection to catch 
traffic that may have bypassed the intersection. And certainly 
there was discussion at the time that that was put in was around 
whether that would be temporary or whether it would be made 
permanent. 
 
And those discussion are ongoing. There’s no decision at this 
point to close that access but certainly it is being reviewed and 
monitored to find out whether it is a necessary second access to 
the east side of the interchange there. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, Mr. Chair, to the minister. Does the 
department feel that that existing off-ramp causes . . . is a safety 
hazard? I understand that if it hadn’t have been for the 
Grasswood Business Association that that access wouldn’t have 
been in the plan. that they lobbied and discussed with the 
department over a period of several months. And I believe they 
had some input into the design and so on. And they felt it’s very 
important that that access and off-ramp be maintained on a 
permanent basis. And my question is, does the department feel 
that it’s a safety hazard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, Mr. Chair, any access 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

or off-access to the main highway creates some level of risk. 
But I think what’s important to note here, and I think the 
member did note, it was the negotiations — the very successful 
negotiations — that went on between the businesses and the 
department at the time of the building of that roadway and 
certainly a desire to, within the parameters of risk, be able to 
accommodate the needs of those business folks. 
 
And to this point, we’ve been able to accommodate that with 
the off-access road there. And as we say, we can . . . there’s 
always some level of risk. But we continue to monitor and to 
discuss with the businesses to know whether or not that 
off-access is necessary, whether it is getting the use that was 
anticipated, or whether people are actually using the 
intersection as it was built and not needing that kind of catch 
access a little bit further north. 
 
If they are not needing it, because there is always a little bit of 
risk involved in these access pieces, then if it’s not necessary, if 
the use doesn’t justify the road being there then we will close it. 
If it is justified by the use, we’ll leave it there. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, I’ve been in 
conversation with some of the owners of the businesses in that 
area and they feel that the maintenance of that off-access, 
maintaining it in it’s present location is essential to the viability 
of their businesses, and they are very concerned that that access 
. . . or that off-ramp or off-access is being reviewed by your 
department. What they are wanting is assurances from you, 
Minister, that that access will remain there to those businesses. 
 
What they tell me — and it seems very logical to me — as 
motorists are going by their businesses and notice that they’re 
there, if there isn’t an off-access, they will continue to go 
straight through to Saskatoon. Or for the people who are 
frequenting and . . . say the motel or hotel that’s located there 
and other businesses, it makes it very difficult for them if that 
. . . to get over onto the west side. And they are wanting 
assurances from you, Minister, that that off-access will be 
maintained permanently. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Basically I would say the last answer 
that I gave you answered that question. It stands that as long as 
it’s serving the purpose and we’re monitoring and we’re seeing 
that the risk is not too high, it’ll be there. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, under what . . . I guess to explore this 
issue a bit further, then, under what conditions would your 
department consider closing that access? Are you monitoring 
the traffic as far as the number of vehicles on a daily basis that 
are using that access? And if so, what would be the threshold 
before you would close that access? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The department assures me that the 
issues would be around safety. This is to be an off-access, not 
an on-access for the highway continuing into Saskatoon. It is 
there to catch traffic that is moving north that missed the 
intersection that might then want to have access to those 
businesses. So it’s designed really to be just an off-access, not 
an on. So what would create concern, if we noticed if there was 
a high risk, if there were accidents there, it would certainly be 
clearly evaluated and a decision made as to whether to keep it 
open. 

(21:15) 
 
We don’t have regular traffic count out there but there are 
intermittent audits and also discussions with the business people 
to see if it is in fact being used, how much is it being used, is it 
worth keeping there and maintaining? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening 
to the minister and his officials. I want to thank my 
Transportation critic, the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood for giving me an opportunity to ask 
some questions that relate mostly to the Rosetown-Biggar 
constituency. A couple of questions will be updates on 
questions that I’ve asked previously. 
 
But first of all I would like to discuss the refit of the Riverhurst 
ferry. I have here a project information sheet dated January 7, 
2003 about a project that was to start the day before, on January 
6, 2003. It was to be completed, the expected estimated 
completion date to be May 1, 2003, and the project cost to be 
$1,005,278.27. So I would ask the minister if the project was 
completed on budget and on time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, the ferry has been 
refurbished and has been operating effectively since May 17. 
That was a delay of some two weeks, which some of that was 
weather related, some of it just in terms of construction 
operation delays. But we had a date set; we had hoped that it 
would be ready by the first. It was delayed about just over two 
weeks. 
 
The major project itself fell within the budget parameters that 
were set. There was an additional 80,000 that was spent on 
upgrading the ramps on the east side, and the ferry service there 
has to date met with all inspections and is operating. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Could the Minister 
. . . Mr. Minister, would you explain the improvements that 
were made to the ferry? I know that there was . . . there is great 
expectation by a number of people — trucking firms, farmers, 
and others that use the ferry — that after the refit, the capacity 
to haul two loaded trucks at one time would be in place. 
 
Could the Minister assure me that the Riverhurst ferry with this 
refit is able to transport two loaded B-trains in one crossing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The ferry was retrofitted to federal 
marine standards and we also had a number of issues around 
occupational health and safety from our provincial government. 
And it was upgraded to meet all of those standards. 
 
And in order to support the agricultural industry in the area, 
potato developments and other agricultural industry, it was also 
fitted so that it would have capacity to be able to haul two 
loaded B-trains, semis that are hauling weights on secondary 
highways. And it was designed so that if indeed we’re able to 
follow through on long-range plans, that we’re able to haul 
primary weights, that it was designed to be able to handle those 
weights as well. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, there was also 
an expectation that the ferry perhaps would even have a larger 
deck, square footage, or whatever term you want to use, square 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

 

metres. I’m not sure what terminology you would use. 
 
I happened to use the ferry this morning coming from my 
constituency back to Regina and my observation was that 
actually the deck surface with the refit is less area than it was 
prior to the refit. So I’m just wondering how that accommodates 
more, you know, more weight. 
 
What was done in the refit to accommodate more weight so the 
two B-trains, loaded B-trains could be accommodated? And in 
fact has the deck capacity or the deck area been reduced as far 
as the ability to carry vehicles is concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There was some contemplation of 
increasing the length of the ferry, but by design we were able to 
increase the capacity without making those major structural 
changes. And so we designed it so that it would carry an 
increased capacity without increasing the area. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Just a supplementary to that question, Mr. 
Minister. Does the deck as it’s now designed have the capacity 
to carry as many vehicles as it did prior to the refit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes. I think you must be facing an 
optical illusion there, hon. member. If you check out the area 
you’ll find that it will handle all the traffic that it would before 
but it has significantly more capacity for weight. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Okay, well thank you, Minister. I do know 
that it is narrower, so I suppose it would depend then on width 
of the vehicles. If there were some wider vehicles it perhaps 
could carry fewer. 
 
The other question I have with regards to Riverhurst ferry is 
that the washrooms were moved from the bridge side of the 
ferry to the opposite side of the ferry and put it in an enclosed, 
larger area that has also a waiting room for passengers on the 
ferry. My understanding that the purpose for moving and 
redesigning the washrooms were to make them wheelchair 
accessible or accessible to the disabled. 
 
However from my evaluation of what I’ve seen on the ferry, 
they are less accessible to the public in general where they are 
located at the current time, and in fact certainly aren’t 
accessible for wheelchairs and for disabled people given that 
vehicles that are loaded on the ferry are almost within a foot or 
a foot and a half of the washroom doors and it’s almost 
impossible to negotiate between vehicles on the ferry and the 
doors of the washroom. 
 
Could the minister comment on why the washrooms were 
moved and made so difficult to be reached by passengers on the 
ferry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, the design was to federal 
standards and the waiting room had to be put in. And according 
to the design, the reconfiguration to give us the capacity that 
was necessary and meet the federal standards was done as you 
see it today. And washrooms were put on the other side to 
balance out the waiting room, from my understanding. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Can the minister then explain why these 
washrooms are so difficult to access? I mean, they’re difficult 

for an able-bodied person to reach once the ferry is loaded. 
They’re impossible to be reached by someone with a disability. 
Has the minister looked into this, and if not, will he commit to 
look into this because, quite frankly, I don’t see how those 
washroom facilities and the ability to access them could 
possibly meet any standards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As I said earlier, it was designed to 
federal standards. But as provincial government, we will look 
into it and if there is possibility of making adjustments within 
the parameters of those standards, we will see what we can do. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 
suggest sometime when you go to visit your relatives over at 
Elrose you take the ferry and you actually personally inspect 
that design, because it is one of the most ludicrous things that I 
have ever seen. 
 
As concerning as it was that the washrooms as they existed 
before were not fully wheelchair accessible, the situation now is 
far worse. Even though the washrooms are larger, the ability to 
access them has diminished greatly and I see that as being a 
rather difficult problem, not only for people with disabilities but 
for the general public as well who would . . . Any time the ferry 
is loaded on the east side, which is half the time, and oftentimes 
the ferry is full, those washrooms are absolutely next to 
impossible to get to. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Mr. Minister, just a follow-up to some questions that I have 
asked previously. As you know, in my area there’s a great 
concern about the overweight penalties charged for carriers on 
secondary highways which they have to pay until they leave the 
province of Saskatchewan even though a portion of the distance 
they travel may be on primary highways where in fact their load 
is within legal limits. 
 
Last time I questioned you on this, Mr. Minister, you said you 
were undertaking to correct that problem. And I wonder if you 
could report that the problem is in fact corrected, and that 
people in my constituency, those that haul potatoes and are now 
going to haul salt out of the Beechy area, the fact that we now 
have an oil and gas exploration in the west side of my 
constituency, whether or not you’ve got this problem corrected 
so if they are hauling weights from the Rosetown-Biggar 
constituency — to Alberta, Manitoba, wherever — that they are 
no longer charged that overweight penalty on the entire trip out 
of the province but only on the portion of secondary highway 
that they travel on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, the only people . . . the 
only truckers who are paying those fees are truckers who are in 
a partnership relationship, and it does not apply to others 
because they are obliged to follow the weight restrictions. So 
we don’t have any oil and gas companies that are in trucking 
partnerships and therefore that fee would not apply there. 
 
We recognize that it’s there with some of the agricultural 
producers who are trucking and we continue to look at ways 
that we can facilitate the industry. And at this point we do not 
have any changes that we are prepared to recommend in the 
trucking partnerships. Thank you. 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well I’m pretty unhappy with that answer, 
Mr. Minister, because we raised this issue and you said you’ve 
recognized that there was a problem when I raised the issue 
before and that you would be dealing with that issue. It is 
certainly something that has been raised to me on behalf of 
particularly people who are trucking potatoes out of that area, 
and it does apply to some other industries as well. 
 
You know, I assure the minister that it will be an election issue 
that I will be raising in my constituency because people in that 
riding know that I have already raised it with you previously, 
and I assured them that I would follow up. It’s quite obvious 
that it’s an unfair penalty that’s placed on people particularly if 
they are trucking out of the middle of the province, such as 
people in my area, as opposed to someone who is closer to one 
of the . . . or closer to the perimeter of the province. So, Mr. 
Minister, that answer certainly is not acceptable and we will 
endeavour to capitalize on a lack of action on the part of the 
government in the upcoming election. 
 
The next area that I want to touch on is with regards to 
Highway 4 through the South Saskatchewan River Valley 
between Kyle and Stewart Valley. There is increasing traffic on 
this portion of highway because of more truck traffic, more 
grain being hauled through the South Saskatchewan River 
Valley on Highway No. 4. As you may have noticed when I 
was giving a member statement in the House a couple of weeks 
back, a golf course has opened up in the valley. There’s the park 
there already. So there is significant traffic. 
 
And it has become I believe quite hazardous given the fact that 
traffic has increased and trucks find the grade very difficult to 
maintain adequate speed, particularly on the south side although 
it’s a problem on the north side as well. Most highways that 
have that volume of traffic and that type of a grade for that 
length of distance are . . . have a passing lane. And I’ve been on 
many highways through the Qu’Appelle Valley for instance 
where there is high traffic and a passing lane has been installed. 
I know there has been demand for quite some time to put 
passing lanes on both the north and south sides of the South 
Saskatchewan River Valley where Highway 4 crosses it. Could 
the minister tell my constituents when they might expect to see 
this type of a project entered into on Highway No. 4? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We have responded several times with 
written answers to members opposite regarding these climbing 
lanes on both sides of the river, and it would simply be too high 
a capital cost to go in there separately and do this work. 
 
But what we would do is when the next scheduled resurfacing 
happens along the No. 4 on either side of the river, then you’ve 
got the crews in there and we would be . . . that would be the 
time that we would undertake to do the studies to make sure 
that it would warrant the high capital cost of building these 
climbing or passing lanes. 
 
So in the immediate future there is no plan to go in and build 
those, but when the scheduled resurfacing — which could be 
two, three years, I’m not sure. The department looks at and 
evaluates all of our capital projects and resurfacing needs. 
When that scheduled resurfacing comes, it certainly will be 
considered seriously. 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — I’d like to thank the minister for that 
answer. So then I’m quite clear that it would be at least two or 
three years before even a study would be undertaken and some 
time after that before construction might be commenced. 
 
Just one more question, which I forgot, which also regards the 
Riverhurst crossing but not the ferry. I had requests from 
constituents that the department have another look at how they 
prepare and authorize the ice crossing. Seems like there had 
been some delays, at least in the opinion of some of my 
constituents, that because this ice crossing is serviced out of the 
Central Butte depot rather than the Lucky Lake depot, that it’s 
seen as the last mile on the highway rather than the first mile 
and doesn’t get the due attention it deserves. And in fact the ice 
crossing has minimal impact, it’s late getting started and 
doesn’t have the priority of the department. Has your 
department given any thought to transferring the responsibility 
to test and prepare the ice crossing to the Lucky Lake side, 
rather than the Central Butte side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, really the key issues 
around building any of our ice roads are safety for our crews. 
It’s not a matter of where the shop is located, it’s not an 
end-of-the-road or first-of-the-road issue. It really has to do 
with safety. We want to make sure that the ice is thick enough 
to be able to handle the road. Different conditions, different 
years, water flow, etc. can make a difference. 
 
But we always, always try and make sure that we meet the 
needs of a particular road based on traffic flows, past history, 
but primary is the safety. And when it’s safe enough to build 
those roads, recognizing the use, our crews go in and do it. And 
it really doesn’t matter whether they are housed at one end or 
the other of the project. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The concern of 
my constituents is that after the ice crossing has been 
determined to be safe enough to cross, the preparation time — 
and there is preparation required in clearing snow and marking 
the crossing — is far too slow. There’s sometimes a week or 
two weeks passes after the crossing has been determined to be 
safe. And of course if you have, you know, a six-week period to 
cross that ice, and that is important to many people in that area, 
and that’s reduced to four weeks because of slowness on the 
part of the department to actually prepare the crossings, that is 
considered to be a substantial concern to those constituents. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the interests of time — and I have just a 
number of questions but I want to let my colleague, the critic, 
get back to his questions — there is real concern in the . . . in 
many, many rural ridings, and of course I see the entire 
province and I have seen a real deterioration of secondary 
highways. That thin membrane surface is really, really breaking 
down this spring. 
 
I can tell you, and you may know, that Highway 42 is in bad 
shape. That’s the highway that goes from up to . . . from near 
Outlook all the way down to the ferry and across through to 
Tuxford just north of Moose Jaw. The highway is full of 
potholes. In places it’s become really hazardous to drive on and 
of course we’re worried about the safety of our friends and 
neighbours, the kids that ride on school buses. 
 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

 

I know that Highway 44 is of major concern to people who are 
dependent upon that highway. 
 
Highway 31, which begins just north of Rosetown and extends 
all the way to the Alberta border, I believe, to Macklin, a 
number of those kilometres are within the Rosetown-Biggar 
constituency and I have been hearing a lot of concerns about the 
quality of that highway. 
 
There is still concern about the fact that some highways have 
been returned to gravel. That was supposed to be a temporary 
situation, but in the case of Highway 42 it’s not been a year; it’s 
been I think about three years now since that stretch of highway 
was returned to gravel between Brownlee and Eyebrow, which 
is not in my constituency but many people from my riding use 
that highway. 
 
Also Highway No. 373 was destroyed by the Department of 
Highways in actually trying to upgrade Highway 45 to service 
the potato industry going north of Lucky Lake, and it used to be 
a thin membrane surface and now has been returned to gravel. 
 
Can the minister tell me what he is going to do to restore the 
confidence of people who depend on these highways, that they 
will be safe travelling on these thin membrane highways, and 
when those that were turned into gravel might be resurfaced 
with dust-free surfaces, going to stand up the test of time a little 
better than we’ve seen in the past? 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, first of all I’d like to 
respond to some of the assumptions that were left hanging by 
the member opposite at the end of his comments on the ice road 
and about the opinions of folks in the area who are evaluating 
the work that’s going on. 
 
And I think it’s important to note that our crews do get out 
there. When it’s safe they do the work and regardless of what 
assumptions the people in the area may have about this, those 
folks are out there trying to make sure that they get that road 
done in a timely manner. Issues that come up are different 
ridging in the ice; sometimes it’s not consistent all the way 
across and so when it’s ready they do the work. And it’s our 
hope, our belief, and our intention that work is done in a timely 
manner on all fronts. 
 
Now with regard to the TMS, the thin membrane surface 
highways, I have on numerous occasions in letter and also in 
this House responded to questions about the thin membrane 
surface highways and the issues that we have around those 
highways. The member should well know the change in traffic 
patterns and the amount of heavy haul that has been going on 
these roads, which are some 30 to 40 years old, beats them up in 
short order. And that can be a matter of hours, days, very short 
order, depending on the heavy haul that’s there. 
 
And so we have been, as a department, looking at the priorities. 
We work with our area transportation planning committees who 
know those roads, know the economy in the area very well, and 
we’ve been setting the priorities on when and how we can get at 
those roads to make them work most effectively for the people 
in the area. 

We will be spending over $4 million in the member’s 
constituency this year, and we will be working on evaluating all 
of those roads, which we do continually, work on evaluating the 
roads to make sure that we are keeping them as safe as we can 
keep them given again the traffic patterns, given the beating that 
some of those roads take because of the change in haul. 
 
The member asked about a number of roads, in particular No. 
42, for example, which has a section that was reverted a couple 
of years ago to gravel — a very mushy section that was 
breaking up. It was hazardous with the hard surface on it, and is 
indeed — because of the nature of that road, the low spot 
through there — difficult to maintain, definitely needs a rebuild. 
We know that. It’s coming under the Prairie Grain Roads 
Program for improving that road. And it is on our long-term 
schedule to be completed. And it will be upgraded and 
completed and we will see a much better, much safer roadway 
for people both travelling to the lake and people who are 
coming for, travelling either way, for either commercial or 
private reasons. 
 
With regard to most of these roadways, one of the things that I 
think has been a tremendous success of the work of the 
department has been the alternative heavy-haul route 
agreements that we have managed to get with a number of the 
RMs (rural municipalities) and that has taken the heavy-haul 
traffic off of the TMS roads. And when that traffic is off, the 
heavy-haul traffic is off, when the roads are fixed and 
maintained they do stay as a good, mud-free, dust-free surface 
for those who are needing to commute on them. 
 
So it’s an ongoing battle with . . . I mean even with record 
budgets that we have had over these last few years — $900 
million over the three years going into our roadways — even 
though we’re spending almost 100 per cent of what we get back 
in fuel tax every year, it’s still an ongoing battle to catch up on 
these some now 7,000 kilometres of thin membrane surface 
highways. 
 
We have already upgraded almost 1,000 kilometres of those 
highways to a pavement standard. And we continue to do a 
certain number of kilometres each year. We’ve reduced the cost 
of doing that by agreements that we have made with Pavement 
Scientific International to build better roads for less, to build a 
roadbed that is more solid without having to get into some of 
the expense that past scientific methods for road building used. 
This road building method enables us to build better roads for 
cheaper. 
 
So we’re making progress on the thin membrane surface roads. 
But we must follow the guidelines that we’ve got, working with 
our area transportation planning committees in terms of 
priorities. 
 
If we jumped all over the place and did every piece that 
members opposite raise and every piece that other citizens raise, 
we would not be doing the kind of consistent work that we need 
to in terms of focus on traffic patterns, in terms of the economic 
need of a particular area. And therefore we do take the guidance 
of the people who live and work in that area, the people who are 
on the RM councils, and who are engaged in our area 
transportation planning committees in setting the priorities. We 
have agreements along 44, we have agreements along 31, and 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

we are indeed working within those agreements to help 
maintain our highways at a safer standard, and to make sure that 
we’ve got the mud-free, dust-free surface for commuters. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. I would point out to the 
minister in fact they are bouncing around the province, and they 
aren’t completing . . . they are just doing short portions of 
highways that need major reconstruction. And in fact it’s very 
frustrating for residents all over Saskatchewan who never see a 
stretch of highway completed properly. 
 
And as far as Highway 42 is concerned in that stretch that has 
been returned back to gravel between Eyebrow and Brownlee, 
it’s just as unsafe as when it was dust free because it’s still full 
of holes. You have to swerve and practically put one wheel over 
into the ditch to get around some of the holes. And you have the 
added danger of flying stones and severe dust with a gravel 
surface that wasn’t there when it was just the potholes in the 
highway. So the highway is still unsafe and it’s in now a gravel 
situation rather than a dust-free situation. 
 
The final question that I have for the minister again is old 
business being revisited. The department has taken on a project 
with the rural municipalities to refurbish parts of Highway 342 
between Kyle and Beechy. As the minister knows, there was 
some confusion. He thought that the RM had run out of money 
and didn’t finish a portion of highway that was due to be 
refurbished last year when in fact it was his department that ran 
out of money and halted the construction project. 
 
I wonder if the minister can assure me that there is money back 
in that budget to not only complete that portion of the 
construction which was intended to be completed last year but 
to also further that project so that the highway is in a safe and 
upgraded condition over a longer stretch of that portion between 
Beechy and Kyle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member opposite. We spent, in 
2000, about $1 million on the 342. Last year we had budgeted 
for about 500,000; we spent about 644,000. And this year we 
budgeted for 500,000, and that should enable us to finish about 
4 kilometres, I believe, of the roadway this year. 
 
So we are making steps there and working in partnership with 
the RM, and it will be moved ahead by about $500,000 worth of 
work this year. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I would like to thank the minister for 
answering those questions. And I would just leave him with the 
thought that the economic potential of the Lake Diefenbaker 
area, the Rosetown-Biggar constituency, is huge and not only 
for agriculture but for tourism, for oil and gas. My constituents 
tell me that the biggest barrier to economic activity is, first of 
all, the taxation policies of the NDP, but secondly, the quality 
of transportation in that area. 
 
So I would just encourage the minister to make that area as high 
a priority as he possibly can because the returns there are 
immense. And I would turn the question to my colleague, the 
member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to the Minister. 
Minister, there is an issue within your department that has been 

ongoing since, I believe, early December and the issue I’m 
referring to is the issue with the highway traffic officers. 
 
Back in December, a number of officers filed under section 23 
of the occupational health and safety, unsafe working 
conditions. And this issue has been brought to my attention and 
it’s ongoing. And I understand it’s resulted in a significant 
reduction in transport compliance enforcement which I feel, 
Minister, is certainly one of the contributing factors to the 
significant breakdown of our TMS highways this year. It’s 
certainly not the only one but I would think, Minister, that it 
certainly would have some impact on that particular situation. 
 
Now I understand that the department issued an enhanced 
officer discretion directive to the highway traffic officers which 
basically told the officers that if they don’t feel safe in stopping 
vehicles and enforcing transport compliance regulations and 
laws, that they were to disengage. 
 
Minister, what is being done by yourself to resolve this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Our department has hired a private 
consultant to look at the occupational health and safety issues 
and related issues in terms of our traffic officers. 
 
The department is also very carefully trying to make sure that 
our officers are as safe as they can possibly be as they enforce 
the trucking regulations that we ask them to enforce. And we’ve 
seen some of the officers who had said they did not want to go 
out and work come back from that position and are out 
working. 
 
And so it is our hope that with the report, and with the concerns 
that we have about enforcing our trucking regulations, and our 
concerns particularly for the safety of our employees the 
highway traffic officers, that we will find some resolutions in 
the short term and after we have received the report from the 
private consultant. 
 
(22:00) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, when will 
the . . . when do you expect that this assessment and this report 
will be completed and will be in your hands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s my understanding that the 
consultant is writing the report at this time and that the report 
will be presented to the steering committee, senior staff, on 
June 23. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, if that consultant’s 
report recommends that highway traffic officers be issued side 
arms, will your department take the appropriate steps and see 
that the officers will be issued side arms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I don’t intend to make any 
prejudgment on the consultant’s report. We expect the 
consultant will be looking at providing us with a variety of 
options. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, was there not another 
consultant that looked at this whole issue and issued a report 
back in 2000 that recommended that highway traffic officers be 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

 

issued side arms, that there . . . the risks inherent with their 
position justified that they should be carrying side arms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There was no clear recommendation 
that traffic officers should have side arms. I think in some 
consultants’ reflections, there is a view that if certain duties are 
assigned then side arms might be appropriate — but certainly 
no recommendation that we should be providing side arms to 
traffic officers. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, did not that 
consultant back in 2000 with B.A. Evans & Associates 
recommend that if the duties that were currently being 
performed by the highway traffic officers at that time, if those 
duties were to continue in the future, that the officers should be 
issued side arms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The report that we have from Evans 
does not give any clear, categorical recommendation that the 
traffic officers should have side arms. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, Mr. Chair, to the minister. If in fact, as I 
asked in an earlier question, that the current assessment that is 
being done recommends that the risk hazard is of such nature 
that the highway traffic officers, when their duties are compared 
to other people in public service — conservation officers, for 
example, and so on — if the conclusion of the study is that 
these people, that the highway traffic officers should be issued 
side arms . . . Or the other alternative would then be, I presume, 
would be to reduce the duties or withdraw those duties that 
would put the highway traffic officers in a position of danger 
where they would require side arms. Is that the situation you 
were looking at? 
 
It seems to me that you’ve made up your mind that these 
officers won’t be given side arms under any condition and 
therefore you will just simply reduce their duties. And so 
therefore we will have reduced enforcements of the trucking 
regulations in our province and we will see an increase in the 
damage to our highways. Is that your position, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As I said to the member earlier, I am 
not going to prejudge our consultant’s report. The consultant 
will evaluate the work that is being asked of our highway traffic 
officers. We want our highway traffic officers to be safe. He 
will evaluate the work that they’re doing, the risk involved, and 
make recommendations accordingly. 
 
And when we have those recommendations, we will consider 
the recommendations and then we will make our 
determinations. Any assumption that everything is prejudged I 
think would be erroneous at this time. 
 
And so all I can tell you at this point, I’m not prejudging the 
report. We will as a department look at this and we will make 
our determinations when we have the consultant’s report. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister: since this issue has 
arisen and the action was taken by the highway traffic officers 
back in December, the department issued a directive — an 
enhanced officer discretion directive — which basically, as I 
said earlier, said to the officers, if you don’t feel safe in the 
performance of some of your duties, disengage. 

Now to me the situation is fairly simple and fairly clear cut. If 
the consultant says that some of their duties are of high risk and 
in order for the officers to safely perform those duties they 
should be equipped with side arms, what alternative do you 
have except to downsize and withdraw some of the duties that 
they are currently performing? 
 
I can foresee a situation — a possible situation — as a result of 
this situation where the highway traffic officers could be 
confined to the weigh scales and not out on the highways 
conducting the type of surveillance and enforcement that’s 
required for the safety of travel in our province and for the 
preservation of our highways. Certainly the highway traffic 
officers perform a very vital function, and I realize that there are 
a number of times where some of the people that they encounter 
aren’t happy with the way they’re being treated because they 
are in violation of some of our trucking regulations and some of 
the rules of the road and so on. 
 
The other thing is, Minister, as I’m sure you’re well aware of, 
highway traffic officers have the authority and often do issue 
summonses and so on which result in much higher fines than 
the RCMP have authority to issue under the rules of the road, 
Minister. 
 
Also when highway traffic officers pull over a large truck, they 
have a long distance to walk from their . . . the safety of their 
vehicle to the cab of the truck. They don’t know who’s coming 
out of the cab, what they’re carrying, they don’t have the 
sightlines, and those sorts of things. So there are these very real 
issues that I’m sure you’re very well aware of them. 
 
And what I would like from you, Minister, is if in fact an 
answer . . . If in fact the consultant says yes, there is an aspect 
of high risk and high danger to these highway traffic officers 
and it boils down to simply either equip them and train them so 
that they can perform their duties or else withdraw their duties, 
which choice will you make, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Once again I will remind the member 
opposite that I am not going to prejudge the report. It is our 
expectation that the consultant will give recommendations 
around the duties that we ask our traffic officers to perform. 
 
Indeed they do perform tremendous functions for the province 
in terms of regulating the trucking industry. It’s an important 
function. We recognize that. We want our officers to be safe 
and to be able to fulfill the duties that we ask them to fulfill. 
 
And when we receive the consultant’s report we will look at it 
very carefully. We will look at what we are asking of our traffic 
officers and we will do what we need to do in order to mitigate 
the risks because we do care about them. We do care about their 
safety, and at the same time we also are diligently working to 
improve our highways. And we will take the steps that we need 
to take to make sure that regulations are enforced. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, could you 
provide me with some, with the information as far as 
enforcement in the last four or five months since this action, 
since this issue has arisen as far as tickets that are written and 
summonses and those sorts of things for violation of the laws of 
the road and truck safety and so on, and compare that to the 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

previous period in 2001? 
 
I believe that we have seen a significant reduction in 
enforcement in this period of time. And I believe that if you 
take some of the actions that you’ve outlined in as far as 
resolving this issue . . . Because what I’m hearing from you, 
Minister, is that you’re very concerned about the safety of your 
highway traffic officers — as we all are — but I’m getting the 
sense that you’re not prepared to equip them with the 
equipment that they need to do their jobs which I said will, as I 
said earlier, will result in reduced enforcement. And I believe 
that their statistics will probably show that that is happening at 
present as compared to the last year. 
 
Do you have any information as far as the number of violations 
that were encountered and enforcement that was taken in the 
last few months as compared to a year ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Certainly recognizing the member’s 
concern for this issue as well, first of all I would like to say you 
can assume anything you want about my opinion and you can 
talk about your assumptions about my opinion and about the 
determinations that we might make. And fair enough — you 
have the right to assume what you will. 
 
I am not going to and the department is not prejudging our 
consultant’s report. I don’t know how I can make that more 
clear to you. We are going to get that report and we are going to 
respond accordingly, after we have looked at it, after we have 
had a chance to evaluate what the implications of any of the 
decisions necessary are. 
 
Secondly, you have asked for some statistical information and 
we will undertake to get that information to you as quickly as 
we are able to do that. 
 
(22:15) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, you recently appointed a new deputy 
minister in charge of operations, and the transport compliance 
branch falls under the operations division of your department. 
Do either of these two individuals, whether it be the assistant 
deputy minister, newly appointed assistant deputy minister, or 
the director of the transport compliance branch have any 
training, work experience in the field of enforcement and in the 
legal world or as far as degrees in law or anything like that? 
 
When you have people in charge of legal and enforcement 
matters, I think it’s important to have those people who are 
supervising and directing those individuals to have some 
experience and some training in those areas. So do either of 
those two persons . . . people have a background in 
enforcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Just with regards to the changes and 
appointments, the director continues to report to the same 
person who he was reporting to before, which is our associate 
deputy, Mr. Barry Martin. And the new assistant deputy, Stu 
Armstrong, who was in the Prince Albert area previously, is 
very knowledgeable about our highways, about transport issues, 
as is Mr. Martin, as is Mr. Stobbs. 
 
They do not have, nor do we believe it is necessary that they 

have, law enforcement backgrounds to be able to evaluate these 
issues. We have people with all kinds of background and 
experience who advise us. And we believe that with their 
knowledge of highways and highway maintenance and with the 
advisers that we are able to get, that we have the information 
available that will enable us to make the best possible decisions 
about transport compliance issues. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, I believe the 
highway traffic officers through their union, the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union), 
made a presentation and met with you late last week. 
 
And in their presentation, in their document, they have three 
recommendations. And I would like to read into the record their 
recommendations. 
 
The first one is the highway transport patrol will retain all its 
present duties including monitoring high-risk driving 
behaviours in order to maintain the safety of Saskatchewan 
highways for the commercial trucking industry and the 
travelling public. 
 
The second recommendation is that the workplace violence 
policy officer training and policies and procedures of the 
highway transport patrol be assessed by Saskatchewan Justice 
law enforcement services using the guidelines and risk 
assessment framework outlined in the use of defensive weapons 
in public service policy approved by cabinet. 
 
And third, in the event that the Saskatchewan Justice risk 
assessment recommends deployment of side arms to the 
highway transport patrol, Saskatchewan Highways and 
Transportation adopt the recommendations of their assessment. 
 
Minister, when you’ve received your consultant’s report and if 
that consultant’s report suggests that there is significant risk, 
will you follow the recommendations of the highway traffic 
officers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, the member is correct. I did meet 
with department staff and with highway traffic officers and with 
union folks and we talked over a number of the issues. I listened 
carefully to what the concerns were, asked some relevant 
questions, as did other department officials. I think we had a 
very good, cordial meeting, and we were indeed presented with 
papers from the highway traffic officers which you have read 
into the record. 
 
And as I said to you, said to the member earlier, Mr. Chair, we 
will not prejudge our consultant’s report recommendations or 
the actions that we will take as a result of that. When we get the 
consultant’s report, we will look carefully at all of the issues 
that are involved with . . . We will evaluate what our needs are 
in order to enforce our regulations and protect our highways. 
 
That said, Mr. Chair, I would like to thank my officials for the 
wonderful job that they do in working within our budget 
capabilities to build and improve our transportation system in 
this province, to make sure that our roads are as safe as they can 
possibly be, and just generally the commitment that they show 
to helping make transportation and highways better in this 
province. 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

 

So thanks to them for their time and effort, and I would like to 
ask that we report progress and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Do you want to read your . . . Do you want to send your lip 
message to me again? 
 
I move that we rise and report progress and ask leave to sit 
again. Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:26. 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1540 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Justice — Vote 3 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1529 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1529 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1539 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1542 
 General Revenue Fund — Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1543 
  Hart ................................................................................................................................................................................1543, 1548 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1544 
 
 


