















































Hansard: May 23, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1185 
 May 23, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people from my constituency 
who are concerned about the high cost of education tax on their 
property. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in education tax burden 
carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Fosston, Bankend, Foam Lake, and Hendon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again this 
morning I rise on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and district 
concerned about the lack of dialysis services in their 
community. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take the 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
have a petition on behalf of constituents from the communities 
of Lancer, Abbey, Portreeve, and other areas of the northern 
part of the constituency of Cypress Hills. And the prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is important to these producers 
because of the impact of Crown grazing leases in that region. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of an 
urgently needed hemodialysis unit for the city of Moose Jaw. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 

district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens all from the city 
of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the condition of Highway 
47. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Estevan, Macoun, Bienfait, 
and Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens of rural Saskatchewan 
that are concerned about the Crown land leasing policy which 
could have a devastating effect in my constituency. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Bracken, Val Marie, and Orkney. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents from the Kindersley 
riding concerned with the closure of rural schools and the 
devastation that occurs to those communities. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to retain schools in rural communities 
such as Denzil and supply adequate education for rural 
families of our province. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is all signed from the very concerned citizens 
of the town of Denzil. 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reductions in services in 
Davidson and Craik health centres. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctor 
services available, as well as lab services, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Craik and area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from the town of Davidson and also 
residents from Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the high crop insurance premium 
rates to farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to present a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan that are concerned with the government’s 
handling of the Saskatchewan crop insurance premiums. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Hafford, 
Rabbit Lake, and Mayfair. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following addendums to 
petitions have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are 
read and received and they are addendums to sessional papers 
no. 12, 13, 21, 27, 35, 36, 90, 100, and 114. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 48 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Agriculture minister: in the most recent fiscal year, 
could the minister please table all of the contracts the 
department made between individuals in the department 
and between all the firms and the department; also please 
disclose the dollar amounts? 

 
I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Estevan Man Inducted into Saskatchewan 
Baseball Hall of Fame 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Estevan 
resident Bob Burns has been selected for induction into the 
Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame. 
 
Burns has been umpiring ball in this province for 52 years, 
starting in Wood Mountain — and, Mr. Speaker, the member 
from Wood River claims he taught him. He has umpired in 
almost every town in southeast Saskatchewan as well as, as far 
west as Swift Current, north to Hudson Bay, and at the summer 
games held in Moose Jaw in 1972. So his eyesight has been 
questioned many times. 
 
Whether it’s baseball, fastball, or softball Burns has become a 
fixture on the diamonds around this corner of the province and 
is one of the most respected baseball figures in the area. 
 
As well as umpiring, Burns has also acted as coach on 
numerous local teams. In 1974 the Estevan Tower Mets, a 
junior baseball team coached by Burns, won the provincial title 
and placed third at the Westerns. He may not coach any more 
but Burns is always willing to lend a hand with practice. It’s not 
uncommon to see him loading balls into a pitching machine and 
helping up-and-coming players with their fundamentals. 
 
More recently, Burns has focused on developing a strong base 
of young umpires in the area. 
 
Burns is one of 15 individuals to be inducted at a ceremony 
taking place on August 16 in Battleford. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Bob Burns on 
this well-deserved recognition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
well-known fact that the oldest and the best film festival in 
North America is held every year in the city of Yorkton. It 
started again yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the 56th consecutive year, 
and will carry through until Saturday. 
 
The story of the festival will begin with the Yorkton Film 
Council of 1947, is remarkable in itself, and can be found in 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

 

festival’s Web site. 
 
But in my part of the world, Mr. Speaker, we don’t rest on our 
laurels; we go on by making things better each year and the 
executive director, Fay Kowal, and her remarkable staff of 
volunteers have done it again. They got things rolling with the 
second annual emerging filmmaking day with a workshop 
dedicated to helping filmmakers get their start. 
 
The featured guest for the entire weekend is internationally 
acclaimed documentary filmmaker, Ric Burns, who will take 
part in several workshops to present the screening of the feature 
documentary entitled Ansel Adams. 
 
Another highlight will be the awarding of a lifetime 
achievement award to actor Gordon Tootoosis of the 
Poundmaker First Nation of Saskatchewan. Members will know 
him in his role of North of 60 TV series, and many other movies 
and TV roles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be a pitchfork fondue. There will be a 
screening under the stars on Saturday night, and I plan to be 
part of the Golden Sheaf Awards banquet and ceremony on 
Saturday. A trip to the east side of the province, Mr. Speaker, 
will be well worth your while. And I invite you and members of 
this Assembly to join us in Yorkton at the film festival this 
weekend. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Athlete of the Month Award 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
congratulate the Bruno Junior Axemen on being chosen 
recipients of the Saskatchewan Sports Inc. April Athlete of the 
Month Award. 
 
This broomball team is made up of 19 players and coaches Ray 
Bender and Mark Weiman. The Axemen won their second 
consecutive national title by winning the gold medal at the 
Canadian National Juvenile Broomball Championships held in 
Montreal earlier this spring. 
 
One member of the Axemen was named a first team all-star and 
two members were named to the second team. The team was 
nominated for this award by the Saskatchewan Broomball 
Association. Congratulations to the Bruno Junior Axemen. 
 

World Health Organization’s Tobacco Control Treaty 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, according to the World Health 
Organization, almost 5 million people die each and every year 
from cancer, cardiovascular disease, and other conditions linked 
to tobacco use, and that toll is predicted to rise to 10 million 
deaths annually by the year 2020. 
 
In Saskatchewan it is estimated that 1,600 people die from 
tobacco use and 200 from second-hand smoke each and every 
year. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, more than 190 countries 
recently signed the World Health Organization’s landmark 
anti-tobacco treaty that, among other measures, would ban or 
restrict cigarette advertising, reduced second-hand smoke, 
introduce more prominent warnings, and control terms like low 

tar on cigarette packages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the provisions called for in the pact 
already apply in Saskatchewan. In fact, we are among the 
leaders worldwide in anti-tobacco legislation. For example, 
Saskatchewan, along with Manitoba and Ireland, are one of the 
first jurisdictions in the world that do not allow tobacco 
products to be openly displayed, promoted, or marketed to 
children. We are also implementing smoke-free public places, 
protecting the public and workers from the dangers of 
second-hand smoke. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in applauding the World 
Health Organization’s efforts in this regard and in renewing our 
own commitment to a comprehensive tobacco reduction 
strategy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the members not to be conversing 
across the way here during members’ statements. 
 

Saskatchewan Athlete Wins Eddie Shore Award 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to applaud the achievements of 
Mr. Curtis Murphy, a young man from the Kerrobert area. 
Curtis was awarded the Eddie Shore Award, an honour 
bestowed upon a player who is chosen by the American Hockey 
League’s media and players as the best defenceman in the 
league. 
 
He was named best defenceman with 22 goals and finished 
second with 52 points in 78 games for the Houston Aeros, 
accumulating seven power play goals. He was also named a 
first team all-star. The honour caps off a great season for Curtis 
who made his Minnesota Wild debut on December 15, and 
played in his second consecutive all-star game. 
 
Please join me in congratulating this outstanding young athlete 
and wishing him every success in his future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Aboriginal Hockey Championships 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Here’s another great bit of good news for Saskatchewan. Add 
another team to the list of Saskatchewan’s national hockey 
championships. 
 
This month an all-star team of 15- to 17-year-olds won the 
second annual national Aboriginal hockey championship held in 
Akwesasne Mohawk Territory near Cornwall, Ontario. 
Saskatchewan beat the defending champs from Manitoba in a 
thrilling overtime win. Not only that, Travis Gardipy from 
Beardy’s was named the tournament’s most valuable player, 
and three others were named to the all-star team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s how they won. They were trailing 2 to 1 
with less than 10 seconds left, and a Manitoba player picked up 
the puck thinking the game was over. This gave us a penalty 
shot, which Travis scored, taking the game into overtime, which 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

we won six minutes in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And there’s a lesson here, Mr. Speaker, 
to the members opposite — the game ain’t over till it’s over. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate each member of the boys’ 
teams and the girls’ teams which also represented 
Saskatchewan very well. 
 
I congratulate general manager, Lyle Daniels, and coach, 
Charles Keshane. And I know all members will join me in 
recognizing another Saskatchewan win. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
future is wide open for all athletes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cowessess Community Education Centre 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday morning my wife and I 
had the pleasure of joining with community and First Nations 
leaders to witness the official opening of the new Cowessess 
Community Education Centre. Mr. Speaker, this new school is 
a sight to behold. Considering the state of the former education 
building, the new building is certainly a welcome addition to 
the educational services provided on the Cowessess First 
Nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are currently 200 students enjoying the 
educational opportunities in the Cowessess school. Over the 
years many students have graduated from the Cowessess 
Community Education Centre and are today nurses, lawyers, 
teachers, etc. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, an elderly First Nations woman was invited to 
speak and she commented on her education in the residential 
school at Lebret. She said that she had nothing but good and 
positive memories of her educational years. She went on to 
stress the importance of education giving First Nations people 
opportunities to find meaningful employment, enabling them to 
play leading roles in building their communities and our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opening of the new Cowessess Community 
Education Centre building was certainly welcome for 
community leaders, teachers, administrators, and students on 
the Cowessess First Nation. 
 
I would like to extend my congratulations to everyone involved 
in the opening of this new school. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Professor Honoured 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, every year the 
University of Saskatchewan honours a member of the faculty 
for excellence in the supervision of graduate students 
undertaking projects, theses, dissertations, or artistic works. 
 
This year the university’s Distinguished Graduate Supervisor 

Award was presented to mechanical engineering professor, 
Kamiel Gabriel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Professor Gabriel has supervised 24 masters’ and 
doctoral theses. All of his graduate students have been 
successful in finding jobs in academia, industry, and 
government laboratories, and most have published papers in 
highly reputable journals. 
 
Tom Wishart, dean of graduate studies and vice-president of 
research, had this to say regarding Dr. Gabriel: 
 

Professor Gabriel is an outstanding example of the type of 
faculty member we are seeking to honour — one who has 
demonstrated excellence in scholarship undertaken with 
students and who has superior mentoring skills to stimulate 
and motivate students to achieve high standards. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all of my colleagues to join me in thanking 
Professor Gabriel for his dedication and in congratulating him 
on receiving this prestigious honour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
now the fourth day of the investigation into the case of BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy) discovered in an Alberta 
beef cow. Can the minister tell this Assembly whether or not, as 
of this morning, the CFIA (Canada Food Inspection Agency) 
has in fact determined the farm where the infected cow was 
born? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday at this time we had 
been of the view that the cow definitely was born in 
Saskatchewan. CFIA this morning is — in a conference call that 
they had earlier and will have again in the next little bit — are 
still of the view that there is not an absolute determination that 
the cow was in fact born in Saskatchewan. It would be their 
view however, though, that from a weighted perspective the 
cow looks like it was actually born in the province but there has 
not been an absolute confirmation of that at this moment. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday afternoon officials 
from the minister’s department, from his own department, told a 
Saskatchewan media source that CFIA had confirmed that the 
birthplace of an infected cow was at a farm near Baldwinton, 
Saskatchewan. However sometime later the official phoned the 
media back to recant the statement and said that in fact the place 
of birth could not be confirmed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the questions surrounding the 
investigation into this case and the number of Saskatchewan 
farms involved, I believe it’s extremely important that the 
information from the minister’s department be as accurate and 
as timely as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why the officials went 
public to the media that the location had been confirmed when 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

 

the CFIA had indeed not confirmed the location? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, if the member had been 
listening to the astute reporting that I might say happened by the 
media in our province this day, one of the things that they said 
is this: that we should pay close attention to the information 
that’s being provided by CFIA because it’s the information that 
CFIA provides from which we glean our information and then 
share accordingly for Saskatchewan people. 
 
The media this morning said that they were at a briefing 
yesterday of which they all came away from where they all 
heard the same information. But in fact information was 
broadcast differently from some locations across the province 
from what they had heard at the briefing. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, the information that we’re 
relaying today to Saskatchewan people is information that 
we’re getting directly from CFIA. Yesterday we were of the 
view that the farm in Saskatchewan was in fact the one from 
where the cow was born. Today we’re again being told that that 
has not been confirmed fully. We are of the view yet that this 
animal is likely to have been born in Saskatchewan and this is 
what CFIA continues to tell us. And I say to the member 
opposite today, this is the information that we have today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s now being widely reported 
that there is questions surrounding the actual age of the animal 
infected with BSE and that the CFIA is trying to determine 
whether the animal is eight years old as originally thought, or in 
fact five or six years of age. They are trying to determine this 
through the trace-back process and we respect their efforts. 
 
Has the minister’s department been assisting the CFIA with this 
process? And will the minister tell this Assembly what the 
CFIA has told them about why there is both a discrepancy in 
the actual age of the infected animal and some question about 
its birthplace? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what will be important to 
determine here, which will be determined by CFIA . . . And all 
provincial departments of Agriculture and ministers are 
involved in receiving information on a regular basis and are 
also involved through their departments in assisting the CFIA 
and the federal government in this very difficult period. 
 
The reality is, is that they have not yet been able to determine 
whether or not the cow was actually born in the province or 
whether or not in fact the fetus was . . . the cow was bred in 
Saskatchewan. They have yet not determined that, Mr. Speaker, 
and they’re currently working on that. 
 
It will be important to know whether or not the dam of the cow, 
of which was infected here, in fact came here from some other 
province, or outside the country, or in fact it’s a Saskatchewan 
cow that came from another herd in our province. And it is that 
yet that CFIA has not been able to determine. It will be 
important to have that information to determine specifically the 
age of the animal which is currently in question yet again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, some media sources are 
reporting this morning that in addition to the two Saskatchewan 
farms under quarantine in relation to the case of BSE, there are 
eight farms quarantined in Alberta and now three farms in 
British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister been informed by CFIA whether 
there are any other Saskatchewan farms now involved in the 
investigation and whether there may be any other Saskatchewan 
farms placed under quarantine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I am aware that there are now 13 farms in 
Western Canada that are quarantined. There are in fact three in 
British Columbia. There are eight in Alberta and there remain 
two in Saskatchewan. 
 
What in fact will happen, or has been happening, is that this 
cow of course had some offspring. Where the offspring went to 
are now being examined and some of those farms have been 
quarantined. 
 
The animal that in fact was infected — the cow that was 
infected — was in fact rendered, as we reported before earlier 
this week. Those renderings have made their way into some of 
the animal food chain. 
 
The farmer who in fact had the cow in Alberta had assembled a 
host of other animals as well for his yard. Those animals went 
out to other feedlots and other locations across Western Canada. 
And accordingly, we now have to trace back all of those 
animals, not only the ones that were indirectly . . . that were all 
directly in contact or in the same area that this cow was. 
 
So we have the siblings of the cow. We have the residents of 
where the cow lived over the last several years. And we also 
now have other animals that were associated to this animal on 
this farm that went somewhere else that are now being 
examined. 
 
So there will be, I expect, more farms that will be quarantined 
along the way to be sure that we can isolate this to the particular 
incident of the animal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
farm under quarantine near Baldwinton, Saskatchewan has been 
named in the media, and the farm family has been under intense 
media scrutiny because of the possibility of the ties of the cow 
to BSE. 
 
I have spoken with the family several times over the last two 
days, and on behalf of them I would ask the following 
questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CFIA visited the farm just once earlier this week 
to inform them of their herd under quarantine, but they have not 
heard from CFIA since and have no contact whatsoever from 
Saskatchewan Ag and Food. They feel quite dismayed that the 
media now knows more about what is going on than they do. 
 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to immediately 
contacting the Saskatchewan cattle farmers quarantined as a 
result of the BSE investigation to provide any information he 
has and to regularly update these family farms on the 
investigation, and also briefing the Saskatchewan farms prior to 
his media releases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, to that question 
would be, yes. Absolutely we would be in contact with those 
individual farmers. What we have not done, Mr. Speaker, in any 
of the provinces, on the direction of the federal government and 
the CFIA, is that they are the lead agency doing the 
examination and the investigation of this matter. 
 
This is a very, very complex issue. It affects for sure today 
Western Canada. And what we do not need today, Mr. Speaker 
— what we do not need — is we do not need a whole host of 
professionals or people who believe they’re experts engaging 
themselves in this deliberation. 
 
This investigation is being led by CFIA. They’re advising us, 
Mr. Speaker, on the processes happening today. And those 
provinces where, in fact, there are farmers that have been 
identified, absolutely, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have contact with 
those people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Mr. Speaker, as also discussed this morning, it 
is still unconfirmed where the infected animal was born. The 
family farm at Baldwinton has a lot of questions as to whether 
or not the infected animal did in fact originate in their herd. As 
a result they have requested that CFIA provide a DNA 
(deoxyribonucleic acid) sample from the deceased cow that they 
could match their own DNA samples on record to provide that 
the animal is one of the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister and his department officials work 
with this farm to help facilitate the request of CFIA? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the minister and my 
department will not tell CFIA how to do their job. Mr. Speaker, 
CFIA will do their investigation using their resources that they 
have at their disposal. 
 
They are the food inspection agency of record in Canada. They 
have an outstanding record, Mr. Speaker, of examining the 
issues around animal disease. In this province, as we well know 
with chronic wasting disease, this agency has served this 
province in an outstanding fashion and there is absolutely no 
question on this minister or this department’s perspective about 
the capacity of this agency to do its work. 
 
They’ll use the tools and the techniques and the skills and the 
scientific knowledge that they have today to assure not only this 
Saskatchewan farm but Canadians, Mr. Speaker, about the 
importance of their work. And at the end of the day will 
confirm in my mind and other Canadians that we have a safe 
food system in Canada, in Saskatchewan farms, on Alberta 

farms, on British Columbia farms, and in Canada. And we 
should let CFIA, in my view, continue to do its work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 
asking the minister not to, I guess, tell CFIA what their job is 
and what they’re needing to do in relationship to this situation 
but working with the farmer to see if the DNA can be used as a 
way of identifying that it’s an animal that’s come from their 
herd. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — If the member is asking us to have a 
conversation with the farm family, I’ve indicated that we’ll 
have a conversation with the farm family. We’ll continue to 
assure through my department and the specialized people who 
work in my department who are working closely with CFIA, 
we’ll ensure that they have a conversation with the farm family 
to ensure them that all of the work that’s been done today to 
identify the source of this particular disease in this animal and 
how it in fact will affect the other animals on their farm — 
we’ll have that conversation, Mr. Speaker, with that farm 
family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 

High-speed Internet Service 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the minister responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the town of Ogema is one of Saskatchewan’s 
economic success stories. In 2002, the town of Ogema applied 
to SaskTel for high-speed Internet service to support continued 
growth. SaskTel flatly refused. 
 
In a letter dated June 12, 2002 to the mayor of Ogema, SaskTel 
president, Don Ching, wrote this, and I quote: 
 

Internet service is a competitive service, and SaskTel must 
justify providing this service based on the revenue . . . it 
will generate. 
 

Mr. Ching went on to say that, quote: 
 

SaskTel must consider long-term profitability when 
selecting expansion sites for High Speed Internet service. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government think the town of Ogema is not economically 
viable enough to provide high-speed Internet service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m 
pleased, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that that member from the 
Sask Party acknowledges the importance of high-speed Internet, 
Mr. Speaker, and so does SaskTel. 
 
SaskTel by the way, Mr. Speaker — and for the information of 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

 

the Sask Party and for the information of the public of 
Saskatchewan — will have connected 74 per cent of the 
population of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, by the end of this 
year. There is no other jurisdiction in the world that has 
achieved that objective, Mr. Speaker, no other jurisdiction in 
the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Rather than criticize, we should be 
incredibly proud, Mr. Speaker. And SaskTel and its officials, 
Mr. Speaker, will continue to work with people within the 
communities to try to deliver high-speed Internet into every part 
of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister suggests that they’re working with every 
community. It’s obvious they’re not working with the 
community of Ogema. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the town of Coronach also has a problem with 
SaskTel’s high-speed Internet service, but unlike the problem in 
Ogema, where SaskTel is shunning one of Saskatchewan’s most 
successful rural communities, in Coronach the problem is that 
SaskTel has decided to provide high-speed Internet service even 
though that service is already being provided by a community 
owned and operated company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did SaskTel refuse to provide high-speed 
Internet service to the people of Ogema who desperately want 
SaskTel service, while at the same time launching SaskTel’s 
high-speed Internet service in Coronach in direct competition 
with a locally owned company that is already providing the 
service to the people of Coronach? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we in 
SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel and this government, obviously 
recognize the importance of communities like Ogema. Mr. 
Speaker, they are integral to the development of the economy in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely they are. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what an incredible contradiction. That 
member should look to his left to the critic of Crown 
Investments Corporation, Mr. Speaker, who on a daily basis 
stands in this legislature and criticizes SaskTel for competing, 
Mr. Speaker, with other high-speed Internet providers, Mr. 
Speaker, on a daily basis criticizes for a competition with other 
high-speed providers. Mr. Speaker, there are private companies 
who can deliver high-speed Internet, Mr. Speaker, but this 
member stands up in the legislature and demands and is 
insulted, Mr. Speaker, that SaskTel won’t provide it. 
 
Well I say again, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel by the end of this year 
will have delivered high-speed Internet to fully 74 per cent of 
the population of Saskatchewan and that number will grow into 
the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, a very simple question: how can 
the minister justify not putting high-speed Internet service into a 
town that desperately needs it and wants it for economic 
growth, and yet will provide service to compete with an existing 
system in Coronach? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I need to 
supplement my last answer. I don’t think I answered it 
completely. It was pointed out to me, Mr. Speaker, that I 
referred to one member to that member’s left. In fact, I think 
everybody is to the left of that member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out, yesterday there was reference 
made by the critic of Crown Investments Corporation who 
talked about DBRS’s (Dominion Bond Rating Service Limited) 
credit rating . . . or the report that DBRS released yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the distortion of the day from that 
member, Mr. Speaker, the distortion of the day from that 
member, said, Mr. Speaker, DBRS referred to SaskTel as 
amongst the strongest telephone companies, not just in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, but in the world, Mr. Speaker, in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, globally, Mr. Speaker, 
globally, worldwide, SaskTel ranks 10th — 10th in the world, 
Mr. Speaker. And there are literally thousands of telephone 
companies, Mr. Speaker, in the world. They rank 10th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know what, you know what DBRS said, Mr. 
Speaker? They said that SaskTel has amongst the best debt 
ratios, Mr. Speaker, of all telephone companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s nice to hear the minister’s rant, but unfortunately 
the sad part of this whole story is Coronach was turned down 
for high-speed Internet service, that’s why they went to another 
community service base. And as soon as that goes in, then 
SaskTel comes in and competes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the president of SaskTel is absolutely right when 
he says that SaskTel has to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order 
please, members. One at a time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, I’ll say 
that the president of SaskTel is absolutely right when he says 
that SaskTel has to make decisions about providing services 
based on long-term profitability. Unfortunately SaskTel then 
uses that criterion to refuse high-speed Internet service to the 
town of Ogema, one of the fastest growing towns in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But apparently SaskTel is not so interested in applying this 
criterion when it comes to pouring money — $24 million into 
its dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia — or pouring $40 million into 
money-losing stock market gamble in Australia. 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the NDP thinks it’s 
just fine to keep pouring money into all of these losing foreign 
investments in Atlanta and Australia and then decide that it’s 
not in SaskTel’s best interests to invest in high-speed Internet 
service in one of Saskatchewan’s fastest growing towns right 
here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do want to 
point out to that member, in case that member is not aware, Mr. 
Speaker, that SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network) is 
the service provider for CommunityNet to that area, Mr. 
Speaker. They already do provide CommunityNet through 
SCN, Mr. Speaker, in case he’s not aware of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I do want to also point out . . . 
Because he talks about why SaskTel is diversifying outside of 
the province, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to point out, in DBRS’s 
report yesterday, that they released yesterday morning — listen 
carefully, listen carefully, Mr. Speaker — the one area that 
DBRS notes, the only area where SaskTel is below average, is 
in its size, Mr. Speaker. They say that DBRS thinks that 
SaskTel is too small and that SaskTel needs to diversify and 
grow to remain one of the strongest telephone companies. 
 
How do you grow, Mr. Speaker, under the policy of the Sask 
Party, Mr. Speaker? You don’t. You shrink; you sell, Mr. 
Speaker. The way you would grow, Mr. Speaker, is to diversify 
like SaskTel is doing so that they can provide high-speed 
Internet to fully everyone in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regional Highway Maintenance Centres 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Highways. 
 
Last week my colleague from Last Mountain-Touchwood asked 
the minister about the reduction and closure of several regional 
highway maintenance facilities in the province. But the minister 
provided no answers as to how many facilities were going to be 
closed or downsized and why these closures were taking place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are huge concerns about how the safety of 
highways in these areas will be impacted as a result of these 
changes. In fact Department of Highway workers and members 
of the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union) say they will join the fight against the 
reduction of highway employees working out of the 
Churchbridge maintenance facility. 
 
In fact the SGEU says the only rationale for downsizing is to 
save money, and I quote: 
 

. . . but they may be saving money by risking people’s 
lives.  

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how many highway maintenance 
facilities and crews are being closed or reduced in the province 
this year and why? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, there has been one 
closed; that was in ’96, I believe, in Maidstone. And as far as 
the efficiencies that we are working on, we are also — as we’re 
working on those efficiencies — we are also looking at making 
our service better. 
 
In terms of laying people off, in terms of selling off, getting rid 
of equipment, those are the experts over there, Mr. Speaker. 
They sold off the equipment. If there’s any problem with 
maintenance, struggling to do maintenance in this province 
right now, it’s because of what they did in the ’80s; it’s not 
because of what we’re doing right now. 
 
We are building the highways, we are fixing the highways, and 
we are making progress in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister should come out and check with the people of 
Churchbridge; check the conditions of the highways in the state 
they are now with what they’re going to be like with less people 
working on them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the minister claims all is well 
and in fact that it’s business as usual at these regional 
maintenance facilities. Well the people of Gull Lake know all 
too well because they watched the Highway department load up 
all equipment and move it to Swift Current. 
 
Employees at the Highway department know how difficult it 
can be during bad weather, especially bad winter weather, to 
keep a highway clear and safe . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m sorry. Order, members. I would ask all 
members to allow the question to be put in a manner which it 
can be heard. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
Churchbridge they know that they’re able to . . . what they are 
able to do with existing staff and equipment, and believe their 
ability to provide timely road maintenance will negatively be 
affected. 
 
They say, and I quote again: 
 

At the end of the day the people in Churchbridge area will 
be serviced less and their level of safety will drop by an 
hour, (or possibly) two . . .  

 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government compromising the 
safety of motorists by cutting these regional maintenance 
facilities on a busy highway like Highway 16? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of closing or 
reducing the staff at any of the regional maintenance facilities, 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

 

the fact is that when the department looks at this they look at 
the broader picture of the whole province and how to make our 
roads safer, how to make sure that the overall maintenance is 
done right. And I tell you we have no interest in the 
privatization schemes that Alberta pulled, that these guys on the 
other side, the Sask Party, would pull. 
 
What we are interested in is improving our highways in this 
province, giving the best service that we can, and when those 
maintenance shops are changed, the structure around them is 
changed, the corresponding ones around the area are improved, 
Mr. Speaker. And we give good service to the citizens of this 
province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Why is the Minister of 
Government Relations on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
privileged to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues 
in this Assembly, some very special guests that are seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask that each of them 
stand as I introduce them. And I, in advance, apologize if I 
mispronounce any of the names. I beg your indulgence. 
 
The Hon. Akwasi Asare Ankomah, who is the president of the 
National Association of Local Authorities of Ghana. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Diotrephes Mmari, who is the 
permanent secretary, regional administration and local 
government; Mr. Basilius R. Nchimbi, who is the 
Secretary-General of the Association of Local Authorities of 
Tanzania. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Shingirayi Mushamba, who is a senior 
officer, municipal development program, Zimbabwe. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — And I believe, Mr. Speaker, they are 
accompanied by members from the Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities and that would be Mr. Claude Rainville, who’s a 
program officer, East and Southern Africa; Marie Lynne 
Grandbois, administration officer, African program. 
 
And they are accompanied here, Mr. Speaker, by the president 
of our Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities, Mr. Mike Badham. 
And I’m not sure whether Mr. Keith Schneider accompanied 
him this morning or not, but I would ask all members to 

welcome these people to our great province and I hope they 
enjoy their visit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition I would like to join the Minister 
of Government Relations in welcoming our esteemed guests 
from Ghana, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe, as well as the officials 
from the Canadian municipalities association along with Mike 
Badham, our president of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association). We hope your stay in 
Saskatchewan will be very favourable and hope you enjoy your 
time here. 
 
So will everyone join me in welcoming them again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions 302 through 304 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 302, 303, and 304 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 
17, An Act to amend the Land Surveys Act, 2000 is quite 
possibly one of the shortest pieces of legislation this 
government has entered into the House for consideration. 
 
While it is very terse and covers a very few pieces of interest, I 
have to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 17 is tied in its 
entirety to one of the largest financial boondoggles this 
government has ever imposed on the people of Saskatchewan, 
the Information Services Corporation — better known as ISC 
— and the LAND (Land Titles Automated Network 
Development) project. 
 
Now as you know, Mr. Speaker, and as the people of this 
province know, ISC was supposed to be a $20 million 
computerized improvement to land titles. And as of last count I 
think we were at somewhere near $107 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t understand, even by NDP math, how we could have got 
to that particular level; how we could project a project costing 
$20 million and eventually end up at somewhere near 107 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

million and counting. But nevertheless that’s what the people of 
Saskatchewan are burdened with financially for this failed 
project. And I say failed, Mr. Speaker, because at this point it is 
yet a very flawed system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had, as part of the preparation for today’s notes, 
some of the comments made by other members of the 
opposition concerning this particular piece of legislation. And 
without exception, every person who from the opposition side 
spoke to this Bill pointed out episodes and issues that their own 
constituents have had with ISC. 
 
In the time that this computerized land titles system has been 
so-called operational, we have seen one fiasco after the other 
develop in terms of land registry, the time with which it took to 
complete a transaction, the delays and the financial 
consequences for people who are undertaking various lands 
transactions, the frustration that individuals received or 
obtained as a result of trying to receive information on where 
their land transactions were at. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the ISC experiment to date has not been 
exactly as joyful an experience as most people would have 
anticipated, given the amount of money it’s taken to get this 
project up and running. It has created a lot of anxiety and 
uncertainty among many people. And each of us as MLAs has 
had our own story to tell on behalf of our constituents in this 
regard. 
 
We’re not talking about major changes in The Land Surveys 
Act that is part of this ISC project. There are minimal changes 
actually as a result of this piece of legislation, as I indicated 
earlier. What The Land Surveys Act, 2000 does purport to do, 
Mr. Speaker, is to define the term, legal description. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think in almost any transfer of title, any 
land changing hands, any condo that’s purchased by individual 
buyers in the province, any house transaction that might occur, 
has as part of the whole legal package a legal description. And 
we find out now that the term legal description — although it’s 
been used commonly in transactions and in various pieces of 
legislation — the term legal description has never been defined 
in any careful manner. 
 
And what we find here is that the legal description with respect 
to a parcel of land will now mean a considerable number of 
things. And I think that some of the changes that are included in 
this piece of legislation have been necessitated by the technical 
difficulties experienced by ISC. 
 
You know, in most instances in terms of rural land, rural parcels 
of land changing hands, a land description was enough. We 
could get the northwest quarter of this section in this township 
and that description was quite adequate. Now what we’ve got 
. . . And it seemed actually quite easy. I think it was 
understandable and everybody could identify with it. 
 
But now what we’ve got is a situation where ISC doesn’t know 
for sure whether it can handle that kind of simplicity; it’s gone 
to a numbering system to help identify pieces of land. So we’ve 
got kind of a dual system now for ISC’s purposes. We have a 
land description that is designated for the parcel on a plan that 
will include, and I’m going to read from the Act if I may, Mr. 

Speaker: 
 

(A) in the case of a parcel on an approved plan, the number 
that the Controller assigned to the plan on approving the 
plan pursuant to section 37; 

 
And we won’t go into a lot of detail there. 
 

(B) in the case of a parcel on a plan of survey that was filed 
or registered in the land titles office of a former land 
registration district pursuant to the former Act, The Land 
Titles Act or The Condominium Property Act, 1993, the 
registration number of the plan of survey; 

 
And if you want to sell a piece of land that maybe doesn’t have 
all the detailed information that a plan might ordinarily require, 
you can get down to: 
 

(iii) a written description of the parcel that uniquely 
describes the parcel without ambiguity, and which may 
include all or any of the following descriptions: 
 

(A) a description of the geometry of the perimeter of the 
parcel; 
 
(B) a description of a portion of the parcel; 
 
(C) a description of a remainder of the parcel; 
 
(D) a description of an exception to the parcel. 

 
I don’t see that this particular piece of legislation actually 
makes clarity or achieves the test of clarity, when the old 
system was really quite clear and quite understandable. But 
nevertheless, what we have here is a Bill that will allow this 
material — this information I’ve just read into the record — to 
provide the definition of legal description. 
 
The other thing this piece of legislation does is it allows for the 
requirement for surveyors to re-erect monuments in areas where 
those identifying features have been lost. And in the past there 
was no apparent legal requirement of surveyors to replace the 
monuments if they were out surveying that particular parcel of 
land and found that the monument had been destroyed, maybe 
removed, whatever, lost somehow. The surveyor wasn’t 
required to replace that monument. 
 
And now there is a requirement on the part of the surveyor to do 
that, although the time limitations may vary somewhat. There 
could have been a more restrictive time requirement, I believe, 
but it seems that for convenience purposes this piece of 
legislation has allowed some flexibility on behalf of the 
surveyor in the time requirement to replace the monument. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of a monument and the replacement of a 
monument might not seem like a significant matter. But in the 
case of many rural surveys that happened, well I think, prior to 
the turn of the century — back in maybe the 1880s or 1890s — 
we have in many areas of rural Saskatchewan been completely 
dependent on those surveys. And they were seen as quite 
accurate and really reliable for the purposes of land ownership 
and transaction. But we have also seen with the loss of some of 
those monuments that, over time, individuals ended up losing 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

 

the line of their property and maybe farmed over the line and 
into the neighbouring property. 
 
I had a constituent call me just shortly after I was elected back 
in the fall of ’99 and he was faced with a situation where his 
property was undermined by a new survey. What had happened 
is the ownership of his property had been defined by a survey 
that dated back to the previous century. And when there was 
access required on his property by an oil company, he wanted to 
establish a route where they could access their development 
site. 
 
And when he had a surveyor come out he found that he was 
actually losing a fair amount of acreage as a result of the most 
recent survey. He had been farming his neighbour’s property, 
but more than that of course, he had fenced what seemed to be 
the accurate line of his property and now with the new survey 
he was going to lose not just some of his acreage but his fence. 
 
And when he appealed to the chief surveyor and the provincial 
government he was told that well, that’s just the luck of the 
draw, that’s the way things happen, and your particular loss will 
be at your expense. He didn’t think that was fair and I’m not so 
certain that any of us would see that as fair. 
 
But the problem was created in the first instance by the loss of 
the monument. So while on the face of it, on the surface of 
reviewing this particular piece of legislation, that replacement 
of monument provision may not be that important, or may not 
seem that important, but in reality for individuals from time to 
time the loss of that monument can be rather expensive and 
difficult, and create certainly some misunderstandings from 
time to time between neighbours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have looked at this piece of legislation, as brief 
as it is, with some concern because of the way it ties into the 
Information Services Corporation and land titles and 
automation and so forth and the overall cost of that particular 
enterprise by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, we’ve been assured time and time again that 
Information Services Corporation will bring new efficiencies to 
the registration of land titles, and we certainly hope so because 
we can’t afford any more losses. At $107 million and counting 
we have to see some efficiencies and we have to see them soon. 
 
But one of the things that I thought was interesting recently, Mr. 
Speaker, was, when the minister responsible for ISC was 
justifying its existence, he said that the Government of Alberta 
had decided they wanted to undertake an automated land titles 
system too and were looking at Saskatchewan’s model. 
 
Now I wonder, Mr. Speaker, why, if Alberta was looking at 
undertaking that automation process and looking at 
Saskatchewan’s model, why have they not offered to buy 
Saskatchewan’s model, take the information, and implement it 
in Alberta? Now I understand that at a $107 million cost to 
Saskatchewan the province of Alberta probably wouldn’t be 
interested in repeating that mistake. So if they could possibly 
buy this Saskatchewan technology and make it work in Alberta, 
I’m sure they would be quite prepared to do it. 
 
Now the fact that they haven’t done it yet, Mr. Speaker, I think 

raises some concerns on the part of the official opposition, and 
probably underlines some of the issues with this particular 
system that we’ve raised in the past. It may not be as effective 
and workable as the government would have us believe. There 
might be a lot of additional flaws with this system and lots of 
wrinkles that have to be worked out yet before it would be 
commercially viable for any other jurisdiction. 
 
(11:00) 
 
So if that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, we might be looking at a 
considerably larger investment on behalf of ISC than the $107 
million that has gone down that black hole to this date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one other thing that I did find interesting 
about this particular piece of legislation and that isn’t what was 
in the legislation but what wasn’t in the legislation. 
 
And I know that as part of the process in developing legislation 
the government tries to entertain representations from various 
interest groups and gets their feedback and discusses what 
changes need to be brought forward and what ones would be 
beneficial to the industry. 
 
And the one group that was, I assume, consulted or ought to 
have been consulted would have been the Saskatchewan Land 
Surveyors’ Association. They’re a self-regulating professional 
group and they’re a small group in this province. We don’t have 
a lot of professional members as part of the Land Surveyors’ 
Association. If I recall correctly their membership amounts to 
about 70 people, maybe 75 in total in the whole province. 
 
But this group was looking for some changes in the legislation 
that would allow them to operate with a little greater depth and 
scope. And I don’t see any of the issues that the Saskatchewan 
Land Surveyors’ Association brought forward, I don’t see any 
of their concerns mentioned in this particular piece of 
legislation. 
 
So I can only assume, Mr. Speaker, that the government chose 
to ignore the request of this organization, or they will be 
addressing some of these concerns in future or additional 
legislation. And I hope it’s the latter, Mr. Speaker, because 
what this small professional organization was looking for was 
some latitude that would allow them to appoint members to 
their board of directors who weren’t necessarily resident in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, many of those professionals 
have been trained here, maybe start a business here, but in the 
past 10, 15 years have located into Alberta. And their workload 
is considerably greater over there so they could do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve been listening to the 
member’s debate and he seems to be spending about 70 per cent 
of it on items other than that . . . directly on Bill 17. Now it’s 
fine to relate these items but I think that the bulk of the 
member’s remarks should really relate to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well relevance, Mr. Speaker, is important, and 
I’ll try and maintain a better record in that regard. 
 
But nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, I think that this particular piece 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

of legislation, this particular piece of legislation has been 
necessitated by the changes to the computerized land titles 
system. I mean, if we hadn’t gone that route, Mr. Speaker, we 
would have . . . this would not have been necessitated. We 
could have gotten by with the old piece of legislation. 
 
But I do think that it’s very relevant, Mr. Speaker, to comment 
about the requirements of this organization, the Saskatchewan 
Land Surveyors’ Association, and their desires and needs to be 
able to offer a greater variety of services to the people of this 
province. This particular piece of legislation deals directly with 
these individuals and to have ignored or at least not provided 
the changes that they were looking for is a gross oversight on 
the part of the government in this particular Bill. So we’ll hope 
that they will make the changes requested by the organization in 
future legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in view of the concerns, the ongoing concerns that 
we have with the implementation of this legislation and how it 
relates to ISC, I believe that there are additional comments that 
members of the official opposition would like to make. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 
modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to enter into the debate on The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill requires some close scrutiny because as 
we’ve seen in the past, just about anything having to do with the 
ramifications of the 25-year agreement signed by this 
government with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations), answers and real questions and legitimate concerns 
are few and far between from this government. Too many issues 
have arisen in the last few years when it comes to accountability 
surrounding First Nations gaming and the revenues generated to 
let these questions go unanswered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, I’d like to quote from the minister’s 
introduction of the Bill where the minister says, and I quote: 
 

These amendments will ensure that First Nation GLAs are 
accountable to the commission just as the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority is. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s scary if that commission, or if the First 
Nations GLAs (gaming licensing authorities) are going to be as 
accountable as SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority). And I would like to just talk a little bit on a little bit 
of historical data about accountability by this organization and 
this government. 
 
We go back three years ago. The expense accounts of Mr. 
Dutch Lerat, spent close to 800,000 on vehicles and plane 

tickets — the accountability of that and the minister’s referring 
in this Bill it’s going to be as accountable. Will it be as 
accountable as Mr. Dutch Lerat? 
 
Mr. Speaker, also on the note of accountability, we go back a 
couple of years and we notice that the Provincial Auditor 
clearly stated that the lack of action by the minister led to the 
improper use of at least 1.7 million by the Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there again you can see what our concern is. 
If the minister is suggesting that this organization will now be 
as accountable as SLGA, it is indeed a worrisome issue, for not 
only us but for the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another one that I would like to read with 
respect to the accountability. Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation’s Act, public money directed toward the First 
Nations Fund is to be spent specifically for the economic and 
social development of First Nations people in the province. 
 
In the Spring Report of 2001, the auditor concluded that he 
could not determine whether $34 million of gaming proceeds 
paid to the fund was spent as directed in provincial legislation. 
He said there are no records to show how any of that money 
was spent except for 280,000 that was spent illegally on travel 
and for the FSIN Senate. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, one has to question when the minister is 
suggesting that this organization is now going to be as 
accountable as SLGA. And yet we see what’s going on within 
SLGA, the lack of accountability. 
 
And more recently, Mr. Speaker, we have a mega bingo scandal 
— $7.9 million that we know of today. Whether there’s more or 
not is yet to be determined. But how accountable is that? 
 
And now we’re putting a 25-year agreement in place to ensure 
that this organization is going to be as accountable as SLGA, 
and yet the accountability at SLGA is definitely, definitely 
questionable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the minister was questioned at the time of 
the 25-year agreement about jurisdictional issues and how that 
agreement affected them, that minister wouldn’t, or more 
accurately, couldn’t answer those questions. He basically said, 
we’ll let the courts decide. Well, Mr. Speaker, those kind of 
answers aren’t good enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will give us the opportunity to again ask 
those pertinent questions, and the House can rest assured that 
we will be asking those questions. 
 
Some of the questions that we would like to ask pertaining to 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is, what will the 25-year agreement mean 
for the province’s authority over gaming issues on reserves; 
how will this agreement improve accountability on those 
on-reserve gaming operations? And I’ve alluded to already and 
stated some of the problems that we have. 
 
And how are we going to know that monies is going to go to the 
people that really need it on reserves? How will this agreement 
and the legislation we have before us ensure that dollars 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

 

generated will go, in fact, to the intended purpose of these 
dollars? 
 
At the end of the day, money raised through these gaming 
operations are first and foremost supposed to help the First 
Nations people of this province socially. Now that’s where the 
accountability issues come in again. And if we fail, if we fail to 
ensure that these dollars are actually being used in the best 
possible way to improve the lives of our First Nations people, 
then we have failed, and more specifically, the NDP 
government has failed the First Nations people of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP continues to turn a blind eye and a deaf ear to these 
concerns and to wash their hands completely of the matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, until we get certain questions answered from this 
government, we will continue to ask these pertinent questions. 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’ll be more people that wish to speak to 
this Bill, so at this time I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 35 — The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
into the second reading debate on Bill No. 35, The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, really the crux of the Bill, I think, was reflected in 
the minister’s comments when he provided his second reading 
speech. When he talked a little bit about the fundamental 
change that would be occurring, he said that the Bill . . . I 
should back up a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He talked a little bit about the Provincial Auditor’s concerns. 
He recognized the Provincial Auditor’s concerns with respect to 
the trust fund, the First Nations trust fund and he had this to say. 
He said: 
 

. . . the Provincial Auditor has in the past expressed 
concerns with regard to some aspects of how the First 
Nations Fund was operated and administered. 

 
And he went on to say that he wanted to assure, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — this is a quote still: 
 

. . . and indeed all members of this Assembly, that both the 
government and the FSIN take these concerns very 
seriously. 

 
Now indeed, Mr. Speaker, Bill 35 takes these concerns so 
seriously that in his comments just before his commitment to 
take the concerns of the auditor about the First Nations trust 
fund seriously, in his comments just prior to that, he indicated 
the basis for this Bill, the heart of this Bill, which would 
provide a fundamental difference. And I’m quoting again: 
 

. . . in the arrangement is that the First Nations trust will be 
directly responsible to the FSIN and will operate more 
independently of the provincial government (more 
independently of the provincial government) in keeping 
with the terms and conditions set out in the 2002 Gaming 
Framework Agreement. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from Wood River has 
highlighted, there are concerns and I think matters of great 
public import surrounding the long-term agreement as it’s been 
entered into by the Government of Saskatchewan, but also of 
concern is this ongoing issue of the trust. Because of course the 
First Nations trust and the revenues that accrue to that trust as a 
result of gaming in the province of Saskatchewan are there to 
improve the life of First Nations families. 
 
That is their sole purpose, Mr. Speaker. That is their sole 
purpose. The sole purpose of these funds is to improve the life 
of First Nations families here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial Auditor has on a 
number of occasions highlighted his grave concerns about the 
lack of accountability on the part of the First Nations trust fund. 
That’s what he has highlighted, because the Provincial Auditor, 
like the rest of the province, wants to ensure that the dollars in 
this fund are used to improve the lives of First Nations people 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would ask the member 
not to interfere with the debate. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, we 
encourage the member for Athabasca to enter into the debate 
because I honestly believe that he too would have as his number 
one priority with respect to the First Nations trust, he too would 
have as his number one . . . 
 
(11:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Now I ask the member of 
Athabasca once again to please not interfere with the debate. 
Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 
the member for Athabasca, like every member in this House, 
shares a concern about the First Nations trust fund, would 
priorize, would priorize the fact that this trust fund must be used 
to improve the lives of First Nations people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s the point. 
 
Why he would be heckling about that, who knows, Mr. 
Speaker. Why he would be hectoring about that, who knows 
because frankly I’m sure the priorities are identical on this side 
of the House. 
 
But the measure, of course, of the commitment to this isn’t in 
words. It’s not in the heckling. It’s not in their interventions in 
the second reading speech. The measure of it, Mr. Speaker, is in 
their actions. The measure of their commitment and concern to 
the use of these funds, being to improve the lives of First 
Nations people in Saskatchewan, the measure of that is in their 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

actions. 
 
What have they done, Mr. Speaker? When the Provincial 
Auditor of the province of Saskatchewan tells the government 
that the . . . that he, the auditor, the Provincial Auditor, has 
grave concerns about the lack of accountability of the trust 
fund, what does the government do to address that? What does 
the government do to ensure that there is accountability and 
transparency in that fund and that in fact it is being used to 
improve the lives of First Nations people? They do absolutely 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ve ignored the Provincial Auditor. Well the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast says it’s categorically untrue. She might 
want to share that view with the Provincial Auditor because in 
report, after report, after report, the Provincial Auditor has said 
the same thing. 
 
So if they’re doing something to address it, I think we’d be the 
first to congratulate them, and so would the Provincial Auditor. 
The Provincial Auditor would also congratulate them for doing 
something about that accountability. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the fact that he continues to state his 
concerns would clearly underscore the fact that the government 
of this province is not responding to the Provincial Auditor’s 
concerns. 
 
Now in this particular Bill, the Government of Saskatchewan is 
now affording this fund even more flexibility, even more 
independence as a part of a 25-year agreement on gaming. The 
minister went on in his second reading speech to say that the 
reason that they’re able to do that, Mr. Speaker, is because they 
were going to also hold the fund to a greater level of 
accountability and the Bill would make changes to that too. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, given the track record of this government 
with respect to this trust fund, this First Nations trust fund, 
given the importance of the fund, given the importance of the 
purpose of the fund, we will have a number of questions at the 
committee stage of debate of this Bill to find out exactly how 
the government hopes to achieve the accountability that it 
promises, that the minister promises in a second reading speech. 
 
And even prior to that, Mr. Speaker, because of the importance 
of this Bill in the debate, we will have . . . there will be others in 
. . . my caucus colleagues, who will want to enter the debate. 
And therefore I would move that debate be adjourned on this 
Bill at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 34 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter the debate on Bill No. 34 today, 
the Act to amend The Film Employment Tax Credit Act. 
 

Mr. Speaker, essentially to start with, the Saskatchewan Party 
and the opposition recognize the importance of the film and 
video industry to Saskatchewan’s overall growth. We do have 
some concerns with regards to the specific piece of legislation 
as it focuses primarily around the granting of a 35 per cent tax 
credit eligible for labour costs for film and television production 
companies. 
 
The problem that we see just with the piece of legislation is that 
initially the tax credits and applications for such were to be 
wound up by December 31 of this year. And the amendment 
that is before the Legislative Assembly now asked for an 
extension of that for one other year, which would put it up to 
December 31 of 2004. 
 
But akin to that, Mr. Speaker, there’s also an . . . the 
amendment also requests that the minister would be able to 
receive applications beyond this day, which puts into question 
the real point of the amendment in the first place. If you’re 
going to have deadlines, why would you have them if they’re 
really not standing for anything. And that seems like kind of a 
roundabout way of putting something into legislation that’s 
somewhat pointless. 
 
I don’t know if the idea behind it is to try to encourage 
corporations which are seeking to get such tax exemptions to 
get their applications filed in time. But at the end of the day it is 
a pointless piece of legislation to say, we’re going to have a 
deadline but the deadline means nothing. 
 
This inconsistency is not unfamiliar, Mr. Speaker, in the way 
that this NDP government has handled the growth in the film 
and video industry in the province of Saskatchewan. It doesn’t 
take very long, Mr. Speaker, to look to the sound stage which 
the government put in, it appears untendered, to be built for $12 
million, and again a lack of any kind of business plan to see 
what kind of attraction for production that they’re going to get 
into. 
 
With regard specifically, Vancouver, Toronto, and Calgary all 
also have sound stages and this is, as Mr. Speaker knows, a very 
competitive industry. It is completely, Mr. Speaker, dominated 
internationally out of, obviously, California and to a large 
extent there’s a great deal of production out of Bombay as well. 
 
Moving into this very aggressive market in Vancouver, 
Toronto, and Calgary, Toronto has had a great deal of success 
with the expansion of the film and video industry. And then 
trying to get a piece of that already saturated market for 
Saskatchewan has proven not to be very successful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, relating this back directly to the tax credit. The tax 
credit was in force to allow for a specialist to come in for 
production that didn’t have residency here, and that’s what that 
35 per cent waiver was allowed for. 
 
After 16 consecutive quarters of population loss, the original 
intent of the tax credits to grow the industry in this province 
have been a failure. And they’ve been a failure not because of 
the specifics because of the film and video industry, Mr. 
Speaker, they’ve been a failure because of the overall climate 
that this industry has had to act within in this province, and that 
is a lack of economic vision. And at the end of the day we see 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

 

that the sound stage very largely is underutilized. 
 
And when I drive to the Legislative Assembly in the morning, 
passing College Street, I’m not in the habit of at College and 
Broad seeing stars, you know. It’s not that the production here 
. . . Whoopi Goldberg’s not standing on the corner. It’s not . . . 
We’re not Hollywood, Mr. Speaker. And at the end of the day 
this hasn’t delivered what it’s been promised. 
 
What we have seen is we’ve seen that often — more often than 
not — the sound stage is being utilized by Minds Eye Pictures. 
This is another example, Mr. Speaker, of where the provincial 
government attempts in another industry to pick winners and 
losers. By their own admissions this film company, which does 
utilize the sound stage, has taken cash injections from the 
provincial government of up to $6 million and by their own 
admissions, they’re still having problems with their cash flow 
and recouping this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this gets to the larger point on the nature of the 
economy and the role that the government should be playing in 
it. Centrally planned economies — and it’s no different in the 
film and video industry — are not working. Even the attempts, 
Mr. Speaker, with tax credits of 35 per cent to allow production 
costs to be decreased, which we support, at the other side of it, 
having direct cash inputs into certain production companies 
over others, that is a failure for the industry. And it causes 
larger problems for the long-term viability of the industry. 
 
As I said before, it’s not as well with regards to the sound stage. 
There are other sound stages in Canada. Winnipeg has one; so 
does Edmonton and Vancouver and Toronto. And they’re all 
vying for the same piece of the pie. So before Regina’s sound 
stage was built, we had a very competitive industry. The tax 
credit attempts to address some of this but unfortunately, in the 
film and video production industry, tax credits alone are not 
going to be the end and deciding factor of where production 
occurs. There’s other factors as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other factors would include the talent that’s locally 
available, local production crews, and the infrastructure as a 
whole. It’s not surprising to see, Mr. Speaker, in the United 
States that it’s Hollywood, California and New York City in 
New York which have the bulk of the television and movie 
production. And as far as the other amenities that those centres 
are able to provide, it’s very easy for the film industry to get 
whatever type of support it requires. 
 
It makes it duly difficult for Regina to be competing — and this 
should have been known before the investment was put forth — 
with these other Canadian centres, some of which have larger 
population bases. And by that, they have other services that 
make it more difficult for a smaller centre to be providing on 
par with. And it would have been helpful had the New 
Democratic government looked into this prior to the monies that 
they put forth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day we are supportive of the tax 
credit to legislation. We recognize, as I said before, the 
importance of the film and video industry to our province. And 
I do believe that there are some other members from this side of 
the House which wish to speak to this Bill. 
 

What we would like to end on, though, is we’d like to say we 
do not think it is correct in this industry that the New 
Democratic Party government insist on picking winners and 
losers in the film and video industry, with their investments in 
Minds Eye, their $6 million worth of taxpayers’ money which is 
gone and really isn’t accounted for in a great way. And that is 
very problematic. 
 
Based on these principles, Mr. Speaker, I find it necessary to 
adjourn debate and I move . . . I make a motion to that end. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 32 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment 
Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The press release 
announcing the, not only the measures in Bill 32 and Bill 33, 
was issued by the government by the Minister of Corrections 
and Public Safety on May 9 of this year. 
 
And as you go through the press release and then of course go 
through the actual pieces of legislation you find, Mr. Speaker, 
that fundamentally these two pieces of legislation are not only 
important to the province in light of the recent world events — 
in that they are intended to allow the government to react 
effectively and quickly to any threats of public safety and 
security, including terrorism — so you find that it’s not only a 
very, very important issue, but you find, Mr. Speaker, once you 
read the legislation, that at least on the surface the initiative 
seems to be positive indeed. Now we will be looking at this Bill 
carefully in committee and asking specific questions on a clause 
by clause basis to make sure that it’s as good as it can be, but on 
the surface it looks very positive. 
 
But I’ll tell you why we’re a little bit concerned even at that, 
Mr. Speaker, because this particular minister, prior to becoming 
the minister of public safety and security, was the minister of 
Energy in the province of Saskatchewan, and last spring about 
now introduced a very positive measure as well. He introduced 
the government’s policy on ethanol, which the opposition 
supported because he committed to no public money being used 
to develop the ethanol industry. 
 
But what happened in that case, Mr. Speaker, is that minister 
was overruled and outranked by the current minister of 
Intergovernmental Relations. He was overruled by the then 
minister of Industry, who is in turn risking taxpayers’ dollars in 
a number of ethanol-proposed projects around the province. 
 
So we’re a little concerned with respect to these Bills. We think 
they’re positive but the last time that minister issued a press 
release to talk and introduce a positive initiative that the 
opposition could support, he was overruled by the minister 
responsible for SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company). 
 
(11:30) 
 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

Maybe that won’t happen any more on this particular Bill — on 
Bill 32 and 33 — maybe that won’t happen because now it 
would seem that the Minister of Public Safety outranks the 
minister of Intergovernment Relations after his demotion in the 
wake of the SPUDCO scandal. So we have that hope, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some of the specific measures in this Bill, some of the specific 
measures in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, including . . . include 
changes to The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act, so that 
the government of this province can keep a . . . even a better 
handle on the charitable activities and fundraising activities in 
this province, ensuring that those activities are not being 
undertaken for something untoward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also deals with The Clean Air Act and 
makes changes there with respect to the potential for acts of 
terrorism with respect to the environment; it raises fines in 
terms of imprisonment for that. And, Mr. Speaker, dangerous 
goods are addressed, The Dangerous Goods Transportation Act 
is addressed also by this Act, as is The Department of Health 
Act, The Emergency Planning Act. 
 
And there are several other amendments that really do provide, 
I think, the government with the flexibility and the authority 
that it needs in the post 9/11 world to ensure the safety of the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cypress Hills on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to the members of the House assembled here 
today, I’d like to introduce a good-looking group of people in 
the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 30 students from the 
community of Burstall are with us today, as well as 16 adults — 
a number of teachers and parent chaperones. 
 
And I want to say that Burstall is the community that is furthest 
west in my constituency, and it’s a community that I have come 
to appreciate a great deal. I have family that lived in the Burstall 
area some years ago and I used to visit there when I was a 
youngster. And when I came back — that’d be 20 years later or 
something like that — when I came back, I found that it was a 
growing community, a very productive community, a 
prosperous community, and a very attractive community. 
 
And I’d like to welcome this group of students to the legislature 
and their adult companions today. And I just want to say thank 
you for coming. I had an opportunity to talk to them and answer 
some questions on the steps of the legislature earlier. And 
they’ve made a real effort; they got up early this morning to 
come. 
 
And I’d like to welcome them here today. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security 
Management) Amendment Act, 2003 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join with my friend, the MLA for Cypress Hills, in welcoming 
the group from southwest Saskatchewan here to the legislature 
today. 
 
We’re debating at the second reading stage the Bill No. 32, 
which we’ve already indicated, Mr. Speaker, that in principle 
we can support because this Bill seeks to again increase the 
ability and the authority of the government to protect our 
province from, in terms of public safety and security, including 
from acts of terrorism. My colleague from Cannington says we 
need legislation to protect the people of the province, to protect 
them from their government perhaps. But that’ll happen after 
the next election this fall. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are some specific questions that we will 
have for the minister at the Committee of the Whole level stage 
of debate and we intend to ask those. But at this point, Mr. 
Speaker, we are prepared to see the Bill move through to 
committee deliberations. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 33 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment 
Act, 2003 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (gestion de la sécurité) de 
2003 (no 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Lest it ever be said by 
anybody in this province that the official opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party, does not provide constructive and 
informed opposition and support where it’s necessary, these last 
two Bills, Mr. Speaker, are going to prove those people wrong. 
 
Because once again we have a Bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 33 
that is a good measure for the province of Saskatchewan. It 
relates exactly to Bill No. 32 in terms of the government 
ensuring the security of people. And so twice, consecutively, 
we stand to say we support the Minister of Public Safety, unlike 
his colleague, the member for P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote 
who too often overrules him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we want to say something else. We 
want to say something else, Mr. Speaker. These two particular 
Bills prove once again unequivocally in the province of 
Saskatchewan that even the blindest squirrel can find a nut 
every now and then, Mr. Speaker. Because these are 
constructive and important changes. 
 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

 

And as this relates specifically to the security issues that we 
spoke of in Bill 32, although this deals with identity fraud — 
another important issue in the wake of 9/11 — I just want to 
indicate to the members of the House today that we would like 
to see this Bill moved into Committee of the Whole where we 
can ask specific questions of the minister. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 29 — The 
Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 
modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to be 
able to stand in the House and speak on a piece of legislation 
that I think is very worthwhile and necessary in this day and age 
of litigious attitudes to be honest with you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the information we’ve got on this Act — it’s Bill 
No. 29, an Act to amend The Non-profit Corporations Act, 
1995 — the information we’ve got before us is I think overdue 
and certainly timely if not overdue. This deals with the officers 
and directors of non-profit corporations and whether or not they 
can be sued as a result of their efforts in the line of duty as 
directors and officers. 
 
And what we’re finding, Mr. Speaker, is that in a lawsuit-happy 
world, people who give their time voluntarily to make a variety 
of organizations operate to the benefit of all of society, directors 
and officers are often subjected to lawsuits and frivolous legal 
action that would deter them from doing their job. And frankly, 
Mr. Speaker, as we move forward in our society, it’s going to 
be more important for this kind of legal protection all the time. 
 
You know it’s an interesting situation that we find ourselves in, 
in the province of Saskatchewan. We have as a people, as a 
province, an extremely envious reputation as a province of 
volunteers. Volunteerism in this province is unequalled 
anywhere else in this country. And I think that we can look at 
that situation with a considerable amount of pride. 
 
You know a little earlier, Mr. Speaker, I introduced to the 
House a group of students and a number of adults who 
accompanied them from the community of Burstall. And those 
students wouldn’t have the benefit of this educational 
opportunity, this visit, without the voluntary action and 
assistance of the teachers and the parents who accompanied 
them. 
 
And although this is not a formal organization and there aren’t 
directors and officers involved in this particular activity, it 
represents the willingness of the people of this province to 
participate for the common good. 
 
And certainly in our communities of far-flung rural areas, small 
communities throughout the province of Saskatchewan, and I 
know specifically in my own constituency, there are literally 
thousands and thousands and thousands of man-hours, of person 

hours, given to voluntary projects that would not happen 
without the willingness of the people in those communities to 
participate at their time and expense. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation goes a 
long way to recognizing the importance of that work and the 
need to be protected against frivolous legal action. 
 
Just to refer to a few more details and specifics about how 
important the voluntary sector is to the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 47 per cent of people over the age 
of 15 reported participating in some form of voluntary work in 
their communities right here in the province of Saskatchewan 
— 47 per cent of people over the age of 15. 
 
Communities couldn’t begin to pay for the work that is done by 
volunteers in these myriad of projects that we benefit by. And 
we need to recognize that, I think, and celebrate that on a 
regular basis. I know it’s become almost trite to talk about it 
and we don’t want to, I suppose, pat ourselves on the back for 
good works, but nevertheless when you have a participation 
level as significant as we have here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, it ought to be recognized. 
 
There was some information provided for me, Mr. Speaker, by 
one of our researchers. They went to the Sask Culture Web site 
and we found out from that Web site that Sask Culture’s 
volunteers provide over $35.4 million of unpaid labour to 
maintain cultural activity in the province. That’s estimated . . . 
If you worked that out on a per hour basis, I think that would 
work out to about $6 an hour, according to a 1997 national 
survey. 
 
And the interesting thing about the statistics I just presented to 
you, Mr. Speaker, is that Sask Culture’s volunteers account for 
only about one-half of all the reported voluntary activity that’s 
undertaken in this province. So we can see the magnitude of the 
sector, and speak to the importance of the sector in our 
provincial society and economy. 
 
When you stop to think about the dramatic numbers associated 
with volunteerism in the province of Saskatchewan, you can 
see, Mr. Speaker, why civil lawsuits could have a devastating 
impact on non-profit organizations and could discourage people 
from sitting on boards and getting involved in the running of so 
many of these voluntary organizations. 
 
Now what this piece of legislation does, Mr. Speaker, is it 
protects directors and officers of non-profit corporations from 
civil action for any losses suffered by any person as a result of 
carrying out his or her duties on these non-profit corporation 
boards unless of course, you know, the action was a result of 
fraudulent or criminal misconduct. And you can’t make 
exceptions for those types of activities and they do crop up from 
time to time. 
 
We’ve seen some incidents reported in the newspaper where 
people have abused their position of trust and have taken 
advantage of the organization they work for and have deceived 
or fraudulently benefited from some of their activities. And that 
still is subject to prosecution, as it ought to be. But for those 
people who are serving in good-will capacities in good faith, 
and something happens that is beyond their control, they should 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

not be liable for legal action by disgruntled parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation is important to 
me personally because I have sat as a person on a board, as a 
director on a board of a non-profit corporation and have been 
warned through various means of how important it is to be 
scrupulous and very careful about the way you conduct the 
business of the organization that you represent. And I think it 
was advice well given, certainly well intentioned, and only the 
foolish would not heed such good advice. 
 
But this particular piece of legislation will also protect a 
director or officer from a non-profit corporation seeking to 
recover damages that may be awarded if the director or officer 
is not liable. 
 
And this particular legislation, as I said at the outset, is very 
appropriate, very timely, and I think will be well received by 
people involved with these types of organizations throughout 
the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to adjourn debate . . . 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(11:45) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce any 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right I have Brent Cotter, who’s the deputy 
minister of Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Immediately behind me is Donavon Young, who is the assistant 
deputy minister of Aboriginal Affairs. Next to him is, to his 
right is Wanda Lamberti, executive director, finance and 
management services. To her right is Curtis Talbot, who is the 
executive director of First Nations land resources. And further 
back is Paul Osborne, who’s the assistant deputy minister of 
trade and international relations. 
 
Have I got everybody? Oh, and I’m sorry, next to Deputy 
Minister Cotter is Al Hilton, and Al is the assistant deputy 
minister of federal-provincial relations. 
 
The Chair: — I understand we have a triumvirate of ministers 
so if the other . . . We may as well introduce all the officials 
first go and then we’re done with introductions. So I’d 
recognize minister number two. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I hope I’m correct in my 
assessment of who’s here, Mr. Chair, but . . . or Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But I have with me today Florent Bilodeau, the 

director of the office of French-language co-ordination. Florent 
is seated at the back. And as well, Michael Jackson, the 
executive director of protocol and honours for the province, and 
Michael is seated directly behind me. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize minister number three. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Being number 
three, my officials at this point in time are seated in the back. 
And towards the back of the chairs, the benches, the deputy 
minister of Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs, Brent 
Cotter, has already been introduced. 
 
Wanda Lamberti, who is the executive director of finance and 
management services; Larry Steeves, who’s the associate 
deputy minister, municipal relations; Doug Morcom, who is a 
director of grants administration; Russ Krywulak, who is the 
executive director of grants administration and provincial 
municipal relations; and Mr. John Edwards, who is our 
executive director of policy development. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Deputy Chair. Mr. Chair. I 
just want to take a moment to welcome the minister and all the 
officials, actually the ministers and all the officials that are here 
with us today to provide some answers to our questions. 
 
My first line of questioning is going to be directed to the 
Aboriginal Affairs minister. And, Mr. Minister, in this year’s 
estimates, under the heading, support for Aboriginal 
organizations and issues, there will be an estimated increase of 
$175,000. 
 
Could the minister please explain to me where this estimated 
increase would be spent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
enhancements to the funds are $125,000 for the implementation 
of the FSIN bilateral accord enhancement; $50,000 to the 
enhancement of Aboriginal Employment Development 
Program, AEDP — and you’ll be aware of that program — 
expansion of sports network initiative, which is basically 
employment for Aboriginal kids in the summer. And that really 
is the enhancement for the funding. 
 
There’s been a shift of 25,000 from other areas of the 
department and that’s the total incremental of 175,000. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, treaty land 
entitlement is going to see, according to the estimates, an 
estimated increase of $1.1 million in its budget for the coming 
fiscal year. Could the minister explain why that increase is 
taking place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Okay, this is related to the land 
settlement for the Onion Lake Band, and this is tax loss 
compensation and the amount of $1.1 million that is paid to 
municipalities who are affected by the transfer. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the First 
Nations, the gaming agreement has an estimated increase to the 
budget for this fiscal year of $4.49 million. Is this increase a 
result of the new gaming agreement signed last year? If not, 
why is there an increase in this line item? 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That number reports an increase in 
a revised profit estimate for gaming. The variance is $4.49 
million. The new budget for 2003-2004 would be 28.704 
million estimated, over the 24,214 estimated for the 2002-2003 
year. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could you 
tell me whether or not there will be an increase in funding for 
the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan or to the Clarence Campeau 
Development Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The amount is held steady this year 
from last year. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have 
some questions that are a bit interrelated between the 
department of Social Services and Aboriginal Affairs, and 
certainly would be of consequence to both departments. So I’m 
going to attempt to ask you these questions. And if it’s possible 
for you to answer them, I would appreciate it. 
 
Can the minister please explain to me what role the department 
plays, the Department of Aboriginal Affairs plays in renting 
houses to First Nations people on reserves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The department nor the government 
have any role in that regard. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just needed to clarify 
that for sure. Some residents in northern Saskatchewan have 
indicated to some of our members that they wish to purchase 
their homes. So I wanted to know what programs the 
government has in place, either on its own or in partnership 
with other organizations such as Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corp., to enable these northern residents to do that very thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by my 
officials that this off-reserve housing for Aboriginal people 
would be the responsibility of Community Resources and 
Employment, under what was formerly the Housing 
Corporation. 
 
And I’m, you know, I’m certainly not trying to shift an answer 
to another department. But my officials aren’t responsible for 
that so therefore wouldn’t have the information that you 
require. But certainly the Minister of Community Resources 
and Employment would be able to answer that question for you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I kind of expected that 
that might be the case but I wanted to ask you anyway. 
 
Mr. Minister, at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) convention on March 11, 2003, the Minister for 
Government Relations spoke to the SARM delegates and 
mentioned that there was a partnership between the provincial 
government and SARM that would provide Aboriginal, I 
believe it’s Aboriginal people — but I’m not too sure if it was 
Aboriginal youth — professional development training. There 
was a . . . I’m just trying to find out what this is all about. 
 
There was a steering committee that was struck to assist, I guess 
assist financially and with resources, Aboriginal people in their 
hopes to have some professional development training in 

electronic services. So I’m just wondering what that program is 
about. And I’m wondering if that program is being offered for 
Aboriginal people on-reserve as well as non-reserve residents, 
and how is the training being delivered? 
 
(12:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — If I could, Mr. Chairman, I would 
hope to attempt to clarify the question . . . or the response to the 
question. And I believe what the minister would have been 
responding to would have been the relationship between the 
government and the RMs (rural municipality) in terms of 
training and advancing the ability for not only Aboriginal but 
non-Aboriginal applicants for these job opportunities. 
 
The work that we would do within the department would be 
through the Aboriginal Employment Development Program that 
you may be aware of. It’s a partnership between Aboriginal 
Affairs and the different entities who have signed on. 
 
We just announced yesterday that SUMA has an agreement in 
terms of enhancing employment opportunities for Aboriginal 
people. I think the program, it’s fair to say, could be responsible 
for somewhere in the neighbourhood of 1,500 jobs through that 
program. 
 
The municipal leaders development program I think might have 
been what he was referring to, which would deal with training 
for municipal officials, elected officials, administrators. And I 
think it’s also fair to say that other officials, Aboriginal 
officials, are welcome to attend the sessions. And the sessions 
do start this fall as I understand it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, the minister I was referring to is sitting only a couple 
of seats down from you and I was . . . I thought what he was 
saying at the SARM convention was that there was . . . this 
program was targeted towards assisting Aboriginal people in 
being able to train for electronics, in the electronics services 
area. 
 
And the indication at SARM was that this was an initiative that 
was going to be, I guess, cost shared between SARM and 
provincial government. I’m not sure even if it was cost sharing 
but it was certainly a promotion of this between the two. And so 
the message that I got from that, that there would be training for 
Aboriginal people. 
 
And so I’m wondering if that was the correct message or if the 
message’s more according to what you have mentioned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — As you refer to the cost sharing, I 
think that would lead us to believe that the remarks were 
focused on the municipal development . . . or leaders 
development program. And we would be more than willing to 
expand on an explanation of what it is, how it’s funded, as it 
related to the minister’s remarks and how it relates to this 
program. Okay. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
appreciate some more details on the program because there is 
question coming from some Aboriginal people — off-reserve as 
well as on-reserve — whether or not they would qualify for this 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

type of programming. So I appreciate your answers. 
 
I have some more in-depth questions that may result in some 
debate and I’m going to withhold those questions until the next 
time that we may sit here because I have a colleague of mine 
that would like to submit some questions to the appropriate 
minister on Intergovernmental Affairs. And I thank you very 
much for your answers. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, obviously 
the last couple of days we’ve had pressing issues and urgent 
issues on our minds in regards to the BSI situation and trying to 
identify I guess if it’s a situation that’s only provincial issues or 
if it’s an issue that’s across, you know, across Western Canada 
as well. 
 
We’re seeing now that not only in Saskatchewan but Alberta 
and British Columbia have got farms that are being quarantined 
as well. We’re also realizing that the fallout has come quite 
quickly in the sense of closing the doors to imports of beef 
product, and those seem to be growing from day to day with 
some of the countries that are closing their doors. 
 
The European Union has made a comment and a statement that 
they feel quite confident in what’s happening within our 
country and that’s quite . . . that’s a positive indicator in I guess 
the efficiency of being able to identify the meat product that we 
have in this country. 
 
But I would like the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs to 
maybe talk a little bit about his involvement in the fact of the 
international impact that this has on our agriculture industry: 
how he personally has been involved and how his officials have 
been involved and how he feels that the work that needs to be 
done on the level of the federal concept as well as the provincial 
concept, that we need to work with this issue and work with the 
situation, and how we can alleviate that problem to reopen those 
doors and opportunities for the beef industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can say to the 
member that the officials have been actively engaged with our 
federal counterparts in Ottawa. As you will know, the Minister 
of Agriculture and Food on behalf of the province of 
Saskatchewan, has been the lead minister on this file as it 
relates directly to an industry that is very much related to 
agriculture. 
 
I can say to the member that I will be speaking with Stéphane 
Dion, who is my federal counterpart, on Monday. We haven’t 
set yet a time for that. 
 
As well, the Western premiers have been engaged in 
Canada/US (United States) trade issues, as you will know. And 
the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs works with the 
Premier’s office as part of that. And I would suggest, given the 
events of the last few days, that the BSI issue will be very much 
brought to the top of the list of things that we will be 
discussing. 
 
Hopefully the issue will be better understood, there will be 
more light shed, more clarification in the coming days as the 
federal administration works towards a better understanding in 
an attempt to get to the bottom of this issue. Because as you 

will know, the impact of trade as it relates to the beef industry is 
not inconsequential not only for Saskatchewan but for Canada 
in that it is a very, very large part of our trade. And so it’s very 
much on the top of the minds of officials within our department 
or within our government. 
 
And I would want to say that there’s been some very close 
co-operation with Saskatchewan, with the Western provinces 
who are impacted, and the federal administration. And it will be 
. . . I’m looking forward to my discussions on Monday with my 
federal counterpart because it is a very important issue to us as 
a province and us as a government. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, I guess we recognize and realize the impact it’s going 
to have on the entire industry in that respect. And I guess we’re 
not only concerned in talking about the producers, the ranchers, 
as well it’s impacting obviously the stockyards; the slaughtering 
plants have been closing down. The trucking industry is being 
impacted as well. And I think the sense of having some 
indication of what type of a time frame that we may be looking 
at to . . . having to deal with this issue and the amount of, I 
guess, days or weeks or months that may impact this entire 
industry is, I think, a real issue that we need to understand. 
 
If the minister can make some comment in the sense of what 
type of a timing situation we’ve got here. Are we talking about 
this being tied up for a lengthy period of time or is this 
something that we can have at some expediency on, to try and 
get these doors opened up again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member, 
I think it’s fair to say that this is very much, for us as a 
province, it’s very much a priority of this government because 
we do recognize the impact. 
 
I can tell you as well that the Premier has been involved. He has 
met with Minister Goodale, the cabinet minister from our 
province who represents Saskatchewan in the federal 
government. I can tell you as well that the Premier is 
communicating with the Prime Minister as it relates to this 
issue. 
 
I think at this point it’s difficult to determine the time frame in 
which this whole issue can come to resolution but I can concur 
with what you say in terms of the impact, the potential impact 
on industry — not only the production of cattle, but the whole 
industry that supports this, the packing industry. 
 
So it is important to us; it’s important to Saskatchewan’s 
economy in particular. At a time where we’re attempting to 
work with the producers to expand the livestock industry here 
in our province, it certainly creates some uncertainty at this 
point. 
 
I am confident that the work that will be done by the officials 
who are looking at this will bring this to a conclusion and that 
we will be able to satisfy the concerns of those to whom we 
export beef, which is a large part of this industry. It’s certainly, 
as you will know, not all domestic consumption. There’s a 
concern that we need to, we need to find the solutions and find 
the base and the root of this as soon as we can. 
 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

 

And we are putting all the resources that is required, from the 
Premiers office on down, to ensure that we do our part as a 
province to come to a resolve sooner rather than later. I mean, 
time is, as you say, important. We need to restore these 
markets; we need to continue to build this industry. And so we 
are putting the required resources to the issue. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess, Mr. 
Minister, also in the area of the quarantined producers that are 
out there right now, there is that whole discussion of having to 
put down some of these animals and that whole area of 
compensation. And it may not be fair to ask you this question 
but, you know, I’ll raise it anyway and you can decide if you 
want to respond to it. 
 
In the sense of the compensation to the producers, you know, 
how these producers will be compensated, if it’s strictly a 
federal issue that deals with the compensation, if we’re going to 
see the provincial government involved somewhat as well to 
seeing that there’s adequate compensation going to these 
producers because we have commercial herds as well as 
full-blood herds as well being involved here. So is there some 
indication of the way that compensation may go with the 
producers that are going to see some of these animals being put 
down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, Mr. Chairman, I would like 
to respond in this way. The USDA (United States Department 
of Agriculture) and the CFIA will decide, I believe, the 
conclusion to this and it will be based on science. At this point I 
think it’s a little premature — we don’t know the scope, the 
magnitude. 
 
There are, as you will know, some existing programs in terms 
of financial support. But I think I would want to respond by 
saying at this time the issue of compensation and articulating 
options and opportunities that there may be would be premature 
until we know the scope and the magnitude of the problem. And 
that hopefully will be known based on science and based on 
scientific evidence, and hopefully that’ll be soon. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I’m 
just going to change direction a little bit here in the sense of 
talking a little bit about the imposed tariffs on grain duties. We 
have the Canadian Wheat Board which basically is the Western 
Canadian provinces that encompass the Canadian Wheat Board, 
and we’re the ones that are really impacted. And Saskatchewan 
is a huge producer of the wheat product in particular. And there 
was a 4 per cent levy and now we see another, an 8.15 on the 
Canadian wheats and durum, a 6.12 that’s gone on as well. 
 
Can the minister give us some indication on, and the 
involvement that he’s got and his department has been playing, 
in the sense of working with the tariffs that have been put on to 
the Canadian Wheat Board and the products that have been 
going across the line, and where some of this direction is going, 
and what are some of the results. And what are we seeing that’s 
going to be coming out of, I guess, initiatives and the actions 
that we’ve been taking, and particular this province has been 
taking to try and alleviate that problem, because it’s a huge 
impact to the producers of this province. 
 
(12:15) 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that 
the government certainly is disappointed with the actions taken 
by the Americans. This is the 10th attempt since 1990 to restrict 
access of Canadian wheat and durum exports. And as you will 
know, we all understand that the challenges are costly to defend 
and they’re disruptive to the industry. 
 
The province, its legal counsel, are going to continue to 
coordinate our response with the federal government, other 
provinces, and the Canadian Wheat Board by reviewing US 
findings, defending our domestic policies before trade panels 
and ultimately getting this decision reversed which has been 
done before. I think it’s fair to say that the Canadian Wheat 
Board has been under attack by Americans, and as a matter of 
fact, by some internal to this country. 
 
I would want to say, just looking at the actions taken by the 
United States, they’re particularly questionable given the new 
US farm Bill and the massive domestic support that they 
provide to their agricultural community. 
 
I think we have a very strong case to defend. We’ve done it 
before, and as I’ve said this has been ongoing, the 10th time 
now since 1990. Our officials and our legal counsel will 
continue to work with our federal counterparts to have these 
decisions turned around. And hopefully that’ll be soon. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess in that same 
area of discussion, it seems that the Canadian Wheat Board is 
the one that always seems to be attacked. The Ontario wheat 
board and the wheat board, you know on the eastern side of the 
province, and the British Columbia wheat board, they function 
and structured in a little different manner and they don’t seem 
to have the impact of concern for tariffs as such. 
 
You know, if the ministers have some interest in talking about I 
guess the structure of the Canadian Wheat Board . . . And I 
know that’s always been brought up in the sense of its structure 
and how it has control in marketing products which is quite 
different from the structure of the other boards that are out there 
right now as well. And if that needs to be a way or an area that 
needs, you know, we need to take a look at and have some open 
discussion on the sense of being able to have, I guess, the 
opportunity of marketing in different styles that allows the 
producer to move his product in some different ways as well, 
and we don’t become under that scrutiny all the time that the 
United States seems to have on the structure of the Canadian 
Wheat Board in itself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well let me, Mr. Chairman, 
respond to the member in this way. And I want to make it very 
certain that people understand, and that the agriculture 
community, that people across this country understand that we 
very much support the Canadian Wheat Board as a provincial 
administration. We support the benefits that it provides for our 
farmers. We support the process. And that’s not to say that there 
can’t be improvements to the way the Canadian Wheat Board 
does its business. I think administrations of that nature are 
always looking at ways in which they improve their 
efficiencies. 
 
I would want to say that the Canadian Wheat Board has faced 
this scrutiny, as I said, since 1990. And every challenge has 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2003 

 

been overturned. I think the vast majority of the farmers in 
Saskatchewan support what the Canadian Wheat Board does, 
support the way it markets their grain, and support the benefits 
that they provide, that the Canadian Wheat Board provides. And 
I know sometimes this becomes a matter of political discussion, 
a matter of political debate that what we are facing now, 
frankly, in my opinion, is a challenge that would happen 
irrespective of the Canadian Wheat Board’s operations. 
 
I think that there is a large lobby in the United States with . . . in 
the grain industry as there is in the softwood lumber industry. I 
think it’s fair to say that the attack on softwood lumber is as 
unfounded as the attack right now on the Canadian Wheat 
Board. And it’s unfortunate that the Americans have taken this 
position. 
 
We’ll use the legal opportunities and options that we have. 
We’ll continue to work with the federal government to ensure 
that these levies, these tariffs, are looked at in a fair way. And if 
it requires a third party review, certainly we would support that. 
 
But I would want to say that we very much as a government 
support the Canadian Wheat Board and the benefits that it 
brings to Saskatchewan farmers. And I think it’s fair to say that 
it will be found and it will be discovered that the levies that are 
imposed as it relates to durum and wheat will be reversed as 
they have been in the past. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess bringing up 
that discussion with the softwood lumber issue, I guess the 
question basically to be asked, you know what is the situation 
with the softwood lumber tariffs that are being put on right 
now? Can you give us a bit of an update of what’s been 
happening there, kind of where that whole thing is proceeding 
to, in kind of . . . Are there ongoing meetings, ongoing 
discussions? Are we finding that we’re making some headway 
on that whole area? Because it definitely has an impact to this 
province, maybe not as large as it impacted you know the 
British Columbias, but still it has got quite an impact to our 
industry as well. 
 
If the minister can maybe talk a little bit about that softwood 
lumber situation and kind of what’s been happening there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think, just to the 
member, you will know that just recently there was an 
announcement of a shutdown of one of our sawmills here in 
Saskatchewan, Carrot River, that and along with three other 
sawmills owned by Weyerhaeuser. And part of that is a result of 
the actions that have been taken by the Americans. 
 
We as a province are continuing to work with the federal 
government and the other provinces in terms of litigating 
against the US duties. At the same time we’re trying to 
negotiate a long-term solution to this issue. Recently Canada, 
the work by Canada and affected provinces, in Washington has, 
as I’m told, resulted in a set of forest policy reform guidelines 
that we, should we decide to adopt them, may lead to the US 
revoking at least part of the . . . at least the countervailing duty 
portion, which is about two-thirds of the existing tariff. 
 
You know and as I said earlier, I think there’s always ways that 
we can look at ways of doing business a little differently to 

satisfy some of these disputes. And I’m certainly hopeful that 
we can be looking at a resolve to the softwood lumber issue as 
we do with the wheat and the durum tariffs and levies that you 
have spoken and we have spoken of earlier. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And obviously, yes, 
it is very important that we get, you know, these tariffs looked 
after and dealt with as quickly as possibly and into the future as 
well. 
 
It’s always I guess a costly venture that we need to go back and 
revisit that situation, having to deal with it. And I guess the 
wheat tariffs are one that, like you’ve mentioned, we’ve been 
having to deal with those since the early ’90s and they just keep 
cropping up. It’s almost like they’re looking for a loophole that 
they can find and a way of getting into it to establish that there 
is some injustice there, that that becomes an avenue for them to 
start coming through. And hopefully that we can come up with 
some solution there that they can accept this on a long-term 
basis, that the structure that we have is acceptable as well. 
 
Mr. Chairman, just wanting to talk about the West Nile, I guess, 
situation right now. And if the Minister of Government 
Relations can talk a little bit about the program that’s being 
administered through SUMA and SARM and how that whole 
process is starting to come together? 
 
I know there was some, there were real problems in being able 
to identify where the application forms were going to come 
from, where the application forms were going to go, who they 
were being processed through as well, the dollars that they were 
eligible for is there as well on a population basis? Sometimes 
that becomes a little difficult to bring those municipalities 
together of need when you’re talking to 2,000 or 2,500 people 
and you get into some rural situations where you’ve got to go 
quite afield to bring that amount of people together. 
 
And you’ve got some areas in the rural sector as well that are 
needing some support. They’re needing some help to, you 
know, to fight the situation as well. And if you can’t become 
eligible because you don’t have the population, you still have 
the problem. 
 
Can you maybe speak about this a little bit on the sense of how 
that whole process is going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the 
member, I appreciate the question and we will do whatever we 
can to obtain the information and look into the very specific 
questions you’ve asked. As you will appreciate, and I’m sure 
you’re aware, it is in fact a Health file but we have been 
working closely with our friends in the municipalities. 
 
The question that you raise with respect to population numbers 
that may be required to access some of the funding is an 
important one, and perhaps now brings to . . . into perspective 
the potential for neighbouring communities on an application 
basis to apply involving neighbouring communities that may in 
fact make up the numbers that may be required. I offer that as 
an observation because that may be one of the considerations 
under the application process. 
 
But as I pointed out, it is a Health file that we will follow up 



May 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

 

with answers to the specific questions, application forms, and 
the other inquiries that you had earlier in your question. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, through to 
the minister. I think it’s very important to appreciate and realize 
that the criteria of 2,500, you know, basis for population 
becomes quite challenging when you get into the rural sector. 
And I guess if we take a look at the rural communities, there’s a 
lot of those rural communities that just won’t qualify. For them 
to bring 2,500 people together for a population base becomes 
quite a challenge, if it’s even possible. 
 
Would the minister take a look at that criteria with the Minister 
of Health to see if you can I guess allow for some opportunity 
for some of the smaller communities and some of the rural 
communities out there, and even the rural RMs, that they can 
find a way of qualifying for their need that actually is out there? 
 
And I know you’re using mosquito traps and such to identify if 
those actual mosquitoes are out there that are carrying the virus. 
And if there’s a way of identifying there’s some absolute need, 
I think we need to address the opportunity of being able to 
provide that offsetting funding, you know, for those particular 
communities and municipalities as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the member, 
I just want to say that we all have a concern with respect to the 
West Nile virus issue. And it’s evident because we’ve involved 
people from various agencies to become involved in looking at 
the whole picture. 
 
We’ve involved the medical professionals for advice and the 
criteria that’s been set out for the program that we’re talking 
about. As I mentioned, if there’s a potential for smaller 
communities to apply on the basis of — I don’t like to use the 
word regionalization because it makes it sound such a massive 
area — but in those areas where there are smaller communities 
and a population base within the rural municipalities that may 
make up the numbers to qualify under the program, that will 
certainly be looked at. 
 
But I can assure the member, Mr. Chair, that there is a sincere 
concern about doing whatever we can, working with whomever, 
with our, as I say, our good friends in the municipalities, with 
the medical professionals, and any other agency that may assist 
us in ensuring that we can take whatever adequate measures to 
assist and ensure the safety of all our citizens. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the 
officials for their support and move that the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:34. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Estevan Man Inducted into Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
 Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
 Athlete of the Month Award 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
 World Health Organization’s Tobacco Control Treaty 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
 Saskatchewan Athlete Wins Eddie Shore Award 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
 National Aboriginal Hockey Championships 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
 Cowessess Community Education Centre 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
 University of Saskatchewan Professor Honoured 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1189 
 High-speed Internet Service 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1190 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1190 
 Regional Highway Maintenance Centres 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1192 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1192 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1193 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1193 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1193 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1193 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1193 
 Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003/ 
    Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1196 
 Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1197 
 



 

 

 Bill No. 34 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2003 
  Dearborn ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1198 
 Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
 Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2)/ 
    Loi corrective (gestion de la sécurité) de 2003 (no 2) 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
 Bill No. 29 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2003/ 
    Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs — Vote 30 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1202 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................1202, 1206 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1204 
 


