















































Hansard: March 24, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 137 
 March 24, 2003 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
continue my speech concerning the Throne Speech debate. I 
would like to take this opportunity now to congratulate the two 
new members that were recently elected, the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview and my colleague and seatmate, the 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife. Congratulations to both of 
you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to just continue on. I held a number 
of open houses around my constituency, and this one gentleman 
by the name of Clarence Williams from Borden, Saskatchewan 
. . . He’s a retired farmer, but still active I believe on his farm 
and certainly active in his community. And we discussed many 
issues, and he put it in a letter form and I would like to just 
speak to and about what his letter says about his feelings about 
the problems in this province which the — I think you would 
agree and the people of Saskatchewan would agree — the 
Throne Speech does not address. 
 
The number one point is revenue sharing from the province has 
decreased every year since 1997, and as we know that has been 
a big item in this province concerning the school boards and 
municipal governments in Saskatchewan. Of course, part of that 
is the loss of elevators has reduced the tax base in this province. 
He speaks of SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) rates having been increased dramatically. 
 
The fourth item is policing costs has increased as well. 
Naturally we all know about the energy rates for villages . . . 
have increased dramatically over the last few years. He also 
goes on to speak to the school tax increasing for everyone, 
especially farmers in this province. And he said that there 
should be a rebate on provincial or Crown lands used for 
grazing when the number of cattle is restricted due to drought 
when the grass is suffering. 
 
And one other item he mentioned is just recently . . . was made 
compulsory for villages to have a secretary with a certificate, 
and he says the municipal governments can’t afford them. And 
he signs the letter on behalf of small villages and farmers, 
Clarence Williams, from Borden, Saskatchewan. 
 
So this gentleman and the people at the meeting were well 
aware of all the concerns that are really hurting rural 
Saskatchewan, small town Saskatchewan, the farmers and 
business people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One item, Mr. Speaker, that is . . . the Throne Speech speaks to 
is concerning the infrastructure program that the government 

lays out in the Throne Speech in such glowing terms. And I’d 
just like to read a letter from the Canadian-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program, CSIP, to Ms. Pam McMahon, 
administrator, village of Perdue. It’s: 
 

Dear Ms. McMahon, 
 
The CSIP Project Review Committee has now received 
your municipality’s project proposal. 
 
While your proposal was an important project for your 
municipality, and eligible under the program, the 
committee members were unable to recommend any 
financial assistance. The committee determined there was a 
greater need to fund other projects with the available 
funding based on the information provided in the 
application and supporting documentation. 

 
The letter goes on to say: 
 

Thank you for participating in this year’s 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program, however, 
since the CSIP is a multi-year program, we encourage your 
municipality to apply again next year. We anticipate that 
we will be mailing applications of the above program for 
the next fiscal year to all municipalities in July. Sincerely, 
Terry Gibson, Federal Co-Chair, and Russ Krywulak, 
Provincial Co-Chair. 

 
And I’d just like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this is the third 
year in a row that the village of Perdue has applied for the 
infrastructure program. It’s the third year in a row they’ve 
applied because of the drastic situation of their water and 
sewage infrastructure that is deteriorating. They’ve made many 
stop-gap procedures which have cost considerable amount of 
money, and now waiting for this infrastructure program to come 
through. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they have been told that this infrastructure 
money would be coming this year, and now they get an official 
letter saying that the program does not . . . they do not fall 
within the criteria of the program. This leaves this village in a 
desperate situation, Mr. Speaker. And again, I’m sure they will 
apply again for the fourth year in a row. But unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, this village cannot go on and continue on without 
making some changes in their drinking water and their sewage 
facilities. It’s getting to be a very serious concern for all of 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to touch briefly on the Kyoto 
Protocol. As the new environment critic, this is one of my first 
opportunities to speak on this area, and I’d like to just make 
some comments about the Saskatchewan Party position on 
Kyoto. 
 
As you may well remember, the Saskatchewan Party made an 
amendment to the NDP resolution on Kyoto. And the 
Saskatchewan Party had supported the 12 principles adopted by 
the provinces and territories as the basis for negotiating a 
made-in-Canada, made-in-Saskatchewan plan to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions that balances the important goal of 
protecting the environment with the equally critical need to get 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

Saskatchewan’s economy growing again. And I think it’s very 
important that we have to have that right balance between 
economic growth and sustainable environment and both go 
hand in hand because it is very important that we keep our 
environment for our children and our grandchildren’s future. 
 
Specifically, the principles are that all Canadians must have an 
opportunity for full and informed input into the development of 
the plan. The plan must ensure that no region or jurisdiction 
shall be asked to bear an unreasonable share of the burden and 
no industry, sector, or region shall be treated unfairly. The costs 
and impacts on individuals, businesses, and industries must be 
clear, reasonable, achievable, and economically sustainable. 
The plan must incorporate appropriate federally funded 
mitigation of the adverse impacts of climate change initiatives. 
 
Number three, the plan must respect provincial and territorial 
jurisdiction; number four, the plan must include recognition of 
real emission reductions that have been achieved since 1990 or 
will be achieved thereafter. 
 
The plan must provide, Mr. Speaker, for bilateral and 
multilateral agreements between provinces and territories and 
with the federal government. The plan must ensure that no 
province or territory bears the financial risk of federal climate 
change commitments. The plan must recognize the benefits 
from assets such as forests and agricultural sinks must accrue to 
the province and territory which owns the assets — and I’d like 
to come back to this point a little later. The plan must support 
innovation and new technology. The plan must maintain 
economic competitiveness of Canadian business and industry, 
and Canada must continue to demand recognition of clean 
energy exports. The plan must include incentives for all 
citizens, communities, businesses, and jurisdictions to make the 
shift to an economy based on renewable and other clean energy, 
lower emissions, and sustainable practices across sectors. 
 
And the last point, Mr. Speaker, the implementation of any 
climate change plan must include incentive allocation system 
that supports lower carbon emission sources of energy such as 
hydroelectricity, wind power generation, ethanol, and 
renewable and other clean sources of energy. 
 
And just in closing, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out an article 
in the Leader-Post, Wednesday, March 19, with Kevin Hursh’s 
comments on the federal government’s really lack of interest in 
allowing carbon sinks, agriculture carbon sinks to be used for 
the benefit of an individual farmer or a region or province. The 
federal government looks like it wants to take the credit and the 
benefit on a Canada-wide basis, and this is something that we 
must definitely not support, we must argue against. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I will not be 
supporting the motion and I will be supporting the amendment 
to the motion that was presented by the Leader of the Official 
Opposition from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, at the outset, I just want to 
wish you well during the course of the coming session. I know 
how difficult your job can be, to keep order and to keep the 
members debating on point and on the subject. And so I wish 

you well in these coming days and weeks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to also, at the outset, congratulate the two new members 
of the Legislative Assembly — the member for Battleford-Cut 
Knife and the member for Saskatoon Mayfair. Both are 
members who have a distinguished record of community 
service in their own communities. I think they will acquit 
themselves well. I think they will add to public debate and to 
the formation of public policy in our province, Mr. Speaker. So 
I want to wish both members well in their terms of service, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I also want to recognize the contribution made by the mover of 
the motion in support of the Throne Speech, the member for 
Cumberland. As he was speaking, or as he was finishing, I was 
struck by two things, Mr. Speaker. One, that, you know, it’s 
some ways unfortunate that he speaks both in English and Cree 
because it seems to limit the amount of contribution that he can 
really make to the Legislative Assembly because he’s in a sense 
making two speeches, one in each of the languages. So I wish 
there had been more time to listen to his remarks. 
 
I was also struck by the fact that the member, who has been 
here since 1986, is and has been and will always continue to be 
a passionate, informed, articulate voice for the people of 
northern Saskatchewan and for Aboriginal people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I also want to recognize the contribution 
by the member for Regina Wascana Plains who has also made 
an informed and reasoned contribution to the Throne Speech 
debate as she seconded the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, in the few minutes that I 
have tonight, I would like to briefly discuss history in 
Saskatchewan. I’ve always been a student of history, Mr. 
Speaker, but there are some remarks in particular that cause me 
to have a renewed interest in the history of Saskatchewan, and 
this arises from the remarks made by the member for Swift 
Current exactly one year ago — well, maybe one year ago 
tomorrow — on March 25, 2002. And for those people who are 
at home and who wonder what it is that I’m talking about, they 
can always access the member’s remarks by going to the Web 
site for the Legislative Assembly, which is 
www.legassembly.sk.ca, and if they . . . once they get to the 
Web site, if they click on Hansard, Mr. Speaker, and then go to 
that date, March 25, 2002, and to page 266 of Hansard, they 
will see what it is that I’m talking about. 
 
The member talked in great terms about the history of 
Saskatchewan, and these remarks, I might say, were 
enthusiastically received and applauded by his colleagues. Now, 
what is it that he said, Mr. Speaker? What he said is that for 60 
years — 60 years — Saskatchewan has been heading in the 
wrong direction. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who said that? Who said that? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And that’s the member for Swift 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

 

Current. 
 
Now the basic points seem to be that because for 60 years we 
have chosen at times in Saskatchewan to do things collectively 
through government as opposed to a complete and total reliance 
on free enterprise, Saskatchewan is just in a terrible mess today. 
And that seems to be the thesis of the remarks delivered by the 
member for Swift Current and remarks that were also echoed to 
some extent this afternoon by the member for Wood River, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(19:15) 
 
And the member for Swift Current, Sask Party member, he said 
that this has been the case, that is that for 60 years we’ve had it 
wrong. He said that this has been the case. Now I want to quote 
him, and again people are free to go to the Hansard and to 
check out this quote. He said, quote: 
 

. . . (that this has been the case) on the economic side of 
government and on the . . .soft or social side of 
government. 

 
So just let me say that again. He said that for 60 years — 60 
years — Saskatchewan people have had it wrong and that this 
has been the case on the economic side of government and on 
the soft or social side of government. And these are the remarks 
that were wildly, enthusiastically applauded by the 
Saskatchewan Party opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what he’s saying in effect, too, is that Saskatchewan 
people have had it wrong for 60 years. He said that we have 
seen the same approach by all governments for these past 60 
years. Well I’ve got to say, Mr. Speaker, that one really hurts. I 
mean to be put in the same category as the Devine PCs 
(Progressive Conservative) — that one really hurts, Mr. 
Speaker. And I might say that’s what really got my attention. 
 
Incidentally, incidentally, Mr. Speaker, when the member for 
Swift Current is saying that, when the member for Swift 
Current is saying that, that you have to understand that this is 
self-serving, politically motivated comments to try and to put 
distance between the Sask Party and the Devine legacy that so 
many of them are associated with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to say that the NDP (New Democratic Party) shares the 
Devine legacy, well, Mr. Speaker, those are fighting words and 
I must say that I completely, totally reject their analysis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Now you have to remember, Mr. 
Speaker, that the member for Swift Current’s thesis is that for 
60 years Saskatchewan people have been voting to support, in 
the main, CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party) government. And oh yes, 
we saw one Liberal government, and we saw one Progressive 
Conservative government, but he bunches us all in. And he said 
that for 60 years Saskatchewan voters have been getting it 
wrong. The people of Saskatchewan have been getting it wrong, 
and that we have erred in Saskatchewan on the economic side 
of government and on the soft or social side of government. 
 

Now economically I take the position, Mr. Speaker, that we 
continue to do just fine, thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — That’s the position I take, Mr. Speaker. 
Not that the economy could not be improved, and we are 
always working hard to improve the economy and employment 
opportunities for young people. And that’s what the Throne 
Speech addresses in great detail, Mr. Speaker, and we will 
continue to do that. We could always do more with moisture 
and good crops and decent prices, but that’s not something that 
we control and even the Leader of the Sask Party opposition 
understands that and he speaks to that because he always 
qualifies anything he says by . . . well of course if we have good 
rain. 
 
But outside of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, our economy seems to 
be doing not too badly. Not too badly at all, Mr. Speaker. We 
continue to see excellent job growth. We continue to see, on a 
monthly basis, that we have higher numbers of employment in 
Saskatchewan as compared to the same month in a previous 
year, Mr. Speaker. That’s not the sign of a failing economy, Mr. 
Speaker. That is a sign of a strong economy. And you have to 
remember, you have to remember that this job growth in 
Saskatchewan — yes, job growth in Saskatchewan — is 
notwithstanding one major part of our economy that is 
seemingly crippled these last few years by drought, Mr. 
Speaker, where we see terrible problems on the farm. But 
notwithstanding that, in all other sectors of the economy, we 
continue to do just fine, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, in December I believe we 
had the highest percentage increase in job numbers of any 
province in the country — any province in the country. And we 
continue to have one of the lowest unemployment rates in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, and I understand that youth employment 
is at a 10-year high. 
 
By my reckoning too, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the mid-year 
financial statement and when I’ve been . . . In terms of 
following the debate between Saskatchewan and Canada when 
it comes to equalization matters, it seems to me that 
Saskatchewan is also poised to again become a have province, 
Mr. Speaker. That is to say, by way of explanation for the 
people at home, a province that does not receive equalization 
money from Ottawa. And people will remember that, that 
equalization money has been greatly reduced because of the 
strength of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
At this time there are two have provinces in Canada, provinces 
that do not receive equalization money from the federal 
government, and those two provinces are Ontario and Alberta, 
as opposed to the have-not provinces. And BC (British 
Columbia) is usually a have province but it’s not a have 
province today. 
 
Have provinces, Mr. Speaker, have provinces — that is to say, 
provinces who do not receive equalization money from Ottawa 
— are characterized by strong economies that are able to 
generate the needed tax revenues to support provincial 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

responsibilities such as health care, education, and highways, 
and what have you. On that basis, Saskatchewan has the third 
strongest economy in Canada, Mr. Speaker — the third 
strongest economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Now we’ve been in this position before 
of having have status, Mr. Speaker, but it points to one thing. 
It’s Saskatchewan . . . Saskatchewan at this point is again 
poised to, in my view, to become a have province. This means, 
Mr. Speaker . . . Not by us, but by all kinds of external criteria, 
criteria that we have no control over. Not the criteria that are 
put forward by the Sask Party opposition, but by external 
criteria in this country, we are regarded as having a very strong 
economy in the country of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And those are 
the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — So, Mr. Speaker, how is it then that we 
have had it wrong these last 60 years, economically speaking? 
How is it that we’ve had it wrong if others judge us — others 
judge us — as having one of the strongest economy in the 
country? 
 
Now the member for Swift Current says that, for the first time, 
and I want to quote him: 
 

(For) the . . . first time in 60 years that any political party 
has understood how we can grow this economy (Mr. 
Speaker ). 
 

Here he’s speaking of the Sask Party opposition that they, for 
the first time in 60 years . . . no one else in the last 60 years has 
understood anything about growing the economy. The only 
party that’s capable of growing the economy, the first time 
anyone’s understood this in 60 years is the Sask Party 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The first time. None have any 
experience in governing, but they understand. They know how 
to do it, Mr. Speaker. No experience but they know how to do 
it. Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the only comment I 
can make to the comment by the member for Swift Current . . . 
that this is the first time, and I want to quote him, in 60 years, 
that any political party has understood how we can grow the 
economy . . . their arrogance is not exceeded by anything that 
they have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, inevitably when they talk about the economy, they 
also talk about population. They say that because at times we’re 
losing population, that we have got it all wrong on this side, 
whereas they have it all right. They know what to do. They 
have a plan to change that. What they don’t say, Mr. Speaker, is 
that our population losses were the greatest — the greatest — in 

the last years of the failed Devine government, Mr. Speaker, the 
result of failed right-wing economics, Mr. Speaker; economics 
that so destabilized the Saskatchewan economy that no one had 
any confidence in the economy of Saskatchewan, and people 
refused to invest here, Mr. Speaker. Those are the facts of the 
situation. 
 
What they don’t say is that our population trends are the same 
as everywhere else on the Great Plains, whether it’s Canada or 
the USA (United States of America). 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very happy to attend this past year since we 
last convened last spring, to attend a meeting of the Midwest 
Legislative Conference, which is a conference of the Midwest 
states, the members of the state legislatures from the Midwest 
states and of which Saskatchewan is an associate member, I 
believe the term is. And we go to their conferences, not because 
there are great similarities in our political systems necessarily, 
but because we share great similarities when it comes to 
demographic and economic trends, Mr. Speaker. And that is 
one of the reasons that I’m very interested to attend a Midwest 
Legislative Conference because I feel that as a member of the 
legislature in the province of Saskatchewan, the world just 
doesn’t end or stop or begin at our borders, that we are part of a 
larger world. And in this case, we are part of the Great Plains of 
North America, and those Great Plains don’t stop at our border, 
and everything doesn’t change just because of our border. No, 
we are part of those Great Plains. 
 
And I was interested at the Midwest Legislative Conference to 
hear a presentation by Dr. Richard W. Rathge who is a doctor at 
North Dakota State University and he talked about the changing 
population profile of the Great Plains. And his abstract starts by 
saying, quote: 
 

The redistribution of population in the Great Plains has 
dramatically transformed the region’s landscape. The many 
rural towns and villages that once dotted the region are 
vanishing. These communities which flourished as trade 
centers for agriculture are depopulating as generations of 
young families move to larger cities. 

 
You know, when you hear that debate and you hear those 
comments by those members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and we 
hear them often, you would think that you’re only talking very 
narrowly about Saskatchewan. But this is a trend that affects all 
of the Great Plains region. This is not unique to Saskatchewan. 
This is something that’s happening across the piece in rural and 
agricultural Great Plains areas. This professor goes on to say: 
 

Population change in the Great Plains has followed a very 
consistent pattern over the last half century. 

 
Which is consistent with Saskatchewan where we have been 
seeing these declines in population since 1936. He goes on to 
say, quote: 
 

. . . the dominant flow of people is clearly from 
rural-to-urban. Researchers largely attribute this 
pronounced movement to agricultural restructuring brought 
on by technological advancements. 
 

And then he goes on to say, quote: 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

 

Technological advances in agriculture have dramatically 
increased both production and efficiency. As a result, 
farmers and ranchers can operate greater amounts of land 
thereby reducing the need for labour. 
 

And I think that’s true for Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker. 
And then he says, quote: 
 

Farm population losses during the last half century have 
been overwhelming. 
 

And I think that’s too mirrored here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, where we see much the same trends. I might say too, 
Mr. Speaker, that this is not just unique to Saskatchewan and to 
census districts in rural Manitoba, but this is also something 
that’s happening in census districts in Alberta. 
 
To hear members opposite speak about it, they’d say that, you 
know, universally across the piece everything is booming and 
everything is going well in Alberta. But even in Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker, there are census districts . . . these are rural areas 
where population is being lost as people move from rural areas 
for the reasons I mentioned or Dr. Rathge has mentioned. 
People are moving to urban areas. 
 
(19:30) 
 
So these things are, in terms of population shift, these 
demographic shifts, Mr. Speaker, are widespread across our 
Great Plains. But they say, well no, here in Saskatchewan it’s 
not because of these trends that are taking place in the Great 
Plains, here it’s because we’ve had the wrong kind of 
government for 60 years. Well I beg to differ, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now here’s the thing, if I just might digress for 
just a minute, that I find really interesting, that they say — that 
is the Sask Party opposition says — they say that not only will 
they stop, stop these population trends; they’re going to reverse 
them. And they say, never mind what’s happened anywhere else 
in these rural areas of the Great Plains; just put your blinkers 
on, we’re going to change that in Saskatchewan. And not only 
are we going to stop it here, but we’re going to change it 
dramatically, Mr. Speaker. So dramatically that they propose to 
increase the population of Saskatchewan by 100,000 over . . . I 
forget what number of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well it is so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, that it 
flies in the face of reality. It really does fly in the face of the 
reality that’s evident on the Great Plains of North America. 
 
I mean, here you have census districts in Alberta that are losing, 
that are losing population. And notwithstanding all of the 
wealth that Alberta has, and notwithstanding also policies that 
they so greatly admire in Alberta that they say that they would 
put into place here because that would create such a 
transformation here, and notwithstanding these things, 
notwithstanding these things, Alberta cannot halt, arrest, let 
alone turn around the decline in population in census districts 
within the province of Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say their plan flies in the face of reality, Mr. 
Speaker. Now it may, it may well be, it may well be an 
admirable goal, but it’s not very realistic, Mr. Speaker. It’s also, 

it’s also I might say, if this is the basis, the basis for their whole 
approach to government, that this is a shaky premise for an 
economic plan, Mr. Speaker. Because these plans, Mr. Speaker, 
if you’re not right, you will in effect take, you will in effect take 
hundreds of millions, billions of taxpayers’ dollars to put it into 
a plan that is doomed to fail because the reality says that plan 
will fail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I only have a few minutes left, but speaking of 
population, did you happen to catch the news out of Alberta, 
Mr. Speaker? I gather this topic of population also seems to be 
on the mind of their energy minister, Mr. Speaker, a Mr. 
Murray Smith. It is reported that Mr. Smith said that 
Saskatchewan would be a good place to build a nuclear reactor 
that could in turn supply power to the Alberta Athabasca oil 
sands project. 
 
He also said, Mr. Speaker, because we are less densely 
populated in Saskatchewan, fewer people would be endangered 
if there were ever a nuclear accident. What a kind, considerate 
person this Mr. Smith is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But wait, that’s not all. He also said that our economy could use 
the boost from such a nuclear reactor, Mr. Speaker. Well first 
we have Mr. Klein preaching to the homeless, and now Mr. 
Smith preaching to Saskatchewan. These Alberta politicians, 
they sure have a lot to say to others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is it about them, Mr. Speaker? Are they confusing the 
good fortune of Alberta with their own leadership abilities, or to 
paraphrase it in baseball terms, Albertans are born on third base 
but their leaders think they’d hit a triple, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know what? The Saskatchewan opposition seem to 
think, no they haven’t hit a triple; they’ve hit a home run. 
That’s what I gathered from their remarks when they say, well 
we agree with this Mr. Smith from his approach. 
 
Also speaking of the economy, Mr. Speaker, when the 
Saskatchewan opposition talk about the economy, they also like 
to talk about Crown corporations. They say that one of the 
barriers to economic growth . . . one of the barriers that’s 
holding the province back is the Crown sector. But don’t ask 
them what they would do with the utility Crowns because that’s 
when you get, oh shucks we wouldn’t touch them, we wouldn’t 
do a thing; well maybe just a little bit. Oh, no. 
 
They say there’s a barrier but they wouldn’t do a thing, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what they say if you can believe them, Mr. 
Speaker. And once in a while they will criticize us for financial 
management. But not much, Mr. Speaker. After all, the credit 
rating agencies are far more credible on that score. I might say 
though, perhaps Mr. Grant Schmidt will have more to say about 
that. After all, he is the only one of their potential MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) with actual cabinet and 
Treasury Board experience. Now that’s a scary thought, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the reality is that NDP governments 
mean high credit ratings. The right wing brings us declining 
investor confidence and bring us lower credit ratings, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wrap up my remarks by saying one 
thing and . . . just one more thing. And they say that, because 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

for 60 years we have chosen at times to do things collectively 
through government as opposed to a complete reliance on free 
enterprise, that we have been heading in the wrong direction. 
They say, they say that this has been the case, not just on the 
economic side of government but also on the social side of 
government. 
 
Would that be social, Mr. Speaker? Social as in health care 
which is a social program, Mr. Speaker? Well I don’t have time 
to get into all of the details tonight but if they are saying that we 
would have been better off to have pursued a free enterprise 
health care system — and someone said this recently; the 
member for Weyburn comes to mind — as opposed to our 
public system, I would simply say they’re wrong. They’re 
wrong. They’re wrong. And I’ll keep saying it, Mr. Speaker, 
and all the people in Saskatchewan will say, except for the 
right-wing zealots, they’re wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Our system, our publicly funded, 
publicly managed system is a superior system, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the strength of this party during the course of the last 
60 years. On the other hand, they also say with respect to 
medicare, trust us; we wouldn’t change a thing. You can trust 
us; we wouldn’t do anything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well enough of history. Enough of history, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to say with respect to the future that I support the Speech 
from the Throne. This speech provides a plan, a vision. Our 
future is wide open. We talk in this Speech from the Throne 
about expanding our economy, protecting medicare, Mr. 
Speaker, opening the doors to the future through education and 
training, building a sustainable future through environmental 
protection, and making sure that our families are secure in 
vibrant communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is the path I want to go, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to go 
this dimly lit path that they advocate with their drums and are 
beating about that we should take because great, great peril 
awaits us under their leadership, Mr. Speaker. I choose the 
Throne Speech — that’s the direction I want to go. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m requesting leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Speaker, and I particularly wish to 
thank the hon. new member from Battleford-Cut Knife. I’ve 
interrupted your maiden speech before it even got going, but for 
good cause. 
 
We have this evening, Mr. Speaker, a group of Cubs from the 
north end of Regina. There are 19 Cubs, and I was told there 
was going to be seven parents. I didn’t take the time to count, 

but I will when I’m meeting with this group shortly and I look 
forward to meeting them. I believe we’ll be meeting in room 
218 shortly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I especially want to acknowledge for the Cubs and 
the parents Wednesday is their normal evening that they meet. 
They’ve switched it this week only so that they could come and 
share part of this evening with us here at the legislature. So I 
want to acknowledge that, thank them, and ask all hon. 
members to join me in welcoming the Cubs. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as a 
newly elected member to your Assembly, I was listening to the 
Throne Speech I guess from home, not having the opportunity 
of being here after the by-election. And I guess I look . . . I 
listen for issues that may attract some opportunity in our 
constituency as well. And in the Throne Speech I heard about 
vision — vision of opportunity — where the future is wide 
open, a vision of expanding economy from which no one is to 
be exposed. 
 
We heard about government-driven economy, and we 
sometimes wonder if government-driven economy is good, and 
we have debated that here since I’ve had the opportunity of 
listening to the debate. 
 
We also wonder about winners and losers. And I’d like to speak 
about some of the opportunities I’ve had through some of the 
projects of economic development that we have worked on 
within our Battleford-Cut Knife region. 
 
I would just like to touch on a number of those: The Northwest 
Terminal, West Central Pelleting, and two new projects that are 
trying to be developed in that area, which is the feedlot and the 
mineral spa. 
 
The Northwest Terminal is a project that’s been community 
driven. It’s a project that’s been driven from the people. There’s 
$12 million that’s been put into this project and the majority of 
those dollars have come right from the community and the 
people from that surrounding area, and it’s something that’s 
been driven not by government but been driven by the people 
and by business themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — It employs some 18 people. Something in the 
neighbourhood of $2 million is pumped into the economy on an 
annual basis. There’s about $45 million worth of revenue that’s 
generated for the people in that area as well. Problems and 



March 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

 

issues that they have with that project — property tax . . . 
Education and property tax is a huge problem and it’s a 
non-stimulus in the sense of economic development when we’re 
looking at developing our economy. 
 
West Central Pelleting is another project that I’ve worked fairly 
closely with, and it’s another one that’s been driven by the 
community and only by the community itself. I’ve had the 
fortune of sitting into a meeting when this project was first put 
into place. We had people from the Department of Economic 
Development out talking to the proposed project steering 
committee, and at that time it was touted that we had to lose the 
venture, buy it back at 50-cent dollars and then it would only be 
a viable project. But this is a project that’s been proven over 
time that it’s viable on its own. 
 
It’s also been expanded into Wolseley, and Wolseley is a prime 
example of community expansion and community development 
through economic development. And again it’s locally driven 
opportunity that’s taken that on as well. There too there is 
something in an order of about two and a half million dollars 
that’s put into the economy through the 12 to 14 full-time staff 
people that are being employed in both of those facilities. 
 
Now those are two projects that have been driven, driven 
entirely by its own economy, by the people itself in the regards 
of how those projects have gotten off the ground. There has 
never been any indication of any support coming from other 
ventures in any government initiatives. Where are the winners 
and losers? Those are the winners, but nobody has come along 
and provided the direction and the guidance to make sure that 
those projects were up and running. So there was some picking 
and choosing going on there as well. 
 
There’s a prime example with the feedlot that was proposed for 
that region as well. They raised something in the order of $1.6 
million which would have employed eight to ten people, again 
putting into the economy about $2 million worth of salary — a 
project of about $3 million. They needed a partner, they needed 
somebody to come in and help them support that project but 
there was nobody that came to their door, there was nobody that 
provided that incentive that brought some partners along to 
boast that project, to provide that opportunity to happen in this 
province. 
 
(19:45) 
 
We talk about the livestock industry as being a prime driver of 
the economy of this province but when we have an opportunity 
of that type in west central Saskatchewan, there’s nobody that 
comes to those projects and says, let’s find a partner, let’s find 
somebody that can drive that project to its fullest extent. 
 
Mineral spa is I guess another project that I’m very closely 
involved in. And I know there’s been some question of why I 
come to the Assembly in the sense of promoting that we don’t 
have government participation in a project. Here’s a project that 
is going to run in the neighbourhood of about $13 million, 
employ about 60 people, putting about $4.5 million of value 
into the economy as such as well. 
 
But when you are out looking for dollars to support these type 
of projects — and this is the third type of project that I’ve been 

involved in, in that part of the province — it is very difficult to 
find investment dollars to come into these communities. The 
people that you go and talk to, as far as investing into rural 
Saskatchewan, rural revitalization, is very, very difficult to 
bring forth. 
 
So to say that you can create economic development in rural 
Saskatchewan, you need to create an environment and an 
attitude and an economic thrust in rural Saskatchewan that is 
not government driven, that is driven by industry, that you have 
the confidence of the industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — With the four projects, which are only a few 
that are out there right now that are being worked on in that 
area, there’s some 100 jobs, some $11 million worth of value, 
about $70 million worth of true economy value that could be 
pumped into that area. 
 
We have labour-sponsored equity funds that are supported by 
the government and they are . . . there is dollars that go into 
these projects as well. They basically tout that there’s a 
requirement of 18 to 22 per cent return that’s required before 
they’ll even look at any of these projects. So these projects need 
to, need to be able to be brought up on their own. They need to 
find some investment that comes from the people themselves 
and there needs to be incentives developed as far as the local 
economy, the local people, the province itself investing into 
these projects. 
 
We need a level playing field. We need a playing field that all 
partners can work together, that there isn’t competition and 
picking on the ones that you are going to support and the ones 
that you’re not going to support in the economic development 
field. 
 
We need to restructure taxation. Taxation on property tax. 
Income tax is huge in the sense of economic development in our 
region. We can identify that about 30 to 35 per cent of the taxes 
that are generated in the income tax basis — the personal 
income tax basis — is generated from government-driven 
projects and government-driven employment. That’s a huge 
impact that goes on in our economy, that you have that type of 
government-driven influence that happens in this province. We 
need to develop a province that is business driven, that is driven 
from the people, not driven from the province that can have that 
kind of an influence on the economy of the province as well. 
 
I stand here today in support of the amendment and I do not 
support the Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased to enter into the debate on the Speech from 
the Throne at this time. Before I begin my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to compliment in the strongest of all 
possible terms the member from Battleford-Cut Knife and his 
first speech in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I found the remarks by the new member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife to be fluent and eloquent. I was extremely 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2003 

 

impressed with the way he laid out his hopes and dreams for the 
future and his guiding motivation for seeking election. And I 
have to say that in many ways, Mr. Speaker, I agree almost 
entirely with the member opposite in what he says. 
 
He talks about how to create an environment and an attitude in 
rural Saskatchewan that is driven not by government but by 
industry. Mr. Speaker, I entirely agree with that. At the same 
time I do have to point out that government is necessary for a 
stable and consistent attitude of high-quality services so that the 
hopes and dreams that the member opposite talks about can be 
fostered and encouraged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to have a stable government so that we 
can give optimism and hope for the future. We need the sound 
health care services that government provides. We need the 
sound and positive public education services that government 
can provide. We need the good transportation services and the 
good clean water and sewage services that government can 
provide. Those are all proper and good roles for government. 
 
And at the same time, as the member opposite says, we have to 
ensure the government stays out of the way of industry 
developing its area of expertise so that together, working in 
tandem, working in partnership, business and government, we 
can create a strong, stable, secure society here in Saskatchewan 
so that our young people can grow up here, find jobs here, build 
a future here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have many more things I would like to say on 
this topic but I note the hour now and in deference to the 
member opposite, the member . . . the new member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife who, I’m sure, would like to celebrate his 
first speech in this House, I would therefore at this time move 
that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 19:53. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................137 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................138 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................142 
  Lorjé...........................................................................................................................................................................................143 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................142 
 


