















































Hansard: May 13, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1045 
 May 13, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition signed by citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
about the condition of Highway 47 between Estevan and the 
Boundary Dam resort, which has seriously declined over the 
last number of years due to lack of proper maintenance by the 
province. Mr. Speaker, the petition indicates that the condition 
of this highway endangers the safety of drivers and causes an 
inordinate amount of damage to vehicles. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the fine 
community of Estevan. 
 
I also received a letter today regarding the same matter, so I’m 
pleased to present this letter on their behalf. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens from Moose Jaw concerned 
about a lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

As you may expect, Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition 
today are all from the city of Moose Jaw and I’m pleased to 
present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I stand 
to present a petition on behalf of citizens of the community of 
Cabri. It’s in relation to the issue of Crown grazing lease 
renewals. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that 
current Crown land lessees maintain their first option to 
renew those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very important issue for the people of the 
Cabri region and I would like to present this on their behalf. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of the Northwest concerned to 
preserve the historic bridges over the North Saskatchewan 
River. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister 
of Highways preserve the old bridges between Battleford 
and North Battleford. 

 
Your petitioners come from the town of Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
inconsiderate lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose 
Jaw. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I’m proud to rise again with a petition from citizens of 
rural Saskatchewan who are very much concerned with the 
access to . . . or lack of access to adequate health services. And 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen, and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people from west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with the state of health care. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley, Major, and Eatonia, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present that deals with the condition of Highway 22, 
particularly that section between Junction 6 and Junction 20. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of . . . the communities of Southey, Earl Grey. 
 
And I’m pleased to be able to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned with 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Rabbit 
Lake and Medstead. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 27, 36, 41, 90, and no. 100. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the CIC minister: has there been a policy change in the 
past fiscal year which has resulted in requiring different 
persons to make the meter readings for both electricity and 
natural gas; if so, what is the cost savings of this move 
from one person to two people? 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: since the inception of the Our Future is 
Wide Open campaign, what percentage of total dollars 
spent on advertising in print and electronic media have 
been spent within the Saskatchewan boundaries and what 
percentage has been spent outside of Saskatchewan? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: what was the cost of the six-page special 
information supplement for the province of Saskatchewan 
published in The Globe and Mail, May 13, 2003, and 
featuring a glossy picture of the Premier? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As sure as 
spring arrives every year, the grade 8 class from the Rosetown 
Central High School makes their annual visit to the city of 
Regina and they come and visit the legislature as well. 
 
And I’m very pleased to welcome 28 students, grade 8 students, 
from Rosetown Central High, 27 of whom are sitting in the east 
gallery up there, and Katie is sitting right over here. And we’re 
very glad to have the grade 8 students visit us. We hope that 
they learn a lot from the proceedings and I’m also looking 
forward to meeting with them later on today. 
 
They are accompanied by teachers Richard Berezowski, Miles 
Bennett, and Mary Munchinsky. And we welcome you here, 
enjoy yourselves immensely, and we hope you take back a good 
report to the fine community of Rosetown. Would you welcome 
them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, a group of seniors from Selo Gardens, which is 
located on McNiven Avenue in my constituency. This group is 
sponsored for this tour here by the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. 
Some of them are in the Speaker’s gallery and some are here on 
the floor of the legislature. 
 
I would ask that all members welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — (The hon. member spoke for a time in 
Ukrainian.) 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my pleasure to introduce an individual seated 
in your gallery, a Mr. Sang Wong Kim of Toronto. Mr. Kim is a 
successful entrepreneur who has worked in his family’s 
business for a number of years and a friend of mine from 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

 

college. 
 
And I hope he enjoys the proceedings today and that all 
members will join me in welcoming him to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery, Mr. Don Black from the Public Service Commission is 
accompanied by three students who will be working for the 
summer in areas of policy and communications. And they had 
the usual five minutes of quality time with me that my family’s 
come to expect. And I just would like all members of the House 
to thank them for their interest in the public service and for 
joining us in the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members today, 
a businessman from Yorkton, owner and operator of the 
Community Post, Dave Bucsis. And I’d ask all members to 
welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 
this opportunity to join my colleague, the Minister of Health, to 
welcome the great looking bunch of people that are seated in 
your gallery, and in particular, to very good friends, Edith and 
Mike Burianyk, formerly from Ituna, who are now living here 
in this great city of Regina. 
 
I’d ask all members to please help me welcome them to this 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a couple in the east gallery, Mr. Roy and Kay Nelson. 
They’re residents of Regina now but their home has been in 
Glentworth for a number of years. And some people in the 
Assembly will recognize Roy as a former member of this 
Assembly. 
 
So I’d ask everyone to please welcome them here to the 
proceedings this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Space Travel from Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Okay, Mr. Speaker, repeat after me — 
10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, and so on. It appears that learning to count 
down is soon going to be part of the Saskatchewan vocabulary. 
Our Future is Wide Open and now that includes the space above 
our province and not just the resources within it. 
 
All this by way of saying that Saskatchewan will host the 
world’s first independent manned space launch. And as the 

Leader-Post says today, the da Vinci project, a Canadian-based 
initiative to make a manned space flight is not “some wacko 
project” but the real McCoy. 

 
The da Vinci project is one of 23 international competitors for 
the X PRIZE, a foundation providing a $10 million US (United 
States) prize to the first group that launches a manned, reusable 
space capsule 100 kilometres into space twice within a 
two-week timeframe. 
 
Project leader and astronaut for the da Vinci project, Brian 
Feeney, announced this morning that Kindersley, Saskatchewan 
will be the site of this space milestone, and once again 
Saskatchewan will be a leader in Canada. We’ve long been 
Canada’s social laboratory, now we will be Canada’s staging 
area in the final frontier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the launch date this year will be detailed later. 
Meanwhile I know that we’re all thrilled at this innovative, 
technological adventure which embraces and symbolizes our 
bright future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Little Theatre 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud 
to say today that the Swift Current Little Theatre has been 
recognized as being the best amateur theatre group in the entire 
province. 
 
This spring the Swift Current Little Theatre performed in front 
of sold-out audiences with their newest production entitled The 
Foursome. It’s a story about four friends who reunite for a 
game of golf and to reminisce about old times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Swift Current Little Theatre took their 
production to Theatre Fest 2003, the annual competition of 
amateur theatre clubs in the province, where they did 
exceptionally well. As a matter of fact, they picked up six 
awards including the best entry at the seven-play competition. 
They also received the William Hubbard Memorial Plaque for 
excellence and honourable mention for the best visual 
presentation. Individual awards were presented to Bruce Rayner 
as the festival’s best actor, to Ken Johnson for best director, and 
to stage managers Connie Rayner and Toby Dueck, who won 
the Margaret Corbett Aspirant Award. 
 
So congratulations to the actors: Bruce Rayner, Brian Potter, 
Steve Rempel, and Brian Dueck in The Foursome, and to 
everyone who works behind the scenes for the Swift Current 
Little Theatre — the best amateur theatre club in the entire 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Westmount Community School Celebrates 90 Years 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On May 2, 
Westmount Community School celebrated a very special 90th 
anniversary. I had the pleasure of attending this event along 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

with students, parents, teachers, past and present, and several 
community guests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as with so many schools of this age, youth who 
attended Westmount went on to play very important roles in our 
communities including contributing to world peace in the two 
world wars. And, Mr. Speaker, you may not know this but two 
special alumni of Westmount include hockey legend Gordie 
Howe and our own former premier, Roy Romanow. 
 
The guest speaker, Al Anderson, also a well-known alumni and 
Saskatoon community booster, reminisced about school days 
gone by. He reminded guests that Westmount was never an 
affluent community and the school did not have all the bells and 
whistles. But as he said, it was a good school, the 
neighbourhood was a good neighbourhood, and the families 
were good families. Mr. Speaker, 90 years may have come and 
gone, but I can tell you the quality of families, the school, and 
neighbourhood is still very, very good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was my first occasion to speak about our 
government’s new initiative SchoolPLUS. We are committed to 
meeting the needs for our children by providing excellent 
learning opportunities and critical human services to support 
their education. We know the importance of strong 
communities such as Westmount to a child’s education and 
well-being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Westmount has enjoyed a wonderful 90 years, but 
you just watch the next 90. This school, these kids, and their 
family futures are wide open here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cellphone Technology 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the past 15 
years the people of Saskatchewan have steadily embraced 
cellular phone technology as a way to communicate better. 
Cellphone technology has advanced to a point where businesses 
now heavily rely on this immediate communication as a tool 
that they must have in order to compete and succeed. 
 
With the vast distances, citizens need a safety device in case of 
trouble or poor weather conditions. Situations have proven that 
where cellular coverage is provided, lives have been saved and 
people have the reassurance that their loved ones are safe on the 
road. 
 
With expansion of Internet technology into the area of cellular 
service, businesses are now able to connect their laptop 
computers very quickly. So I’m very troubled when I look at 
the many areas of cellphone coverage that have not been fully 
developed in Arm River and across rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The citizens of this province are asking why SaskTel has not 
given them adequate cellphone service. They’re asking why this 
government has millions of dollars to invest outside of 
Saskatchewan in the high technology field, yet they are still 
waiting for the safety and security of cellphone service in their 
area here at home. 

It is obvious that this NDP government has no intention of 
spending any more money in rural Saskatchewan. They have no 
intention of providing a service which most people and 
businesses agree that would be made available across our 
province. The taxpayers of Saskatchewan are tired of seeing 
their hard-earned dollars spent on similar technology in other 
countries. It’s time for the NDP to start thinking of the safety 
and security of everyone in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Change of Command at 15 Wing Moose Jaw 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, I’m very 
privileged to have the Canadian Forces base, 15 Wing, in my 
constituency of Moose Jaw Wakamow. It’s great to have 
constituents from all over this country and from the NATO 
(North Atlantic Treaty Organization) countries whose pilots 
now train at the flight training centre program. 
 
Last Thursday my colleague from Moose Jaw North and I 
attended, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
change of command ceremony held at the base. Now the change 
of command from 15 Wing was transferred from Colonel Bruce 
McQuade to Colonel Alain Boyer. 
 
Also attending were Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor and 
Major-General Marc Dumais, commander of 1 Canadian Air 
Division and the Canadian NORAD (North American 
Aerospace Defence Command) region. 
 
It was an impressive ceremony, Mr. Speaker, befitting the 
importance of 15 Wing to our nation’s defence and its 
importance to our international alliances. The rich history of 
pilot training goes back to the 1930s in Moose Jaw, and our 
clear prairie skies still provide an ideal training site for our 
pilots. In fact the new commanding officer, Colonel Boyer, 
completed his basic pilot training in Moose Jaw, receiving his 
wings in 1978. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Colonel Boyer is the 20th wing commander at 
Moose Jaw in the past 50 years, and I know we all will 
welcome him back to Saskatchewan and wish him well as he 
assumes his new duties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Asquith 2002 Volunteer of the Year 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Gail Erhart was the 
well-deserved recipient of the Asquith and District Recreation 
Board Annual Volunteer Award. To honour her efforts, she was 
presented with a volunteer medallion and applauded for her 
outstanding efforts as a volunteer. 
 
She works full-time as a teacher’s assistant at Lord Asquith 
School, is a councillor for the town of Asquith, and also has an 
Avon business of which she kindly donates many items to 
teams and organizations that may ask. 
 
Gail is known to devote all her spare time to various community 
involvement, and is seen about town everyday putting her 
volunteer touch on everything. Figure skating, the Legion 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

 

association, ladies auxiliary, recreation board, rink board, Lord 
Asquith School hot meal program — all have her mark on 
them. Not only does she volunteer to be on the board but she 
steps up to serve in an executive position, most notably her 
prowess as a treasurer and bookkeeper. 
 
Gail’s efforts over the past number of years have been devoted 
to the Asquith Sports Center. She has served on every executive 
position and has handled all the food ordering, banking, and 
bookkeeping for the rink, for the rentals. She has been one of 
the key players devoted to the improvement of the rink facility. 
 
When the Lord Asquith School library was in need of computer 
automation, Gail devoted a year of her time transferring data 
from the library and coordinated the volunteers to the library 
program. 
 
Asquith is fortunate to have a strong volunteer base with leaders 
like Gail to take them in the direction they wish to go. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Asquith 2002 Volunteer of the 
Year, Gail Erhart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Citizens Discuss Forestry Centre 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I want to take a 
moment to congratulate the city council and the citizens of 
Prince Albert, who yesterday gave all of us a lesson in 
representative democracy. 
 
As you know, in the past few days there have been some 
suggestions by some who live elsewhere that Prince Albert is 
somehow incapable of making crucial decisions affecting its 
own future. Better, Prince Albert was told, that newspaper 
columnists and opposition politicians will tell them what their 
city needs. 
 
After all, Mr. Speaker, what does a city living on the edge of 
the forest, a city whose livelihood depends to a great extent on 
the forest industry, a city that proudly calls itself the gateway to 
the North, what could it possibly know about the value and 
placement of a forestry centre? 
 
Quite a bit, it turns out. Yesterday morning the Prince Albert 
council held an emergency meeting to voice its unanimous 
support of the forestry centre and of its downtown location. 
Then at noon, 600 Prince Albert citizens rallied to voice their 
unanimous support of the downtown centre. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the community has spoken 
with one voice, and I further suggest that it would take a pretty 
anti-democratic group to ignore that voice. Apparently, though, 
we have just that group in the opposition party. 
 
As for me and this side of the House, we’ll be listening to the 
voice of the people. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Payment of Municipal Property Taxes 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP (New 
Democratic Party) continues to tell us how much their 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) disaster has helped the people in the Lucky Lake 
area. Yet once again this year the NDP is refusing to pay taxes 
owed by the Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RM (rural municipality) of Canaan has sent us 
tax notices showing that the Sask Valley Potato Corporation 
still owes the RM over $84,000 for last year’s taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of all the other damage that the NDP has 
done in Lucky Lake with the SPUDCO debacle, why are they 
now refusing to pay their property taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m advised by 
my officials that they continue to work with the RMs as they 
have last year, as they have last year, to try and find resolution 
on this issue, Mr. Speaker. Members opposite from the Sask 
Party will know that on a number of those instances — I should 
say in a number of those instances, Mr. Speaker — they did 
find resolution. And I’m confident they’ll find resolution this 
year as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, most good corporate 
citizens, when they receive their tax notice, they pay their tax 
notices. Why is the Government of Saskatchewan different? 
They’ve already left a trail of destruction in the wake of the 
SPUDCO affair with millions of dollars in unpaid bills, homes 
that are now valueless, businesses that are bankrupt, and now, 
Mr. Speaker, they won’t even pay their taxes. Eighty-four 
thousand dollars is a pretty significant fund for the RM of 
Canaan and the Outlook School Division. But once again the 
NDP is content to just walk away and not pay their taxes — let 
someone else pay the bills. 
 
Well eventually, Mr. Speaker, ratepayers are going to have to 
pick up the cost if the government doesn’t pay its tax bill. And 
how can that be fair? Mr. Speaker, haven’t the people around 
Lucky Lake paid enough for the NDP SPUDCO disaster? Why 
should they have to suffer the consequences of unpaid 
provincial taxes for property? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: —Mr. Speaker, the member for Meadow 
Lake, the Minister of CIC, has indicated that we’ll work very 
closely with the rural municipality to ensure that the taxes that 
are needing to be owed to the municipality, as we have in the 
past worked with the municipality, Mr. Speaker, to continue to 
make sure they get paid. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that you 
get up on your feet on a regular basis and you . . . 
 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. I’d ask the member to make all 
of his remarks through the Chair, and I would ask members to 
tone it down a little so I can hear what’s being said. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ll work closely 
with the municipality to make sure that the grants in lieu that 
are owed to the municipalities will get looked after, as we have 
in the past. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, every time you stand 
up on your feet . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The member has a very short 
memory. I would ask him once again to speak to the Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Every time that the member, Mr. Speaker, 
from Outlook gets on his feet — and Rosetown — and the 
member from Swift Current gets up on their feet, Mr. Speaker, 
they talk about, they talk about the losses in the potato industry 
in that area of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have now three letters, Mr. Speaker, here from people who 
live in that area, who do business in that area, and they say, Mr. 
Speaker, that what they should stop doing is stop talking about 
the losses and attacking the industry on that part of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, because nobody’s run off with the 
sheds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those sheds are still there, Mr. Speaker. Six of those sheds are 
full, Mr. Speaker. Potato growers in the area are using those 
sheds and they’re growing the industry there, Mr. Speaker, in 
spite of what the Leader of the Opposition stands up and 
purports on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if those 
sheds are still there, the government should be paying the 
property taxes on those sheds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — It’s interesting to note that last year, Sask 
Water paid $341,000 in legal fees to Olive Waller Zinkhan & 
Waller. Maybe if they just paid their bills, they wouldn’t have 
to pay so much in legal fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is taking the position that these 
multi-million dollar potato storage bins are agriculture property, 
and that’s why they don’t have to pay taxes based on 
commercial assessment. Last year the NDP sold some of these 
potato storage bins to Pak-Wel, and Pak-Wel have paid their 
taxes and they paid them based on commercial assessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible) . . . is paying its bill. Why won’t the 
Government of Saskatchewan, that NDP government, pay their 
bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in this province where there 
are Crown properties, we pay grants in lieu, as we will on these 
properties, Mr. Speaker, to the municipalities as we have in the 

past. But you just need to listen to what the Leader of the 
Opposition from the Sask Party talks about, and the member 
from Swift Current. 
 
They’ve been on their feet on several occasions, Mr. Speaker, 
and they say that these buildings have absolutely no value. They 
say that these buildings have no value, Mr. Speaker. So if these 
buildings have no value, Mr. Speaker, why is it that the Leader 
of the Opposition from the Saskatchewan Party wants us to pay 
taxes for properties that have no value, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, these buildings have value. And if this 
building, if these buildings were to be designated, Mr. Speaker, 
as agricultural properties and we would pay tax on them as 
Harry Meyers pays tax on his sheds, Mr. Speaker . . . He pays 
taxes on his shed, Mr. Speaker, as a privately owned. We’ll pay 
the grants in lieu on it, Mr. Speaker, in the same way that Harry 
Meyers looks after his shed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
lost $28 million on the SPUDCO affair and now they just don’t 
want to pay the consequential bills from the fiasco. Mr. 
Speaker, they simply don’t get it. They refuse to recognize that 
they have to take responsibility for their actions. 
 
(14:00) 
 
They rolled into Lucky Lake, Mr. Speaker, and they tried to 
convince everyone that this was a great deal. They misled 
people by telling them that this was a partnership, but as the 
member for P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote found out, it was no 
partnership. Mr. Speaker, they got local farmers and businesses 
involved and when their potato deal went bad the NDP just 
walked away and left everyone else holding the bag except for 
their lawyers. Millions of dollars in unpaid bills, bankrupt 
businesses, worthless homes — that’s what the NDP did to the 
people of Lucky Lake. And that’s why they only got nine votes 
in that poll in the last election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the NDP take some responsibility for 
the lives that they’ve destroyed? Why won’t they at least start 
paying their taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to look after 
the sheds as Crown corporation assets, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 
continue to pay the grants in lieus to the municipalities as we 
have in the past, as is appropriate when we look after the grants 
in lieus, Mr. Speaker. But I say to the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, I have here a letter here from 
Lindylou Buhr who is a potato producer in that area, Mr. 
Speaker, and she writes this. She said: 
 

We were given help by the Government (Mr. Speaker) and 
Sask Water to develop our dream. 

 
And our dream, Mr. Speaker, is to build a potato industry in 
Saskatchewan. And we ask the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, to stop putting down the assets in the area, Mr. 
Speaker. 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

 

Because what happens is that they’re trying to build an industry 
there and the Leader of the Opposition continues to get up and 
put the asset down. 
 
I have a letter here, Mr. Speaker, that’s written to me by Mr. 
Peters. And he says, Mr. Peters says: 
 

I want to grow the potato industry by 400 acres in 
Saskatchewan but it’s inhibited on a regular basis by the 
Leader of the Opposition, my constituency leader, putting 
down the potato industry (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regional Highway Maintenance Offices 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Highways. Recently councillors 
in towns and RMs from various locations in Saskatchewan have 
been contacting me about the downsizing and even closure of 
regional highway maintenance facilities in the province. 
 
The regional facility at Maidstone was closed and the area’s 
roads and highways now must be maintained out of 
Lloydminster. The Churchbridge facility has been downsized 
by half, with two employees laid off. And even though the 
Department of Highways says that the maintenance facility in 
Gull Lake is under review and hasn’t been closed, all that 
remains, Mr. Speaker, are four snowplow blades and two old 
packers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how many regional maintenance 
offices are being reviewed by his department and how many 
will either be closed or downsized this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we are reviewing constantly the operations of the Department of 
Highways. We have one of the most efficient operations going 
in this country. And I tell you, with $900 million over three 
years we are fixing the roads in this province. We are making 
progress every day and we are doing it with efficiency as well. 
 
And when we amalgamate some of those offices, some of the 
operations, Mr. Speaker, it is to give more effective service to 
the people of this province. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, it is interesting that today there’s a 
letter to the editor from the Minister of Highways in the 
Leader-Post where he states, and I quote: 
 

We recognize that addressing the impact of increased truck 
haul on our secondary highways is especially important in 
supporting the revitalization of rural Saskatchewan. To that 
end, we can assure motorists that our government is 
committed to improving the level of service on TMS 
highways . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, closing and reducing regional highway 
maintenance facilities does exactly the opposite. The 
communities who have contacted us are very concerned about 
how local highway maintenance in their areas will be affected 

by centralizing the Department of Highways services. 
 
Not only are their local families affected with layoffs or 
movement of jobs out of the communities, but their local 
highway services will now be served as quickly from the 
centralized maintenance units by having to . . . by these units 
having to cover a much larger territory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister closing and downsizing some 
regional highway facilities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it was Mother’s Day on Sunday and I recall one of the things 
that my mother always warned about and that is the pot calling 
the kettle black. And from those privatizers, the Sask Party on 
the other side who dumped so many people out of work in the 
Department of Highways back in the ’80s, they don’t have a 
place to stand. They’re on quicksand when they start talking 
about this kind of thing. 
 
We have been improving service. We have been improving the 
highways. We have been building up those TMS (thin 
membrane surface) roads. We’ve been making agreements with 
area transportation planning committees for heavy-haul roads so 
that we will continue to have dust-free, mud-free surfaces out 
there for people in rural Saskatchewan to be able to travel on. 
 
That is just too far out for them to be pointing this way and 
saying, you’re reducing services by amalgamating those service 
offices. We are providing the best possible service to this 
province and we are rebuilding those highways and we will see 
even better service in rural Saskatchewan in the years ahead, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about improving 
services and providing better highway service to the citizens of 
this province, Mr. Speaker, but how does closing maintenance 
facilities lead to safer highways, Mr. Speaker? And that is a 
concern for these communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The province has announced and the minister has announced 
that the speed limit will be increased on the twinned highways 
on June 1 to 110 kilometres. With less local maintenance, Mr. 
Speaker, especially during the winter months, this could mean 
that highway safety could be compromised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these closures don’t help revitalize rural 
Saskatchewan and there are certainly questions of highway 
safety. So where is the savings, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The minister claims he’ll be able to maintain the service, the 
same level of service, from the centralized maintenance office 
facilities. That will mean highway crews will have to travel 
larger distances and it will take more time for them to provide 
the maintenance, Mr. Speaker. So where are the cost savings? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how much the reduction 
or closure of regional highway maintenance facilities will save 
this NDP government? 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We will 
continue to provide the best service that is possible on these 
rural highways. 
 
We will not do as the members opposite seem to think was a 
wonderful idea, the Core Services Review out in BC (British 
Columbia) which has basically gutted their highways and 
transportation program out there. So you don’t provide any 
service when you take that kind of action. You can’t build 
highways, you can’t repair highways when you gut an industry 
like they have done and like their predecessors did in the past, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to build and maintain highways 
in rural Saskatchewan. With these amalgamated offices we will 
provide even better service. Mr. Speaker, we will provide that 
service and we will make sure those roads are good for the STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) buses to keep running 
down them and keep providing service to rural Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to tout this year’s 
Department of Highways budget as a big money budget. He 
often says that this is the second biggest budget in the history of 
the province. But, Mr. Speaker, if you exclude the federal 
government’s money that is going toward the twinning of our 
highways, the NDP’s contribution this year is actually $6 
million less than last year’s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have actually cut, reduced, and slashed 
their provincial portion of the highways budget by over $6 
million. So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, how is the Department 
of Highways handling these cutbacks? Is the closure of the 
highway maintenance facilities the result of the NDP’s cut in 
their Department of Highways budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, the incredible distortions 
that we continue to hear from that side of the House, from the 
Sask Party, are continuing again today. 
 
That is a distortion to say, well if you didn’t have that money in 
there from the federal government, then you wouldn’t have that 
much in your budget. We do have the money in. We worked 
long and hard to get that federal government contribution and 
we are using that to help build the roads in Saskatchewan, to 
give us a better future, to build a solid base for this economy. 
 
We are moving this province ahead. We are building new roads. 
We’re building a future that will be successful. That’s what 
we’re about and we see tremendous results each year. 
 
And what are they about? Privatizing, cutting it back, cutting it 
apart, breaking it down — we’ve seen the results of that type of 
thinking. I had to counsel people who faced that kind of 
thinking back in the ’80s, Mr. Speaker, and we’re not going to 
be dealing with that with this government in power. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Max Service 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
you’ve watched any of the NHL (National Hockey League) 
playoffs — and I hope you’ve had a chance to do that — 
they’ve been pretty good. If you’ve turned on the TV at all this 
spring, no doubt you’ve seen one of the myriad, one of the 
many commercials on television in this province for SaskTel’s 
Max cable TV service, the cable television service that the NDP 
government has set up in the province of Saskatchewan to 
compete with existing cable companies and a co-op here in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister responsible for SaskTel please 
tell us how much money the government has spent to date 
developing SaskTel Max and how many customers do they 
have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well this is an interesting criticism just given a national survey 
that suggests in this area, Mr. Speaker — in this area — the 
public most wants convergence; that is so that they have 
opportunities to get high-speed Internet, telephone service, and 
cable, Mr. Speaker, all through one line. 
 
This is the fastest growing area of public support in this area of 
technology, Mr. Speaker. And what would that Sask Party do? 
They would shut it down. They would sell it. They would get 
rid of it. Mr. Speaker, they would make sure that the people of 
Saskatchewan had no options, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t want to 
answer the questions. The questions were: how much taxpayers’ 
money have they blown to develop the technology; how many 
customers do they have? 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that they have spent $21 million — at 
least $21 million, maybe more — to develop this technology. 
And how many customers do they have in the province of 
Saskatchewan? According to information that was provided in 
this Assembly, about 5,000 customers, Mr. Speaker. After all of 
that cost and after all of that advertising that we’ve all seen on 
the television, they’ve got 5,000 customers; $21 million spent. 
 
So how about this question for the minister, Mr. Speaker. Has 
cabinet even put a ceiling, a cap, on how much SaskTel will 
spend on this initiative competing with cable companies before 
they’ll put a stop to it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well SaskTel 
has invested nearly $60 million, Mr. Speaker — $60 million — 
to bring high-speed Internet to communities like Swift Current 
and dozens of other communities across our province. 
 
That’s what they’ve invested, Mr. Speaker, nearly $60 million. 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, by the end of this summer, 75 per cent of the 
population of Saskatchewan will have access to high-speed 
Internet. Mr. Speaker, will have access to high-speed Internet 
— 75 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, and that Sask Party would, 
on a daily basis, stand here and criticize SaskTel for providing 
options and choices for people in many of the constituencies 
that they represent across Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said in my first answer, a recent survey says 
that in this area of technology development, people, the public 
of Saskatchewan appreciate the fact that they have under one 
single cable the option of high-speed Internet, telephone 
service, and cable. They’re off base when they’re offside with 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of the 
province would be a lot happier about the money invested in 
Internet if 60-plus million hadn’t been blown by the NDP just 
last year in investing out of our province in Atlanta and 
Tennessee and Australia, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the problem. Here’s the 
problem with this particular issue. And by the way, the minister 
isn’t coming anywhere near answering questions on Max TV. 
That’s what these questions are about. 
 
No wonder, Mr. Speaker. They’ve spent $21 million; they’ve 
got only 5,000 customers. And the question for the minister 
was: how much more are they prepared to spend before they’ll 
put a stop to it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to all of that, they’re competing, 
they’re providing a service that anyone who wanted previously 
could have gotten. And in so doing, they’re competing with the 
private sector and co-ops here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So again, in light of all of that, Mr. Speaker, a question for the 
minister is this: how much more money, what sort of a ceiling, 
what sort of a cap, has cabinet put on SaskTel on this Max TV 
initiative? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you again, Mr. Speaker. 
Survey after survey says, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan appreciate choices, they appreciate high-quality 
service, and they get that from SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the service they talk about, 
Max, provides Saskatchewan residents with leading-edge 
technology. And, Mr. Speaker, market research conducted, as I 

said, this spring, 2003, by a reputable company Canadian Cable 
Television Association, notes the following, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . that consumers are embracing new products because 
they answer a need (Mr. Speaker). 
 

They go on to say that: 
 

The line between the home computer and TV set is blurring 
. . . with 23 per cent (23 per cent) of households (now) with 
an Internet connection watching video on their computers 
(Mr. Speaker). 

 
That says, Mr. Speaker, that SaskTel is on the right page when 
it comes to doing this kind of technology, Mr. Speaker; the Sask 
Party is on the wrong page. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, some of the companies, the co-op 
now competing with the government, with the NDP on this 
particular, in this particular area have been telling us that some 
Max customers are already abandoning SaskTel and going back 
to, in this case, Access. Apparently there are many problems 
with the Max system. Some Internet sites may not be 
compatible with the television and the system can only be 
hooked up to two televisions, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. Order. Order, 
members. Got a little problem here, members, particularly with 
members sitting in the front row of both sides of the House. 
And I would ask members just to allow the question to be put. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s some of the 
problems with the system and it’s a reason apparently why 
some Max customers are leaving and going back to Access, in 
this particular case. 
 
We also know the system can only be hooked up to two TVs. 
And apparently — apparently — Max is not at all compatible 
with HDTV, with high-definition television. And we’re also 
told, we’re also told that if it now is compatible with HDTV, 
which more and more people are buying, the reason it would be 
compatible now is that they’ve had to invest even more money 
on the system. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: has he 
asked these questions of SaskTel officials as his cabinet 
colleagues have been approving millions of taxpayers’ dollars? 
Is he aware of these problems? Are these the issues behind the 
reason why they’ve spent 21 million taxpayers’ dollars and they 
only have 5,000 customers so far? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Listen to 
the irony of the question, Mr. Speaker. On one hand, Mr. 
Speaker, that member says and he argues, Mr. Speaker, that 
Max will not work because it’s . . . technologically it won’t 
work, Mr. Speaker. On the other hand, he says somehow 
they’re competing with the service that apparently does work in 
the private sector. It doesn’t make any sense. If it doesn’t work, 
Mr. Speaker, why are people choosing Max? Mr. Speaker, it’s 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

obvious; it works. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason they’re choosing it is because people in 
Saskatchewan want a choice. They understand and they are part 
of the new technological age, Mr. Speaker. They want their 
services delivered under one line, Mr. Speaker, which will give 
them high-speed Internet, will give them telephone service, and 
will give them cable TV. Lots and lots, Mr. Speaker, of 
telephone companies across Canada and North America are 
going this way. Why would the Sask Party be opposed to our 
own telephone company doing the same thing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Milestone on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
during question period, the Minister of Agriculture quoted from 
three letters that he said he’s received. According to 
Beauchesne’s 195, rule no. 7: 
 

When a letter, even though it may have been written 
originally as a private letter, becomes part of a record of a 
department, it becomes a public document, and if quoted by 
a Minister . . . must be tabled on request. 

 
So I would request the Minister of Agriculture table the letters 
that he has quoted from during question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to table the 
letters that I quoted from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, order. Order. Order, members. The 
member’s point is well taken. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions no. 211 through 256 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 211 to 256 have been 
tabled. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Support for Small Business 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
motion that I will be moving at the end of my remarks states: 
 

That the Assembly expresses its strong support for 

small-business owners throughout Saskatchewan and 
regrets any call by any organized labour leader in this 
province to stage a politically motivated boycott of those 
businesses, something that would ultimately hurt workers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think this motion should be supported by both 
sides; at least they’re talking about supporting small business 
throughout this province. And the importance of supporting 
small business throughout the province cannot be 
underestimated. We need to make sure that small business 
realizes that we understand that they are the engine of our 
economy; they drive the economy in every small community 
throughout this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it really is disconcerting when you hear the leader of the 
SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) talking about 
boycotting small businesses due to statements made by CFIB 
(Canadian Federation of Independent Business). 
 
Now I’ve looked at and we’ve seen what CFIB has mentioned 
in their remarks, and it’s absolutely appalling, I would say, that 
the Federation of Labour would go to such extremes to talk 
about a boycott of small businesses — the very backbone of our 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This CFIB is responding to concerns raised by 5,300 members 
across this province. They poll their members on a regular basis 
and get a feeling for what their members want to see in the 
province. They get a feeling for the direction they want this 
province to go, Mr. Speaker, by polling their members, by 
getting a feeling from businesses in small towns, in 
communities such as Fort Qu’Appelle or Milestone or Indian 
Head, right up to cities like Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert. 
 
They have a feel for what is happening in business in this 
province. So when they make remarks, it’s not made by one 
person or what that one person’s opinions are. The remarks that 
were made, were made through opinions expressed through 
businesses throughout this province. 
 
And then you get the leader of the SFL coming out and saying 
that: well I’m sorry but the CFIB, Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business, doesn’t know what they’re talking about 
and by saying the . . . expressing the concerns of its business 
owners to have the SFL talk about boycotting the very 
businesses that employ so many people in this province is 
absolutely unconscionable. 
 
So I’m going to be very interested, as we go through this 
75-minute debate, to hear the comments from the government 
party, the NDP, who are truly hooked at the hip with the 
Federation of Labour and many other unions throughout this 
province. I mean the very genesis of the NDP, the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and the trade unions, 
it was a combination of the CCF and trade unions coming 
together to form a party. 
 
So now we’ve got the Federation of Labour, who the NDP are 
joined at the hip with, making such a statement. I’ll be very 
interested, as we go through the 75-minute debate, to see if that 
isn’t the true feeling of the governing party. Is that what the 
governing party feels? The NDP, do they truly believe that they 
should boycott businesses because business is expressing a 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

 

concern at the direction that this province is going? I think that 
frames the whole debate that we are going to have here in 75 
minutes. 
 
Does the NDP and the governing party believe that the SFL is 
correct in boycotting small businesses throughout this province 
— because that is the very statement that was made — small 
businesses that employ thousands and thousands and thousands 
of people throughout this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I looked at the NDP Web site and I looked at some of the 
links, the direct links and some of the affiliates that the NDP 
Party have, they state the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 
right there on their Web site as one of their affiliates. So it’ll be 
very interesting to see if they stand behind the words expressed 
by the SFL labour leader, Mr. Larry Hubich. Some of the words 
that he has mentioned, he said that: 
 

The organization that speaks for provincial workers may 
implement a boycott of all Saskatchewan businesses that 
belong to the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business. 

 
That statement is scary. It goes on to say: 
 

If this business lobbyist outfit can’t find anything better to 
do with its time than attack working people, then we have 
every legal and moral right to respond appropriately, 
Hubich says in a press release put out by the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would take great exception, and I think most 
business owners, and I would really truly believe, I would hope 
the government party, governing party, the NDP, would take 
great exception with words such as that, directly attacking small 
business and large business for showing concern as to the 
direction this province is going, especially when you look at the 
document that the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business is talking about. This is a document that the CFIB has 
put out as a policy paper, as a guideline, as a judge as to how 
governments are doing. These are the suggestions that they get 
from businesses throughout the province through surveys done 
on a regular basis. 
 
And let’s look at some of the things that the Federation of 
Independent Business is talking about, and should they cause 
such a strong statement as the leader of the SFL has put out by 
boycotting small business. Let’s look at some of the things that 
they’ve asked for. Is it that outlandish that the CFIB is asking 
for . . . to ensure a competitive business-tax environment? Now 
personally I think if we ensure a strong business-tax 
environment, I think that can only do much better for the 
province 
 
The more business we attract into this province, the more 
corporations, the more small business, the more big business 
that we attract into this province, the greater chance of 
employment. The greater chance of employment, the more 
employees there are. The more employees there are, some of 
them will become unionized and some will remain non-union 
shops. But it gives a potential for more people working in this 
province. 
 

We have been hemorrhaging taxpayers out of this province for 
the last decade, and for the first time our census has shown that 
the province of Saskatchewan has dipped below 1 million 
people, contrary to the Minister of Labour. The census shows 
that we have just dipped below 1 million people. In other words 
we’re losing young people out of this province — young people 
that would pay taxes, young people that would work in small 
businesses throughout this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when the CFIB and many other groups talk about ensuring a 
competitive business tax, does that warrant workers throughout 
the province to start boycotting business because they’re asking 
for a competitive business tax? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at point number two that CFIB talked about. It talked 
about creating a low-cost, high-performance government. Is that 
asking too much? Is that why they’re going to boycott 
businesses throughout the province because they are asking for 
a low-cost, high-performance government? Isn’t that what every 
taxpayer would want? Now isn’t that what the CFIB would 
want? Wouldn’t that be what the SFL would want, is a 
government that was high performance and low cost? I would 
think that would be a issue that everybody could rally around 
and say, that’s exactly what every province wants for its 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we go through them it just . . . It’s hard to 
believe that this document would draw such strong criticism, 
criticism that talks about boycotting the very business that 
employs thousands, hundreds of thousands of people in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:30) 
 
It talks about . . . How about this one, no. 5.5 here. It says lower 
taxes for consumers. Now who would those consumers be? 
Would they be unionized people or would we be . . . would this 
mean lower taxes for only non-union workers? Is that what is 
behind this document? And if that’s what’s behind this 
document, then maybe I could see what the SFL was talking 
about. 
 
But that’s not what is behind this document. What they’re 
talking about is lowering taxes for consumers, for all consumers 
— whether they’re unionized employees or whether they’re 
un-unionized employees, Mr. Speaker. What they’re talking 
about is putting more dollars in the pocket, more disposable 
income for people in this province to spend as they wish — not 
as the government wishes. 
 
We could keep the taxes high, we could keep the corporate 
taxes high, and we could keep the personal consumer taxes high 
so that the government could spend that money. So that the 
government could spend that money in places like, oh I don’t 
know, Atlanta, Georgia. How about Palm Springs? Things like 
that. I just love to be able to pay taxes so that the government 
can then invest them across the border, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Perhaps that is why the SFL is talking about boycotting 
business throughout the province. Because they’re calling for 
lower taxes for consumers, Mr. Speaker, such as property tax. 
We talked about property tax over and over again in this 
Assembly. And to tell you the honest truth one of the scariest 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

times . . . One of the most shocking times I had in this 
Assembly is when I heard the Minister of Education talking 
about mill rate, and a 2 mill increase, that sounds small. I just 
can’t believe that a Minister of Education would know so little 
about the impact of a mill rate in this province and would be 
calling herself the Minister of Education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Perhaps the CFIB is asking for lower taxes in consumers by 
saying maybe we should lower the mill rate and property tax to 
give people more money in their pocket so that they can spend 
it on goods that they want, as opposed to the government 
spending it in provinces and countries and states that they want, 
Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately, losing that money over and 
over and over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other topics here — ensure a 
sustainable workers’ compensation system. Well that’s a very 
interesting one that they would have brought that out three or 
four weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. And perhaps this is what the SFL 
was so upset about, and that’s why they’re calling for a boycott. 
 
Do they not want a sustainable and guaranteed workers’ 
compensation system, Mr. Speaker? I can’t believe that, that 
members of unions don’t want a sustainable workers’ 
compensation system, Mr. Speaker. And if that’s the case, then 
they should be very happy with the government they’ve got in 
place right now. For the first time in the history of Workers’ 
Compensation, it is in an unfunded liability position, Mr. 
Speaker. They cannot cover their responsibilities into the future. 
 
When we were doing estimates the other day, the minister said 
that they were at a 99.2 per cent funded liability position. Last 
year she said that they had, according to the Act, had to be at 
100 per cent liability position but this year they’re down to 
99.2. For the first time in the history of WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board), has it ever been in that position? 
 
Now the CFIB, Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 
is asking for a sustainable workers’ compensation system. Now 
that may be the point that they’re keying on and saying because 
of this — they’re asking for a sustainable workers’ 
compensation system — we should boycott business. Is that the 
argument for boycotting business throughout this province? I 
sure hope not, Mr. Speaker, because I think every employee and 
every employer in this province should be, have access to a 
sustainable WCB system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also talks about addressing skill shortages; keeping our youth 
at home. Perhaps that’s what the SFL is angry about. Perhaps 
that’s why they are saying we should boycott business 
throughout the province. By keeping our youth at home, 
supplying jobs for youth at home to work in our own province 
as opposed to having to drive home every long weekend to see 
their parents and grandparents, is that what is so annoying about 
this proposal? 
 
Mr. Speaker, keeping the youth at home is something that we 
have been talking about for a long time. We have been saying 
for the last three and a half years that it is extremely important 
that we . . . In fact, the very future of our province hinges on the 
ability for us to attract youth, for us to attract business, for us, 
for our province to grow over the next decade. 
 

We have set a target of 100,000 people in the next 10 years and 
failing that, Mr. Speaker, this province is going to have a harder 
time paying the medical bills than it is right now, a harder time 
paying education costs than it is right now. The very 
sustainability of this province depends on growth, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is exactly what this document is talking about. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I guess I would ask the SFL if they don’t 
agree with growth, if they don’t agree with more people 
working in this province, if they don’t agree with more business 
coming into this province to supply jobs, both union and 
non-union, then what do they support, Mr. Speaker? What do 
they support? 
 
I find it appalling that the SFL, which is joined at the hip with 
the NDP, and I’ll be very interested as we go through this 
debate to see if the NDP support the position laid out very 
clearly by the SFL, because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, on this 
side of the House we don’t. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s with privilege that I move a motion, 
seconded by the member from Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly express its strong support for 
small-business owners throughout Saskatchewan and regret 
any calls by any organized labour leader in this province to 
stage a politically motivated boycott of those businesses, 
something that would ultimately hurt workers. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly a pleasure to 
enter this debate and follow the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone who did a great job of outlining reasons why 
all members of this Assembly should have an interest in 
supporting this particular piece . . . this particular motion, I 
should say, Mr. Speaker, because it just fundamentally speaks 
to supporting the most important engine in our economy. 
 
Now I can’t count how many times I’ve heard members of the 
government, members of the NDP, quite rightly point out that 
indeed it’s the small-business sector above any other sector — 
above the public sector and above the corporate, the large 
corporate sector, and above the co-op sector even — it’s the 
small-business sector that creates jobs in this province to a 
greater degree than any other sector of the economy that really 
spurs on growth in our economy. 
 
And so here we have the spectre, Mr. Speaker, of organized 
labour in the province of Saskatchewan, and specifically the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, as reported in April, in the 
April 23 Leader-Post, here we have the spectre of the SFL 
urging all of its members, all of its members, to boycott those 
very small businesses that the NDP believe, the political 
cousins of the SFL, the New Democratic Party believes . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, and the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle says hear, hear. And I am . . . And I certainly 
welcome his intervention in the debate and will be looking 
forward to his intervention and to his answer to the question, 
what has he done? 
 
What steps has he taken to talk to his colleagues, to his friends 
in the SFL leadership, to talk them out of this scheme that 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

 

would feature, if you can believe it, Mr. Speaker, members of 
the SFL being urged by their leadership to boycott the very 
small-business men and women in the province of 
Saskatchewan who generate the taxes that indeed support the 
jobs that employ the members of the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it all begins and ends with the creation of that job. 
And we all agree in this House — NDP, Sask Party, and 
perhaps the Liberal — we all agree that it is the small-business 
sector of our economy that is the number one creator of those 
jobs. 
 
We know that we all agree that the small-business sector, 
small-business men and women, create the jobs in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And when each of those jobs is created a tax 
base, Mr. Speaker, a tax base is built, a tax base upon which we 
can afford the public services that pay the wages of the 
members of the SFL, the very organization that would seek to 
destroy the ability of those small businesses to create or 
maintain jobs by a boycott. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, why this debate is important in this 
legislature is we will need to hear from the NDP members in 
this House what they are doing about this issue, what they have 
done about this issue. Have they taken the matter up with the 
SFL leadership? Has the Minister of Labour . . . did she contact 
immediately the leadership, Mr. Larry Hubich of the SFL, to 
talk him out of this strategy that they had taken, Mr. Speaker? 
That is what we will need the Minister of Labour to tell us. 
 
And now in order for the Minister of Labour to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, there would have to be a relationship between the 
governing New Democrats, the Minister of Labour herself, 
perhaps, and the SFL leadership. It would be unfair, it would be 
unfair to ask the government, the NDP, to do anything in this 
regard if there was no relationship. And so we have to decide 
what is that relationship exactly, and if it exists then truly the 
minister should be compelled to do the right thing and contact 
them and intervene in this matter. 
 
Well, we know if you get onto the World Wide Web and take a 
look at the NDP Web site for example, one of the links, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the links that they feature — actually there’s 
two of them — under the Labour section, CUPE (Canadian 
Union of Public Employees) National and the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour. They encourage people who come to the 
New Democratic Web site — fair enough — to go to the SFL 
Web site. That speaks of a relationship. 
 
We know very well the minister from Indian Head-Milestone 
has highlighted the historical relationship between the New 
Democratic Party and organized labour, not just here in 
Saskatchewan but across the country. Fair enough. They 
certainly aren’t ashamed of that and they make no bones about 
that fact at their conventions. It’s quite clear there is an 
allegiance. 
 
We know that there is a coordinated political strategy between 
the leadership of the SFL and the NDP. And make no mistake, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about rank-and-file members of 
the union. We have every reason to believe that, just like the 
rest of the non-unionized sector of Saskatchewan, the unionized 

sector of Saskatchewan, more of them voted for the 
Saskatchewan Party in the last election than the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, but we do know that there is a relationship 
between the leadership of the SFL and the government, 
including now the two former Liberal members who are now 
full-blown members of the NDP Party it would appear. They 
now would have a solid relationship with the leadership of the 
SFL. 
 
We know now, we know, Mr. Speaker, we know that $72,000 
was provided in the fiscal year 2002 and 2003 from the 
Department of Learning to the SFL, probably some program 
funding. Certainly that’s not the question here in this debate. 
 
The question is, is there a relationship? And that speaks to one. 
In 2002 the Department of Labour provided the SFL 12,500 for 
funding various things. We’re not debating what they might 
have or may not have funded, just that there’s a relationship 
between the two. 
 
So we know that there is a political relationship. We know that 
there’s a relationship between the leadership. We know there’s 
a funding relationship. So when the SFL proposes something 
like the boycotting, the boycotting of Saskatchewan small 
businessmen and women, you would want your government, 
Mr. Speaker, your government, no matter what its stripe is, you 
would want your government — whether it was NDP or Sask 
Party — you would want them to stand up and be able to assure 
the people of the province that they have done everything in 
their power to talk the SFL leadership out of such a boycott that 
would hurt the province’s economy, that would indeed fly in the 
face of the fact that the future may or may not be wide open. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that is going to be the question 
later this day of these members. We don’t mind telling them 
that. We don’t mind telling them that. They’re going to have to 
answer the question, what have they done? What have they 
done? Do they consider the matter serious? 
 
They’re all kind of . . . the Minister of Highways is laughing. 
He’s laughing about the matter. It’s not a serious issue. If his 
political friends in the SFL leadership, the people that fund his 
campaign probably, it’s not his concern if they are now 
boycotting the same men and women in small business in this 
province that he expects to create jobs, to generate wages, so he 
can do something in his Department of Highways and 
Transportation. He’s laughing about the matter. We’d hoped 
that they would take it more seriously, frankly. It’s a very, very 
important . . . it’s a very, very important issue. 
 
(14:45) 
 
The important question is this, what has that member done? 
What has the Highways minister of the province done? Has he 
picked up the phone to his political friends in the SFL 
leadership and fought for small business in this province? Has 
he done that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I would say he hasn’t done that, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not in 
his political interests to do that. It’s not in the political interests 
of the NDP to pick any kind of a fight with the SFL leadership 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

on the eve of a provincial election when they need their support 
and when they need their money. 
 
And that’s what we’re getting to today in this Assembly, 
because regardless of your ideology, Mr. Speaker — I’m sure 
the Minister of Highways in a more rational state would agree, 
regardless of his ideology — it is unhealthy for the province of 
Saskatchewan for one its largest organized labour leadership, 
for them to advocate a boycott of small business. Surely when 
he is less angered by something — I’m not sure what it is; he 
was laughing a moment ago, now he’s angry — but when he is 
less angered by whatever it is that’s bothering him, I think he 
would agree. 
 
He would calm down and agree that it is never healthy, 
regardless of the stripe of the government, that a government 
would stand by and do absolutely nothing in the face of a 
potential boycott of its small business by someone from outside 
the province. No, Mr. Speaker, by the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour leadership, by the leadership of the SFL. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s such an easy motion to support and I think 
members opposite, many members opposite will want to 
support this motion. Many will want to speak to the motion. 
They’ll want to support small-business men and women. 
 
And in so doing, it certainly doesn’t mean, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’re not supporting the rights of organized labour in the 
province, the right for workers to organize, the collective 
bargaining process. It doesn’t mean that they would disrespect 
any of that. It would just mean they would be standing up for 
small-business men and women and doing the right thing. And 
we hope that the motion will be supported and that the action 
will be taken by the government to do exactly that. 
 
And it’s a pleasure to second the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my 
remarks, I’ll move the following amendment seconded by the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

Remove all words after “Saskatchewan”. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move this amendment because the government 
has created a positive environment and continues to improve the 
environment for small business to establish, prosper, and 
expand in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a great place to live, learn, work and play, 
and do business. 
 
I rise today in support of the government’s record on promoting 
small business. And as I support these policies, I know these 
policies have support of the people of this great province. 
That’s why Saskatchewan residents have chosen New 
Democrats to govern for approximately 40 of the past 60 years. 
 
I know the members across will agree that not only do we have 
an astute workforce but an astute electorate. This great 
province, this province where the future is wide open, has just 
posted its 12th straight month of job growth; 12,900 more new 

jobs April 2003 over April 2002. And youth employment was 
up 5,400 year over year. 
 
Saskatchewan had the second lowest youth unemployment rate 
in Canada in April while the youth force . . . labour force grew. 
 
The Saskatchewan economy . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Now why 
is the member . . . On a point of order? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The point of 
order, Mr. Speaker, is when the member from Swift Current 
was entering in debate, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley was shouting out the words that he was lying. 
 
And according to Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, Mr. Speaker, that 
word is inappropriate and I would like that member to 
apologize for the use of that word. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his intervention. If the 
Speaker would have heard that intervention and as described, 
the Speaker would have . . . definitely have required that 
member to withdraw the statement. 
 
If the member is . . . did make that statement, I would ask the 
member to stand, to rise in his place and apologize to the 
House. 
 
I recognize . . . The member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — The Saskatchewan economy continues to 
show a strong performance with job growth in a number of key 
sectors including finance, insurance, real estate, service, and 
other primary industries. 
 
Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate is the third lowest in 
Canada in April at 6.1. Regina had the second lowest 
unemployment rate in April, of major Canadian cities, at 5.3 per 
cent. Saskatoon was tied, the fourth lowest at 5.9. 
 
Mr. Speaker, retail sales continue to be among the strongest in 
the country as they were in 2002. Vehicle sales continues to 
rise. Year-to-date housing starts are up more than 50 per cent 
from 2002. Manufacturing shipments are up. Mineral 
production and value of mineral productions are up. 
 
And the news in Saskatchewan keeps getting better. Private 
sector forecasters are positive in their outlook. TD Bank 
predicts Saskatchewan will have the third highest economic 
growth in Canada, both in 2003 and 2004. The Conference 
Board of Canada expects to see strong job growth in 
Saskatchewan in 2003 and 2004, and second highest economic 
growth in Canada in 2004. The Royal Bank expects 
Saskatchewan to rank third in Canada in economic growth this 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economic plan we’ve been implementing, 
attracting investment, growing key sectors, balancing budgets 
with sustainable and responsible tax cuts, investing in 
infrastructure — all parts of our plan that are working. Unlike 
the members opposite, we have a plan making sure 
Saskatchewan future is wide open. 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

 

Mr. Speaker, small businesses in Saskatchewan are defined as 
those with fewer than 50 employees or less than 5 million in 
annual sales. These are the most successful businesses in the 
province and the lifeblood of the economy. Small businesses 
comprise more than 90 per cent of total number of 
non-agricultural private firms in the province. They directly 
employ about one-third of Saskatchewan labour force. They 
account for 40 per cent of the total private sector employment. 
Small business has created about 94 per cent of all new jobs in 
the province during the last decade. Mr. Speaker, our 
government supports small business. 
 
Saskatchewan-based business’s corporate income tax rate goes 
to 6 per cent in 2003 and will be 5 per cent by 2005, a 10 per 
cent drop since 1991. The corporate income tax will now be on 
the first 300,000, up from 200,000. In addition, Saskatchewan 
has a 15 per cent tax credit for scientific research and 
development expenditures. We have 35 to 40 per cent 
employment tax credit to encourage film developers to operate 
in the province. Saskatchewan can provide new employers with 
employee training grants to a maximum of 5,000 per employee 
to a maximum of 150,000 per company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government-administered, community-run 
Small Business Loans Association program has loaned more 
than 3.5 million to approximately 500 start-up and 
non-traditional businesses. The program is credited with 
creating and maintaining over 1,100 jobs, primarily in rural 
communities. Mr. Speaker, supporting these small businesses 
are the people of Saskatchewan, and this government is making 
it possible by providing lower taxes. 
 
A two-income family of four earning 50,000 a year will pay 
1,500 less in Saskatchewan income tax in 2003. We’ve 
eliminated the debt reduction surtax and the Saskatchewan flat 
tax, making Saskatchewan’s income tax system more 
progressive. In 2004 and every year thereafter, the residents of 
Saskatchewan will see their taxes continue to drop through full 
indexation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small businesses continue to thrive in an 
environment of not only financial — in health care, 
Saskatchewan’s gift to the people of our province and the 
people of Canada. This government believes in building the 
foundation and we have boosted health care spending by 8 per 
cent to $2.5 million. 
 
Education — a record 1.2 billion investment to provide quality 
education for our young people. This includes 76 million in 
capital improvements for schools and post-secondary 
institutions. 
 
All this, Mr. Speaker, to building the best workforce in the 
country. Mr. Speaker, workers need assistance and this 
government is providing just that, the largest child care 
expansion in the province’s history. New child care funding 
supports new licensed child care spaces, new subsidized spaces 
and capital funding for building development renovations and 
fire safety requirements associated with new spaces. New 
additional early childhood services grant funding begins to 
address wage and human resources requirements in licensed 
child care facilities. With added capacity, there’ll be 
approximately 7,900 child care spaces supported by an annual 

budget of 22 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small business needs roads. This year’s provincial 
budget invests over 296 million in our highways and fulfills our 
three-year, 900 million commitment to renew Saskatchewan 
roads — to make them safer for Saskatchewan families and 
better for getting our products to the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you more, more about this great 
province and its exports. In a document prepared by STEP, 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, in 2001, 
Saskatchewan’s international exports reached 14.6 billion 
compared to 9.95 billion just five years ago. Today international 
domestic exports account for nearly 70 per cent of 
Saskatchewan GDP (gross domestic product). 
 
Arbel Pulse and Grain Company of Turkey, the largest pulse 
trader in the world, saw an opportunity to invest in 
Saskatchewan. As a result of a joint venture, Saskcan Pulse 
Trading opened its doors almost a year ago just outside of 
Regina and is already processing 24 hours a day at its Regina 
factory. Saskcan employs 25 full-time staff and exports over 95 
per cent of its product to 20 markets in Americas, Indian 
subcontinent, Middle East, and Europe. 
 
Beta-Bioproducts of Saskatoon recently launched a new line of 
cosmetic ingredients. The new line of supercritical extracted 
ingredients was launched based on researching an opportunity 
in the market for natural products. The current export markets 
are Europe, Asia, and North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and what about the Crown corporations? The 
Crowns spent 2 billion a year . . . yearly on local purchases, 
capital spending, and employee earnings. Crowns purchased 
more than 12,000 local Saskatchewan businesses. Mr. Speaker, 
SaskEnergy had the lowest rates in Canada four of the last six 
years. SaskPower had lower residential rates than 
corresponding rates in Alberta as of January 1, 2003. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what does the Sask Party want to do? Sell 
off or deregulate. In The Globe and Mail of May 12, an article: 
 

When Alberta finally took the step forward and partly 
deregulated the electricity market, consumers were 
promised a new era of lower prices. A deregulated market, 
they were told, was going to attract a raft of new 
competition to the province and drive down the electricity 
prices. 
 
But the competition has happened only at the bigger end of 
the market . . . 
 
With (the) three big players dominating the market, along 
with a rate cap of 11 cents a kilowatt hour, it is easy to 
understand why there has been no new competition at the 
smaller end of the market, which demands services to a 
huge number of small customers over a broad area. The 
result is two years and billions of dollars later, Albertans 
are paying the highest electricity costs in the country. 
 
And last week they found out they would . . . (have to pay) 
more. 

 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, the business needs a strong labour force. And, Mr. 
Speaker, because of our labour laws and progressive legislation 
in occupational health and safety, we have among the best 
workforces in the country if not the world — 9.8 years average 
job tenure, best in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is so much more I would like to say but I 
leave that for another time. 
 
I would move the motion to amend the opposition motion, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

Remove all words after “Saskatchewan.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
a great deal of pleasure to enter into this debate today because, 
quite frankly, both the motion put by the Saskatchewan Party 
and the amendment moved by the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview and seconded by myself — proud members of the 
New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan — goes to the very 
heart of the difference between the two parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the surface it would appear as if both of us, the 
Saskatchewan Party on one hand and the New Democratic Party 
on the other hand, are saying the same thing — that we support, 
endorse, and care very passionately about small businesses in 
this province. Because of course we all know small businesses 
are the lifeblood of our economy here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if you would read very carefully the motion 
that’s been put by the member from Indian Head and contrast 
that with the amendment put by the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview, you will see the total and complete difference in style 
and substance of the two parties. 
 
(15:00) 
 
The member from Indian Head said that the importance of 
supporting small business cannot be overemphasized. I totally, 
completely, agree with him. But then he went on to say and to 
insinuate in fairly carefully picked words, but to insinuate that 
somehow because the NDP cares as equally about organized 
labour that this is somehow a terrible or reprehensible thing. 
 
He said, for instance, that the NDP is joined at the hip with the 
SFL, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. I’m not sure what 
school of anatomy he’s ever been to, but if we’re joined at the 
hip with the SFL — I presume he thinks that that must be the 
left hip — I want to tell you though there are two hips in a 
body, generally, and we are also joined on the other hip — 
maybe that’s the right hip — with small businesses and with 
regional economic development authorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — The member from Swift Current, in seconding 
the motion, during his speech went on and tried to do as he 
always does in this House, Mr. Speaker, to distort reality, to 
give half facts, half information, and to sow the politics of 
discord and deception. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my seatmate, the member from Melville, took 
great exception to the remark he made saying that the members 
from Melville and Saskatoon Northwest were full-blown 
members of the New Democratic Party. As anyone knows, 
anyone who has followed Saskatchewan politics, they are not 
members of the New Democratic Party, though I can assure you 
we have found that they have been honourable gentlemen and 
have conducted the affairs of the province of Saskatchewan in a 
extremely credible way and we would be more than willing to 
accept their $10 membership. But they are not members of the 
NDP. 
 
The member from Swift Current then goes on and challenges us 
to demonstrate that we’re standing up for small business. Mr. 
Speaker, I could stand here for the four minutes remaining in 
the time allotted to me and I could read into the record over 
three pages of things that this government has done to increase 
tax competitiveness. That increasing tax competitiveness, as he 
knows — as he very well knows — goes an incredibly long 
way to supporting small business. And I believe it demonstrates 
in a very clear and tangible way that we are standing up for 
small business in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask one of the Pages to very kindly 
deliver the compilation that I have here in my hands, the three 
pages of measures that we have introduced over the last 11 or 
12 years to increase tax competitiveness for businesses in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t read them all into the record right now, 
but I will say that this government has introduced a number, an 
incredible number of initiatives to improve the competitiveness 
of Saskatchewan’s business tax regime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have reduced the small-business income tax 
rate from 10 per cent in 1991 to 6 per cent today, and we have 
made a further commitment to reduce it to 5 per cent by the 
year 2005. That of course is a year, the province’s centennial 
year, the year that we will still remain in government, 
improving the competitiveness regime for Saskatchewan small 
business, standing up for small business and for labour in this 
province. 
 
Because I want to give the opposition a little hint. I’m going to 
tell them a secret about why the NDP forms government and 
why they will never form government. Now all my colleagues 
are saying I shouldn’t let them in on the secret but, you know, 
it’s a secret that the proud million people in this province know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the secret to being government in Saskatchewan is 
to represent all the people — not to sow the politics of discord 
and division but to represent all people; to recognize that 
Saskatchewan, as a land of opportunity, is also a land of 
fairness; to understand that Saskatchewan is also a land of 
compassion, a land of caring, and a land that cares for all people 
and doesn’t try to pick winners and losers and to sow division 
and discord. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion, as I said, goes to the very heart of the 
differences between our two political parties. We do stand up 
for small businesses. We do more than just mutter about how 
great they are. We introduce sound, practical measures to stand 
up for small business. 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

 

Mr. Speaker, I started to talk about the small-business income 
tax rate that we have reduced so dramatically. We’ve also 
increased the annual amount of income eligible for this rate, 
from 200,000 up to $300,000. We’ve significantly reduced 
corporate capital taxes for Saskatchewan-based businesses. And 
we have also introduced a number of tax incentives targeted to 
specific segments of the provincial economy including 
manufacturing and processing, the film industry, and the 
resource sector. Mr. Speaker, we are doing all this to improve 
tax competitiveness and to encourage Saskatchewan-based 
small businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also working with small businesses in the 
area of immigration. We have a provincial nominee program, 
and small businesses, I will say, are the most enthusiastic 
supporters of the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program. 
Do you know I asked people over in the department earlier 
today to get me some statistics and as of November 2002, 65 
per cent, 65 per cent of the employers taking advantage of the 
Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program have been 
businesses with fewer than 50 employees. 
 
The provincial nominee program is something that supports 
small businesses, and the number of nominees has been 
increasing each and every year. We’ve started out quite small 
but it’s like a little snowball that’s going down the hill and it’s 
gathering momentum, gathering speed — it’s soon to become 
an avalanche — because each year for the last couple of years, 
we’ve been doubling the number of provincial nominees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wrap up my remarks just by saying 
that I do not believe the politics of division and discord, as 
demonstrated by the party opposite, are the politics that 
Saskatchewan people truly care about. They do not . . . They 
understand, they understand that we, all of us, live in a truly 
great province and that we, all of us, care very passionately for 
small business and for labour both. Mr. Speaker, I will take my 
place now saying that I am very proud to second the 
amendment from the . . . by the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to take 
part in this debate. It’s incredible that the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, and I’ll quote from their news release on 
April 23, 2003: 
 

“If this business lobbyist outfit can’t find anything better to 
do with its time than attack working people then we have 
every legal and moral right to respond appropriately,” 
Hubich said. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s incredible that those words would come 
out of a labour union head in this province. It’s incredible for 
many reasons, but the most incredible reason is that this leader 
of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour is considering 
boycotting small businesses in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s kind of like cutting off your nose to spite your face. 
 
The small businesses in this province are what creates the job; 
they’re the engine of growth in this province. And if the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour wants to hurt the 

employers of this province, guess what’s going to happen? It’s 
going to hurt the union members, union and non-union workers 
of this province. So it does not make any sense whatsoever why 
this policy would be adopted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business speak on behalf of the independent 
businesses in this province. And one of the reasons maybe the 
head of the SFL is so concerned with this Canadian Federation 
of Independent Business is possibly the reality of what’s going 
on in Saskatchewan. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Southeast is saying what all the 
wonderful things that this NDP government has been doing on 
the tax front. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to . . . Some 
information coming from the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business is when they do their polling — and by 
the way, Mr. Speaker, the CFIB has 5,300 members across this 
province and they make a point of polling their members on all 
aspects that concern small businesses in this province — and 
one of their recent polls that they did of their members was the 
priority issues for Saskatchewan. At the top of the issue was 
total tax burden in this province. And the members of the CFIB 
polled 86.7 per cent as tax burden as the highest concern for 
small businesses. The second one is Workers’ Compensation. 
 
As we know now, Mr. Speaker, Workers’ Compensation is an 
unfunded liability position. That’s incredible, Mr. Speaker, 
because that puts the whole plan in jeopardy. It puts the 
Workers’ Compensation at risk. As we know, the workers . . . 
the employers of this province fund WCB and now it’s an 
unfunded liability, not because of what the employers are doing, 
because the handling of this NDP government and its 
hand-picked NDP head of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have seen the last two years, the NDP 
government has mismanaged Workers’ Compensation and it’s 
to the . . . and it’s a real serious concern because when they 
mismanage Workers’ Compensation . . . The board is there to 
protect injured workers of this province, and it’s something that 
the NDP forget about is what’s good for the workers of this 
province. 
 
The other points on the CFIB poll was third place was 
government regulation paper burden, 72.2 per cent. Number 
three closely, or four, closely behind regulation is provincial 
labour laws at 67.2 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, so this 
government has a long ways to go before they can claim any 
victory concerning the red tape and labour laws in this province. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, the businesses either are leaving this 
province or they have been leaving for 10 years. And if . . . and 
the businesses aren’t leaving, there’s a big red flag at the border 
of Saskatchewan because they know the NDP are in power and 
that there’s unfair labour laws in this province, which is just a 
red flag to businesses in this province. They’ll take their 
investment dollars elsewhere. 
 
And we know they’ve been taking it to other jurisdictions — 
Alberta, Manitoba. Even in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, under the 
NDP government, they’ve taken a moderate position as far as 
labour laws and working with businesses, and it shows in their 
expanding manufacturing base and a growing economy 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

compared to Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s incredible that the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour would consider taking, basically taking a 
run at the small businesses of this province. Of course as we 
see, we don’t know if the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour is 
going to continue with this bizarre position or not. Possibly 
some sense will come to the Federation of Labour, and I’m 
hopeful that the leaders of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour will take a second look at this. 
 
Because we know, we talk to union members and non-union 
workers in this province and what they tell us is they don’t 
agree with the NDP position in this province. They don’t agree 
with many of their own Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 
rules and regulations that they espouse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, in the last election that many 
unionized and non-unionized workers voted for the 
Saskatchewan Party. And I’ll make a prediction that there will 
be many, many more unionized and non-unionized workers 
voting for the Saskatchewan Party in the next election. We’ll 
form a majority government after the next election, and it’s just 
a matter of when the election’s going to be called, and after 
Saskatchewan Party forms government, what kind of a mess 
this NDP government will leave this province in? That’s the 
only two questions that are out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
If this policy continues with the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour, we’re going to see more pressure put on the small 
businesses of this province. And this is something that the small 
business of this province do not need. They are in a very 
competitive environment because of having to compete with 
taxpayer dollars, they’re having to compete with the NDP 
Crown corporations. And so they are really on a . . . in a very 
dangerous situation as far as their economic health, having to 
compete not only around the world with other businesses, but 
they also have to compete with their own government in this 
province, as we have seen many times in the past. 
 
As we know, there is an incestuous relationship between the 
unions and the NDP. We see through the union deductions — 
which are mandatory by the way; the workers do not have a 
choice of giving to their union leaders — and then they pass it 
on to their friends in the NDP. So it’s quite a concern to the 
workers of this province, to the unionized workers of this 
province, that the NDP Party are taking policies, making 
policies that hurt the independent businesses of this policy and 
hurting the jobs that the small business create in the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we have seen there is another way to 
approach labour management, government relations, and the 
Saskatchewan Party has a plan. The Saskatchewan Party 
believes in a partnership. The Saskatchewan Party believes in a 
partnership with business, it believes in a partnership with 
Aboriginals, it believes in a partnership with the farm 
community of this province, and believes in a partnership with 
the workers of this province — both unionized and 
non-unionized workers in this province. 
 
And after forming government, the Saskatchewan Party will put 

that plan in place to come together, to work together in a 
co-operative fashion, to grow this province. Naturally we’re 
going to, obviously, do something about the way the Crown 
corporations are competing with small businesses in this 
province. And we will certainly, certainly, bring all these 
groups together under one tent, into a common goal of growing 
this province. 
 
And we believe we can grow this province by 10,000 people 
per year over 10 years, have 100,000 more people after 10 years 
by working co-operatively together, working with all groups, 
and joining together with union and non-unionized workers for 
the benefit of the province as a whole, not for the benefit of one 
particular group that supports the NDP Party or one political 
party. We believe in supporting the province as a whole for the 
common good of everyone in the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s incredible that the members opposite 
have amended this motion. And we will see in questions 
shortly, how the NDP Party really feel about small businesses in 
this province when they have to answer some very difficult 
questions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Very 
pleased to stand in support of the amended motion proposed by 
our newest member and the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
And I think that what we will see, what we’ve heard is that the 
Sask Party wants the NDP to show its support on the record for 
small business in Saskatchewan. And members on this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, do that not only on the record, not only 
by standing in the House and speaking about it, we do it by 
deed. 
 
And there have been many, many initiatives over the period of 
time since we’ve been government and over the period of time 
to continue. As has already been mentioned, the reduction of 
the corporate tax will come down yet further. It has been 
reduced this year and will continue to be reduced through till 
2005. And then we’ll see where we go from there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they say they want us to show our record . . . on the record 
our support for the small-business community in this province. 
And I say that I and other members on this side of the House 
are very pleased to do that. 
 
But I think that the most significant remarks on record today, 
Mr. Speaker, the most significant remarks, the ones that will be 
the widest distributed, the ones that will be paid the most 
attention to, are the remarks of the Saskatchewan Party which 
show their obvious contempt, their obvious contempt, for 
organized labour in this province. And I think that that’s . . . 
therein is the shame of it, Mr. Speaker. And many of their 
remarks are aimed at the SFL and a lot of the larger 
organizations in this province and the leadership. 
 
But I think it’s very interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that small 
business is defined, in Saskatchewan small business is defined 
as those businesses with fewer than 50 employees or less than 
$5 million in annual sales. And there are certainly some of 
those that are organized, but I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
there are many more who are not organized and are not 
represented by the SFL, but nevertheless their concerns are 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

 

taken into account in all of the labour lobbies. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these small businesses are certainly some of 
the most successful businesses in this province. And as has been 
said, and I’m proud to indeed join in the praise, those small 
businesses are the lifeblood of this economy. They actually 
comprise more than 90 per cent of the total number of 
non-agricultural private firms in the province.  
 
They directly employ about one-third of Saskatchewan’s labour 
force. They account for approximately 40 per cent of the total 
private sector employment. They created — and we’ve been 
talking a lot, Mr. Speaker, about the record of job creation in 
this province — and small businesses created about 90 per cent 
of all new jobs in the province during the last decade. 
 
And that’s a record that we’re proud of for the way that we’ve 
been able to assist small business in this province. And it’s a 
record that small business should most certainly be proud of in 
the way that they’ve been able to deliver 94 per cent of all the 
new jobs in the province during the last decade. 
 
Forty-two per cent of all Saskatchewan businesses are located 
in rural areas. And we constantly hear criticism from the 
opposition about our labour policy, and yet many of those jobs 
and many of those small businesses are located in rural 
Saskatchewan. And you would think that there would be more 
support for employees and employers over there because we 
have an awful lot of people who work in rural Saskatchewan — 
25 per cent of the total employment in this province. 
 
And we have initiatives designed to support small business 
through growth and development. And I think that that is 
something that our province is, and our government is very 
proud of — how we’ve been able to encourage development of 
business networks, business mentoring programs, and new 
business collaborations; creation of the single-window initiative 
to coordinate regional business support networks with the 
services of the Canada-Saskatchewan Business Service Centre. 
 
So there are many, many things that we can be proud of, that 
the government can be proud of, and that the small-business 
community can be proud of. 
 
And I want to emphasize again, Mr. Speaker, just last week we 
had the latest update on the labour statistics and for one straight 
year Saskatchewan has had great news to report on the job front 
— more jobs, more opportunities, and a future wide open. 
 
The Statistics Canada labour force report indicates that there 
were 12,900 more jobs in the province compared to April of last 
year. And I think that that’s very significant. But do you ever, 
ever hear praise from the opposition, from the Sask Party? No 
you never hear praise from the Sask Party and yet the jobs are 
created — they’re created by the very people that they want to 
stand up and try to divide and conquer on this side of the House 
and that side of the House. 
 
We celebrate the successes of small business. We constantly 
highlight that. And yet what do they do? They stand up and 
criticize the efforts of the government and of small business for 
creating 12,900 more jobs this year than last year. 
 

So I think that those things are a good indication that the 
economy continues to show strong job . . . strong performance 
in job growth. We in Saskatchewan have the lowest 
unemployment rate in April 2003 of major Canadian cities at 
5.3 per cent. Saskatoon is tied at . . . with the fourth lowest at 
5.9 per cent. And opportunities for youth in our province are 
certainly a priority, and there was an increase of 5,400 new jobs 
for youth and new youth were employed in Saskatchewan. 
 
But all you ever hear from the opposition is that our young 
people are leaving the province. Well they can’t all be leaving, 
Mr. Speaker, because there are 5,400 more young people 
working in our province this year compared to last year. And 
the youth unemployment rate is down. It’s down from 12.5 per 
cent in April 2002 to 10.3 in April 2003. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, there are many things to celebrate. 
We’re proud of the small-business sector. We’re proud of the 
government’s record on assisting them through whatever means 
are possible, through various tax incentives that have been 
mentioned by my colleagues. And there is absolutely no reason 
for the Sask Party to think that this government does not 
support small business, and we do. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Sixty-five minutes of the 75-minute 
debate have now elapsed. We will now proceed to the 
10-minute question period. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you much, Mr. Speaker. My question’s 
for the member from Redberry Lake. I would ask the member if 
he would lay out for the members of the Assembly and the 
people of Saskatchewan what unfair labour laws that he 
continues to refer to and what labour laws he will change, 
amend, and what rights he’ll take away from ordinary working 
people in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to respond 
to the questions from the member from the opposite side. As we 
know, the motion we’re debating here is whether . . . The 
question is whether the NDP are supporting this boycott by the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and are they taking any 
steps to stop this horrendous boycott which is hurting members 
of their own Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, both 
unionized members and non-unionized members. 
 
And the member should take steps immediately to stop this 
boycott and help its members and help the small businesses of 
this province to grow this province, to create more jobs for the 
good of everyone in this province so the government of the day 
— which will be a Saskatchewan Party government soon — so 
that the government has more money for education and health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
is for the member from Saskatoon Meewasin, and I guess it 
may be as a hypothetical question because the boycott hasn’t 
gone into place. But if Larry Hubich and the SFL follow 
through with their boycott of . . . (inaudible) . . . businesses 
throughout this province — 5,200 businesses throughout this 
province — will she be supporting that boycott by not shopping 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

at those businesses? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, the member, the Sask Party 
member who is the Labour critic, asks the question would I be 
supporting a hypothetical boycott if indeed it would occur. On 
this side of the House, we don’t deal with hypothetical, Mr. 
Speaker. We deal with when a situation occurs that we will 
respond. We will respond when the time occurs. 
 
However this is not a response for the government. This is a 
matter between organized labour and the CFIB. We have a good 
record of support for small business. We also support working 
people, but they will make their decisions about how best to 
respond to a lobby from either side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. I listened with great interest to the speech given by the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone and I thought it was 
interesting given the lack of democracy that seems to be from 
that side of the House. 
 
(15:30) 
 
I would just ask the question for him, is there freedom of speech 
for businesses to give their point of view but not freedom of 
speech for people that belong to a union, men and women? 
Does he believe that the member from Saskatchewan Rivers 
should be able to stand up and say what he has to say or should 
he be curtailed in his freedom of speech? Should the former 
member of this House, Grant Schmidt, who wanted to be a 
candidate, you know the lack of democracy shown there, does 
he support that sort of thing? 
 
So I guess my question in summation, Mr. Speaker, to the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone: does he believe in 
freedom of speech for business only or does he believe in 
freedom of speech for labour unions as well? 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad the 
member asked that question. Because yes, on this side of the 
House, unlike that side of the House, we do believe in freedom 
of speech. We believe in freedom of speech on any union drive 
that comes in this province. We will allow not only the union 
leaders to talk to employees but will also allow businesses to 
talk to employees. 
 
I will ask the members on that side: will they not support 
freedom of speech and let business owners talk to their 
employees during a union drive? That’s freedom of speech, Mr. 
Speaker. Do you want to talk freedom of speech? That’s 
freedom of speech. 
 
So do we support freedom of speech on this side? Absolutely. 
Unlike the government party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
member for Saskatoon Idylwyld. The question is direct. It is a 
yes or no question. It deserves a yes or a no answer. 
 

Has the NDP — have any members on that side of the House or 
any representative of the NDP — intervened with the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour leadership to put an end to 
the talk of a boycott of Saskatchewan’s small businesses? 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to date I am unaware of a 
boycott. 
 
And whether or not this question is directed or hypothetical, I 
spent quite a bit of time pointing out that we are in support of 
small business in a number of things. And the kind of division, 
the kind of division, the kind of division that we’re hearing 
from the other side, the kind of distortion that we hear on a 
daily basis, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s not much like when 
we ask the opposition members where do they stand on 
SaskPower? Are they going to sell it off or deregulate it, Mr. 
Speaker? We were here and we spent new. . . We have . . . Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I know that the Leader of the Opposition has 
stated publicly that all of his members will answer questions in 
this Legislative Assembly. So I have a question for the member 
from Redberry. 
 
To the member: you have on occasion introduced as a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just remind the member to speak through 
the Chair. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Pardon me. The member from Redberry has 
introduced through a private member’s Bill right-to-work 
legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. Can he describe 
what he means, what the member means by right-to-work 
legislation? Does it mean that members of unions have a right 
not to be a member of a union? What precisely does 
right-to-work legislation mean? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be glad to answer 
that question. Mr. Speaker, as a former Labour critic, I’ve done 
a lot work in the labour area. And since the election in 1999 we 
have talked to businesses and labour groups and union heads 
and union members, and we’ve talked to a lot of people and 
we’ve answered a lot of their questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve listened to the workers of this province. 
When the workers of this province said that they wanted a 
secret ballot when they go to organize a union, that’s . . . we 
agreed with them and we put that as a part of our policy — a 
secret ballot to determine whether they want to have a union or 
not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we listened to the businesses of this 
province and they said they wanted freedom of information, 
freedom of speech in the workplace when it came to discussing 
a union organization drive in their workplace, so we have 
responded by giving that. 
 
And directly to the member’s question, we listened to the labour 
leaders of this province and they said right-to-work legislation 
was unacceptable to them and we agreed. We withdrew that 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

 

from our party platform . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the member from Saskatoon Southeast, the same question that I 
asked the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
If the SFL asks you to boycott businesses throughout this 
province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the SFL asked that 
member to boycott businesses throughout the province, what 
businesses that employ members from the SFL will she agree to 
. . . Will that member agree to boycott those businesses and 
perhaps contribute to their demise? 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, apparently the member from Indian 
Head is under the mistaken impression that we are debating the 
motion that he put, which is, I would suggest, full of the politics 
of division and discord. We very clearly moved an amendment 
to say that this Assembly expresses its strong support for 
small-business owners throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
During his speech, Mr. Speaker, he challenged us. He said, the 
importance of supporting small business cannot be 
overemphasized. I’m going to tell you how we support small 
business — by increasing Saskatchewan tax competitiveness. In 
1992, the small-business corporation income tax rate was 
reduced from 10 per cent to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Well I thank all members for their 
participation in the debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 5 — Legislative Reform 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to . . . At the conclusion of my 
remarks, I’ll be moving the motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the advancements that this 
government has initiated with democratic reform of the 
legislature, reforms that bring the people of Saskatchewan 
closer to government. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the issue of 
democracy. Democracy is what we fundamentally, as citizens of 
Canada, see as our rights to express our opinions and our rights 
to vote in a duly elected government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s an old concept in democracy. It’s 
very simple: the minority have the right to have their say, just 
like the majority do, but in the end of the day, the majority 
rules, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, elections are about the right of the majority 
to rule. And on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we believe 
very strongly in that democratic principle. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party don’t believe in the 
democratic principle of the majority rules, the majority wins. 
 
Now I just want to cite an example. Just a few short weeks ago, 
the constituents, the members of the Saskatchewan Party from 

the constituency of Melville, they voted. They turned out in 
some 1,200 to vote on who they’d like to be their representative 
for the Saskatchewan Party in the next provincial election. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they voted overwhelmingly, they voted 
overwhelmingly for a gentleman by the name of Grant Schmidt, 
a gentleman who served in this legislature for a number of years 
— a gentleman who, although I may not agree with his politics, 
I may not agree with his particular point of view on issues, Mr. 
Speaker, nonetheless a gentleman who served his constituents 
well because obviously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those very same 
constituents wanted to send him back to this very same 
legislature. 
 
And they turned out in number on a very stormy night in the 
constituency of Melville to vote. And they voted 
overwhelmingly for Mr. Schmidt. And then Mr. Schmidt, Mr. 
Schmidt wanted then to move forward, as any of us who are 
elected as candidates, to be the candidate in the next provincial 
election representing the Saskatchewan Party. And the old 
concept that most votes wins should have allowed him to do 
that. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no, the Saskatchewan Party leader 
and the Saskatchewan Party executive and hierarchy decide no, 
Mr. Grant Schmidt isn’t good enough to be their candidate in 
the next upcoming provincial election. 
 
Not only did they say he’s not good enough, they went on to 
malign his character, to attack him personally, and do things 
that no respectable political leader should ever do to a candidate 
from his own party, or for that matter, to another individual. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about Grant 
Schmidt’s history. To my knowledge — and I watched the 
political career of Grant Schmidt as did most of the people of 
Saskatchewan — he was never, never found guilty of anything 
criminal, never found to have done anything morally . . . or 
disrespectful, or anything that would make him ineligible to sit 
as a member of the legislature. 
 
I have to say that I didn’t agree with his viewpoints and I didn’t 
agree with his political position on many things, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but he served his constituents in the manner in which 
they elected him to serve. He served them well. We may, him 
and I, may have very well had very strong differences of 
opinion but he was the people’s choice. 
 
And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 12 years later this gentleman — 
who was good enough to be the president of the Melville 
constituency Saskatchewan Party executive — sought again the 
right to represent the people of Melville in this great Assembly. 
And he went forward, he went forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
put forward his position to the people at a nominating 
convention. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those people, those 
people chose by a majority to support Grant Schmidt as being 
the Sask Party candidate from Melville-Saltcoats in the next 
provincial election. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know what the Saskatchewan 
Party is thinking when they believe they can overturn a valid 
election, voted for by the majority of people who own 
memberships in their own party in that constituency, for no 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

more reason than they don’t like the individual. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does that say about 
democracy? That says that in the Saskatchewan Party, 
democracy’s not important. It says that what the people of the 
province want, or in that case the people of the 
Melville-Saltcoats constituency wanted, wasn’t important — 
that a few people can get together in a backroom and say what 
the people want is not important, that they can overturn the 
elected choice of the people because they don’t like it. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does that say if that party ever 
formed government? That they could overturn the very things 
that the people of this province want. What’s it say about the 
right as an elected member of the legislature to have the ability 
to speak freely? Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it significantly 
hurts the very things for which we as citizens of this province 
stand for. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we stand for the right of people to speak 
their mind, to have opinions other than that of the leader of the 
party. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what this whole 
institution’s about; that is what democracy’s about. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, two people can have different opinions. 
They can have different approaches to solve a problem. And 
that should be debated vigorously in this Assembly. But if a 
member of the Saskatchewan Party, a grassroots member has an 
opinion that varies from that of the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party says he doesn’t 
have the right to be a member of the legislature. 
 
So he has the right to choose who’s going to represent the 
grassroots people in his own party. He has the right to defeat 
and overturn what the very grassroots of his party wants. So 
that’s utter disdain for the grassroots, and by doing so it’s utter 
disdain for the democratic principle. 
 
So it doesn’t matter what the members of the Saskatchewan 
Party want, it only matters what the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party wants. Is that the type of leader that anybody would want 
to elect to be the premier of Saskatchewan? I’d say no, because 
an individual has utter disdain for democracy, has utter disdain 
for the very institution, for the very principles in which we as a 
province stand for. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to contrast that value or viewpoint 
of the Saskatchewan Party leader to that of the Leader of the 
New Democratic Party, the current Premier of Saskatchewan. I 
want to talk about the many advancements that he has made in 
democratic reform, bringing this great institution closer to the 
people. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to start by one of the most 
recent events that we’ve had to deal with, that of the Electoral 
Boundaries Commission, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What happens in the Electoral Boundaries Commission when 
they bring forward . . . when, pardon me, the commission is 
structured, that the Chief Justice will appoint the Chair of the 
committee. Then it’s up to the Executive Council or the Premier 
to appoint two other members to the committee. The current 
Premier of the province chose, because he believed it to be the 

right thing to do, that there needed to be fairness, not only in his 
mind but also in the view of the public, in the appointment of 
the commission. 
 
He allowed the Leader of the Opposition to appoint one of the 
members of the commission and then the government appointed 
the other, so that the people of Saskatchewan could have faith 
in that the Electoral Boundaries Commission was truly looking 
at the new electoral boundaries for the province, not from a 
self-interest point of view but from a point of view that was fair 
to all citizens of the province. That’s what the Leader of the 
New Democratic Party in Saskatchewan, the current Premier, 
did. He put aside any opportunity to appoint two people, and 
allowed the Leader of the Opposition to appoint one of those 
two people to the commission. 
 
That is true democracy. That is moving forward in a way that 
shows great leadership and respect for the viewpoints of all 
people in the province. He, by doing that, showed that it was all 
right and acceptable for somebody on that commission to have 
a different point of view than the representative he appointed to 
the commission, that good public policy comes from being able 
to debate differences of opinion, not by putting down or stifling 
differences of opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So where the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party will say that 
democracy doesn’t count, if some duly elected candidate from 
one of his own constituencies to represent his party in the 
upcoming election has a different point of view, he won’t let 
that person run. Contrast to the current Premier of the province 
who allowed the Leader of the Opposition, which he didn’t 
have to do, to appoint one of the three members to the Electoral 
Boundaries Commission. The Chief Justice appoints the Chair 
and then the government appoints the third member. 
 
So this Premier not only believes in the principle of democracy 
and fairness, he demonstrates it by what he does. He 
demonstrates it in the actions in which he takes, in the fairness 
he wishes to display to the people of Saskatchewan, for the 
people of Saskatchewan, because he truly believes in 
democracy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk about the new opening . . . 
the opening up of the committee structure in the legislature 
that’s been proposed by this government. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s going to have citizens and stakeholders being able to go 
before committees of the legislature — all-party committees of 
the legislature — to talk about proposed legislation, to put 
forward ideas, amendments, concerns, so that all members of 
the legislature . . . or, pardon me, all the members of the 
committee from all parties of the legislature have an 
opportunity to hear from those stakeholders firsthand. It’s 
opening up democracy so that the citizens of this province have 
a greater say in the future of our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are significant steps forward. That’s 
talking about valuing the opinions of others. It’s talking about 
listening to the opinions of all. It’s talking about working with 
all people to make the province a better place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s far significant . . . far different — 
far different — than what we heard from the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party when he wouldn’t even, he wouldn’t even 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

 

allow a member to run for his party that might have a difference 
of opinion with himself. That’s not only about democracy, 
that’s about a leader who wants party for . . . or wants power for 
power’s sake and doesn’t care about the viewpoints of others. 
He’s interested only in what’s important to himself. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that tells a great message about the 
basic fundamentals of the institution in which I am part of and 
all members of this Assembly are part of; an institution that 
allows debate, that allows differences of opinion, and allows 
ultimately the majority of those of us who are elected to 
represent their constituents make decisions. 
 
It allows members . . . It talks about allowing members of the 
Assembly to have differences of opinion whether they’re on the 
government side or on the opposition side. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we would never stifle anybody from having the right to have 
their say. Members of the government side, in the last four 
years that I’ve been elected, have had the opportunity when 
they were unhappy or had some concerns about particular 
pieces of legislation, they stood up and brought forward those 
concerns in this House. 
 
That’s what democracy is about. It’s about being able to speak 
freely about your concerns. And at the end of the day, 
democracy says that the minority have the say and the majority, 
through voting, get their way. Well on this side of the House, 
we believe very strongly in that principle. We believe in that. 
 
We’re not going to stop a duly elected, nominated member from 
ever running in election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Members 
opposite, members opposite may talk like that’s happened on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, but it’s never happened. In 
one case, Mr. Speaker, an individual withdrew, an individual 
withdrew because he was facing personal challenges. And we 
on this side of this House respect the fact, we respect the fact 
that an individual member has a right to withdraw from running 
if he’s facing personal challenges. 
 
But we won’t force, we won’t force anybody not to run. And 
we haven’t forced anybody not to run, unlike the members 
opposite, unlike the members opposite. A duly elected member 
of the constituency of Melville-Saltcoats for the Saskatchewan 
Party, who faced no criminal or moral issues, no criminal or 
moral issues, was not allowed to run for the Saskatchewan Party 
because he had a difference of opinion with the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, democracy would say that that’s flaunting 
it and throwing it right in the face of the very institution in 
which we’re part of. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, democracy is a 
principle that we cannot afford to play with because if you will 
flaunt democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will do anything 
because you believe that the rights of the majority aren’t 
important, that the end justifies the means, and you can do 
whatever you want to do, that you don’t have to listen to the 
majority. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is flying in the very, very face of 
democracy. It’s very dangerous. It’s extremely dangerous to the 
principles on which our country and our province have 
governed themselves since Confederation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s put that in contrast to the 
Premier. The Premier who, by his actions, made the Electoral 
Boundaries Commission represent all political parties, and fair 
to all peoples of the province. The fact that this Premier led the 
opening up of the committee system in this province to bring 
democracy closer to the people. That he opens up the committee 
structure so that citizens and stakeholders can go before an 
all-party committee to bring their concerns forward, not just 
before the government but before all-party committee so both 
the views of the stakeholder are heard at the same time by both 
members of the government and members of the opposition. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought the member 
from Regina Dewdney needed a little break. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce a group of students that have just joined us in the 
Assembly this afternoon, Mr. Speaker — 24 grade 8 students 
from Whitewood, accompanied by their teacher, Elaine Wyatt, 
and I notice a few of their chaperones and teachers. I see 
they’ve also brought Pastor John along, so that’s a good thing. 
 
But a special welcome to the students who have come to join us 
this afternoon. I look forward to meeting with them shortly for 
pictures, and just an opportunity to discuss some of the 
proceedings that they’re witnessing this afternoon, and at that 
time I’ll just explain the process. 
 
As you’ll note the demeanour in the Assembly is a lot calmer 
than if you’d have come at question period, but we’ll talk about 
that a little later on. So a special welcome to the students and 
I’d invite the members to join me in welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 5 — Legislative Reform 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to continue with my remarks. As we are here 
debating today the fundamental principle of democracy, the 
very fundamental principle of the institution in which I stand 
today, it’s very fitting that those who witness this debate have 
an opportunity to hear the different views on democracy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to use a number . . . a quote from a 
number of articles in papers throughout the province. 
 
I want to talk . . . the headline here is, “‘Holy inner circle’ of 
Saskatchewan Party.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes on to say 
and I quote: 
 

Some, like former Conservative Dan D’Autremont, say 
Schmidt was given the boot because of his ties to the 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

Conservative Party. My goodness, they are going to wear 
out their shoes kicking out everyone who meets that 
description! 
 
What about MLA Brenda Bakken? What about MLA 
Doreen Eagles, who was Grant Devine’s personal assistant? 
 
What about MLA Brad Wall, who was an assistant to John 
Gerich while Gerich was Grant Schmidt’s associate 
minister in the Department of Economic Development? 
 
MLA Don Toth served one term in the Devine government. 
 
And nearly all the current Saskatchewan Party senior staff 
cut their political teeth in the . . . (same) government. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if Grant Schmidt’s greatest sin was being 
tied to the Grant Devine government of the 1980s, well then 
why are not all these other members being kicked out? Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that’s the question I think that the people of 
Saskatchewan wonder about. 
 
Grant Schmidt was a duly elected candidate by the majority of 
members in attendance at a duly constituted nomination 
convention. The majority spoke. They elected Grant Schmidt 
and then the Sask Party executive and members decide no, they 
can overrule the democratic principle of democracy that most 
votes win. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a very, very scary 
concept. 
 
I would like to refer to another article in the Leader-Post dated 
Monday, March 24, 2003. It’s from Bob Hughes, an editorial. 
And it says as its title, “Maybe voters should decide which 
candidate they like.” A novel concept — democracy. But this 
article goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to say that the voters did 
speak in Melville-Saltcoats. The voters did speak. 
 
Those members that held Saskatchewan Party membership, 
those individuals that held Saskatchewan Party memberships in 
the constituency of Melville-Saltcoats turned up, some 1,200 of 
them, and they spoke. And the majority voted for Grant 
Schmidt. And then the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party can decide that democracy 
does not count. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve got an interesting bit of information 
here. It’s from the P.A. Herald, August 12, 1997. And it says, 
“Krawetz chosen interim leader for new party” — referring to 
the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it goes on 
and I quote: 
 

“Krawetz said he welcomes the endorsements of people 
like former Conservative premier Grant Devine and former 
cabinet minister Grant Schmidt.” 

 
(16:00) 
 
P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald. P.A. Herald, August 12, 1997: 
 

The first leader, the interim leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party praised (praised) the endorsements of former cabinet 
minister, Grant Schmidt. 

 

And now he and others in the backrooms decide that Grant 
Schmidt is not fit to run as the democratically elected 
representative for the Saskatchewan Party for the 
Melville-Saltcoats constituency. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there is no greater tragedy in 
our democratic system than to flaunt the very democracy of 
which we all must uphold — the very democracy that this 
institution is all about. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes on. And I have an article here 
that says, “Sask. Party democracy put to (the) test.” And this is 
from a Hali Oleksyn. It goes on and talks about: 
 

As one of “the clever voters of Melville,” I attended the 
nomination meeting on March 3. Many . . . (Saskatoon) 
Party MLAs were sitting in the back of the auditorium, and 
I can guarantee that their behaviour was both rude and 
unprofessional. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

I overheard jokes about sabotaging the buses from Melville 
and watched and listened as they rolled their eyes and 
snickered throughout Grant Schmidt’s speech. They 
managed to top off their “professional” behaviour by 
chanting “Bob, Bob, Bob!” just as Schmidt finished his 
speech. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I agree the 
Saskatchewan Party’s democracy was put to the test. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they badly, badly failed that test. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here a letter from Lesley Nordick. 
And it calls . . . it says, “Democracy (is) alien to (the) 
Opposition.” And it reads, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Ever since the Saskatchewan Party formed itself out of the 
tatters of the old Liberal and Tory parties, I and most 
people I know have tried to figure out (what it stands . . . 
figure out what for) for what it stands (Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
pardon me). 
 
What we’ve learned so far is that you can’t depend on what 
its members say because any one of them will say anything 
at any time, depending on the way the wind is blowing. 
 
One day, they don’t believe in government investment in 
the economy, says their leader. The next, (day) they elect 
an MLA from Wilkie who has lobbied the government to 
invest in a new spa in his town. That’s one example. You 
can see why I’m confused. 

 
The Schmidt affair helped us a bit. We learned one thing 
they don’t believe in: democracy. The wishes of the 1,200 
people who nominated Grant Schmidt mattered not a sniff, 
overturned in another back room by a group of faceless 
party executives. 

 
Now, the Wiberg affair, (it says) where (the) Saskatchewan 
Rivers MLA Daryl Wiberg first opposed the Saskatchewan 
Forest Centre in Prince Albert, then changed his mind to 
support it because he was told the community wanted it, 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

 

then changed his mind again when leader Elwin 
Hermanson told him that his party didn’t like the centre. 
 
So now we know that what a Saskatchewan Party MLA’s 
constituents want doesn’t matter. More proof that 
democracy is a foreign concept. 

 
So, we know in what they believe. What does that leave? 
The only thing I can see is that the party wants power and 
will do anything to get it. What the people want, what 
Schmidt wants, what Wiberg wants, what the people who 
support them want, matters not . . . 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members, I’m 
attempting to listen to the member speaking and I’m having a 
difficult time hearing him. If we could just have the background 
noise toned down. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Obviously the 
members opposite, we hit a nerve, because even the members 
opposite, even the members opposite know that the people of 
Saskatchewan believe in a democratic principle. They believe in 
the concept of democracy. And the more they flaunt it, the more 
they stick their eye in the concept of democracy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the more that they become nervous and upset at their 
own actions, because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, anyone who 
believes in the institution of government, believes in the right of 
democracy and freedom of speech, cannot be very comfortable 
with what they have done. 
 
They have to be ashamed of themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They can’t, they can’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I hear the 
member — the current member from Melville, or pardon me, 
the current member from Saltcoats — say he feels terrible. Well 
he should feel terrible because Grant Schmidt was elected, beat 
him in a nomination, beat him in a nomination, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And he wouldn’t even respect the democratic principle 
of those . . . the person who gets the most votes wins. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the Leader 
of the Saskatchewan Party as I wind my remarks up. Again, I 
have an article here that says, “Hermanson apologizes to 
Schmidt.” The Leader of the Saskatchewan Party had to 
apologize because the remarks he made about Grant Schmidt 
after he won the nomination in Melville-Saltcoats were so over 
the edge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they went so far that he faced a 
challenge in the courts if he didn’t apologize. So he apologized 
because he knew, he knew that he could not get away with 
those types of comments and that the people of Saskatchewan, 
and in fact the very laws which we stand up for as members of 
the legislature, wouldn’t allow him to go as far as he went, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Here’s the article. I’m going to read just a couple of paragraphs. 
It says: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson faxed an 
apology to Grant Schmidt Thursday to apologize for 
comments he made about the Melville lawyer and rejected 
party candidate. 
 
Schmidt said Wednesday he was considering suing 
Hermanson for telling the Saskatchewan News Network 

last week “most people in the Saskatchewan Party . . . 
(don’t) feel they would trust Grant Schmidt with their 
family, their business interest, (or) with their finances.” 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a man who served in this Assembly 
for more than 10 years, honourably. We don’t have to agree 
with his politics. We don’t have to agree with the decisions he 
made. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the very people who elected 
him to serve in the 1980s turned out in mass numbers to re-elect 
him as their candidate for the Melville-Saltcoats constituency in 
the upcoming election. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the majority spoke. 
 
And not only did the Sask Party have to take away his right to 
run — in the backrooms — not only did they flaunt democracy, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only did they flaunt the very 
democracy which governments across this country operate 
under, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they had to personally attack 
the gentleman, they had to personally attack him in a very vile 
and disrespectful and contemptible way. 
 
And the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party attacked Grant 
Schmidt after not allowing him to run, after they overturned the 
decision by the elected majority, but he had to personally attack 
him in a contemptible way. And for that attack he had to 
apologize, as he should have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party by its very 
actions, and demonstrated by its leader, has contempt for the 
very institution in which he wants to be the leader of. He has 
contempt for the very institution in which he wants to lead, the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I conclude my remarks I would 
move: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the advancements that this 
government has initiated with democratic reform of the 
legislature, reforms that bring the people closer to the 
government. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I’m delighted to stand today and second this 
motion. I think it’s a very, very important motion that speaks to 
why we are all here today, because we value democracy. It’s the 
institution upon which the legislature is based. And I will read 
the motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the advancements that this 
government has initiated with democratic reform of the 
legislature, reforms that bring the people closer to the 
government. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that says it well. We are committed 
here on this side of the House to advancing reforms that make 
our government more in sync with the people here in 
Saskatchewan. And I want to say that this is very, very 
important because this is all about credibility; it’s all about 
trust; it’s all about faith. It’s about how does the government 
rule. 
 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

And you have to have . . . people have to have confidence in the 
government; and what we do, how we act says how people will 
feel about us. Do people have trust, confidence, and faith in us? 
What’s our record? 
 
And we feel, I believe, we have an outstanding record on this 
side of the House and I will speak about that in a minute. And 
of course then I will speak a little bit about the record of the 
opposition and how it lacks sorely in terms of building trust, 
confidence, and faith if they were ever — and I rue the day — if 
they were ever to become government. 
 
Because I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the member from 
Regina Dewdney spoke so well about the tragedy when people 
give up on democracy and instead, in their quest, they decide 
it’s all about power. 
 
And this is what’s happening on the opposition side. They have 
given up on the principle of democracy and it’s all about the 
principle of power. And this is what it’s all about — power at 
any cost — while we on this side value the principle of 
democracy, and this is what this party is all about. It’s not what 
that party, what the Saskatchewan Party is all about. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about three pieces of 
evidence that shows that we are committed to the people of 
Saskatchewan as we make the advancements to reform 
democracy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to talk about the external things that our former Premier 
Romanow did in the early 1990s to reform government so it’s 
more in sync with the people. I want to talk about a very 
exciting initiative that I was part of over the course of last 
winter and that’s the voluntary sector and how do we develop 
active citizenship and the growth of democracy, and as well the 
new initiatives that have been put forward this spring and how 
exciting they are. 
 
And of course all of this is about democracy. It’s not about 
power. It’s about partnerships. It’s about the full development, 
how a society matures. And this is very, very important in 
Saskatchewan as we come closer to our centennial. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, I’d like to talk about the 
Romanow reforms. And they were an excellent beginning, a 
very good beginning. Of course, they were a response to what 
happened in the 1980s, a sad, sad time for democracy, and as 
we can tell, that there were so many — I understand the number 
is up to 22 — former MLAs were charged. And the abuse of 
power which is a very, very sad thing so we had to respond on 
this side to bring elected officials into a more positive, 
honourable light. 
 
And what were some of those things that we did? Well we 
implemented The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act, thereby giving citizens greater access to 
government records. We introduced changes to require 
by-elections on a timely basis. We established an independent 
commission to review all issues related to MLA pay and 
constituency allowance usage, and implemented the report 
without amendment. We substantially increased the budgets for 
the Provincial Auditor’s office, the Ombudsman’s office, the 
Human Rights Commission. 

Now that’s an interesting one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we 
know at one of the very first conventions for the Saskatchewan 
Party, they would like to do away with the Human Rights 
Commission, which is incidentally something they did in BC 
and we talked about that last spring. It’s very, very scary. The 
Human Rights Commission is one of the foundations of a 
democratic society. 
 
And we’ve also established the Children’s Advocate. So those 
are some of the things we did in the first two terms of the 
Romanow government. And that . . . those were important. 
They are not insignificant things. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about a very important 
report that was released last November, chaired by the member 
from Regina Wascana Plains, and I’m talking about the 
Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is an important piece of, how do you develop a 
society; how do you value what people have to say? And this is 
about a partnership between the voluntary sector and the public 
sector or the government sector. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
is the whole root of it when we talk about a civil society and 
how we hope from a civil society evolves democracy. 
 
People get their experience by . . . involved in democratic 
institutions like community associations, parent-teacher 
associations, those type of things. This recognizes all the 
organizations that we have in this province that are founded on 
the democratic principles. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s our vision for the relationship 
between the Government of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan’s 
voluntary sector? Well what we see is this, and I will quote 
from the report: 
 

The outcome of the work of the initiative will be a vibrant, 
robust environment that promotes quality of life and 
encourages active citizenship in Saskatchewan. The 
Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative builds on an effective 
and collaborative relationship between the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the voluntary sector. 

 
And so active citizenship is the key word here. And this may be 
hard for the Saskatchewan Party to understand because they 
would like an inactive, passive citizenship that would let 
anything happen to them. And this is the kind of thing we see in 
BC, but here in Saskatchewan we are calling for a development 
of an active citizenship such as we saw in Prince Albert earlier 
this week, where I understand 400-plus citizens came out to 
express their opinion as active citizens about what they see 
happening in their city. 
 
Now what are some of the values that define the relationship 
between the Government of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan’s 
voluntary sector? Well one of the key ones — there’s many but 
this is one that I think is very key and relates very well to this 
motion here today — democracy. This is one of our key values 
in the voluntary sector, upholding the right to associate freely 
and to express freely and to engage in advocacy and active 
citizenship. That’s what we’re promoting on this side of the 
government — active citizenship and democracy. It’s part of the 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

 

Saskatchewan way and we believe in it completely. And we see 
it in all the work we do here. 
 
As well, we go on in this report to talk about our principles. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this is how the relationship between the 
Government of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan’s voluntary 
sector will operate. But one of the key ones, and there’s many 
here as well, is advocacy. And we encourage this within the 
voluntary sector and we encourage people to come to the 
government and say, how are things going on the streets, the 
farms, the villages, the cities of Saskatchewan. 
 
Advocacy is a key part of that. It is inherent to debate and 
change in a democratic society. The right of organizations to 
advocate their positions and interest the Government of 
Saskatchewan will be upheld. That’s our commitment. That’s 
one of our key principles, that the right of organizations to 
advocate their positions and interests to the Government of 
Saskatchewan will be upheld. And I think that’s a fundamental 
thing for people to hear in this province today because some 
places this is not, in some parties this is not honoured. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this is an exciting initiative and 
we’re going to round two with this. And I can tell you one of 
the very most interesting things that happened. Just last week 
we introduced the Bill to protect or limit the liability for 
non-profit boards, and I think this is a strong signal to the 
people of Saskatchewan, we want to see you involved as active 
citizens taking leadership roles in democratic institutions like 
community associations and all of that. A very, very important 
signal. 
 
And so we’re doing this all the time on all fronts. So we take 
this democratic reform very, very seriously, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And as well I would like to talk to . . . Perhaps this is the most 
obvious one, but it’s one that I think is very, very important, so 
I’ll just take a few minutes to highlight this. But of course it’s 
the rule changes to how the committee structure will operate in 
the legislature. I think this is exciting and this is important 
because this makes our work more accessible to the people of 
Saskatchewan and we increase public involvement and it’s 
better use of MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) time. 
And that’s the long and short of it. And I think this is exciting 
because I’m really looking forward to working in this kind of 
environment. 
 
Now of course some of the parts of it . . . We talk about how 
we’re going to move private members’ day from Tuesday to 
Friday. I think that’ll be an interesting time. And I think this 
will be very interesting, having this 75-minute debate. I think 
that’s an interesting structure and I think that every week this is 
going to be lots of fun. I’m going to be looking forward to that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The ratings are going to go way up. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — That’s right. It’s going to be fun and it’s going 
to be exciting. And I think people . . . It’ll give experience to all 
of us. I think this is good stuff. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the other and the most important 
part of this talks about the policy field committees, and I know 

others will want to get in this debate and have a lot more 
experience talking about this. But I think this is a critical piece 
of it as we make better use of the MLA time and get the public 
involved. 
 
Of course the five — the standing committees on the human 
rights, standing committee on the economy, the Crowns, 
executive agencies, and in government affairs and infrastructure 
— all of this we hope will be televised. And we’ll review 
annual reports, Bills, estimates, regulations. We may conduct 
hearings and inquiries, so there’s that interconnection with the 
public. That’s very important. Reporting to the House, all of 
this is really exciting stuff. And I’m looking forward to it and I 
can’t wait till we get right at that on. So I’m looking forward to 
that. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to talk for a minute . . . So 
that’s our record. And I think there’s three parts that I want to 
emphasize. The initiatives of the Romanow government in the 
first two terms — very exciting work, well needed, and they did 
the job, and that was exciting stuff. 
 
The second one that I talked about was Voluntary Sector 
Initiative. I think that’s key about civil society, democracy, and 
of course now with the committee structure being changed and 
made into a new, innovative way, I think that’s good news for 
people. 
 
So that’s our record. What’s the record of the opposition? And 
as I was preparing for this debate today, it hit me that there 
were three pieces, three pieces, that I think really put the light 
on Sask Party in terms of their quest for power. What a tragedy 
that is, their quest at any cost. It doesn’t matter. We know that 
democracy can be messy; sometimes there are rough edges. But 
what they want to do is they want to have power — the long 
and short of it. And it doesn’t matter if there are people in the 
way, they’re going to roll over top of them. And it doesn’t 
matter if they’re accurate in their facts. It doesn’t matter. 
 
And so what I want to talk about . . . And I’ll go through this 
quickly because I know the member from Regina Dewdney did 
a very good job of pointing out how sore their record is and 
how disappointing it is. 
 
But I would like to talk about three points. And the first was of 
course the dead-of-the-night deal in the, I believe it was, the late 
mid-’90s where people got together to form the Sask Party. And 
what kind of deal was that? Was that the height of democracy? 
Were they out there talking about getting people involved? No. 
That was a deal for power. They really felt . . . this is what they 
did, what they had to do, to get power. 
 
Now the other thing — and I know that there’s been lots of 
debate around recall and that type of thing — but the other part 
of this, around their party stuff, is the lack of resolutions. Now 
sometimes we get into a lot of discussion because — over on 
this side — because we do get a lot of direction from our party 
and we honour that direction. We have a council system set up 
so we can work within that. 
 
But what about the other side? Like when we had this debate 
this Christmas about Kyoto and were talking about our 
November provincial conventions, how many resolutions did 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

they have? They had one resolution. And was that debated at 
length? No. That was the extent of their resolutions. 
 
We had full debate about many resolutions, and I’m really 
proud of that. I think that’s a strong indication of how we value 
democracy. But here is something that comes from The 
StarPhoenix, November 19, ’97 from Murray Mandryk, “Sask 
Party lacks deep thought”: 
 

But the reality is that precious few Sask Party resolutions 
this weekend, (and) few social policy resolutions in 
particular, were tempered by such liberal thought. 

 
And I am quoting here from this article, and I continue the 
quote: 
 

Come to think of it, far too few resolutions were . . . 
(debated) by any thought at all. 
 
Mere moments after passing the youth crime resolution, 
forum participants sent a resolution calling for disbanding 
the human rights commission to the convention floor. 
 
(And) How ludicrously right-wing is this? Well it had 
Grant Schmidt (yes, that Grant Schmidt) appealing to 
delegates the next day for a modicum of restraint and 
reason. (The motion was tabled — not defeated . . .) 
 
Add in resolutions which call for chain gangs for both 
young and adult prisoners, insist that . . . only definition of 
a family is a married couple and would make union 
membership optional in certified workplaces and you get a 
picture of how far to the right this party went. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a sad, sad day when we look at the 
Sask Party record in terms of democracy. Now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, my colleague, the member from Regina Dewdney, 
talked about a few letters and I want to bring these back into the 
record because I think this is important. 
 
Here are some members writing letters to the papers. And 
here’s one: “Sask Party disregarding democracy.” 
 

Dear Editor: 
 

and I quote: 
 

I am writing to protest the actions of the Saskatchewan 
Party in overturning Mr. Grant Schmidt’s recent 
nomination. 
 

And I continue, quote: 
 

To overturn that result violates (a) . . . trust of . . . 
membership and speaks volumes as to the questionable 
ethics of those in positions of power (within Saskatchewan) 
within the Saskatchewan Party. Nowhere was it stated or 
revealed to me that the Saskatchewan Party could overturn 
the results of the vote. 

 
And I will continue, and I start this quote: 
 

In purchasing a membership in the Saskatchewan Party, I 

paid a fee in good faith to support a political party that I 
should have every confidence will uphold the basic rights 
of Canadians. By its actions the Saskatchewan Party has 
demonstrated a blatant disregard and disrespect . . . 
 

And that’s G.F. Melanson from Melville, Saskatchewan. 
 
And here’s another member, I believe, Sask Party . . . And this 
is in the Saskatoon The StarPhoenix: “Sask. Party democracy 
put to test.” And here’s the quote: 
 

In his March 7 column, John Gormley says a political party 
does not need “divisiveness, rudeness, buffoonery and a 
lack of professionalism.” I assure Gormley that the 
Saskatchewan Party already has its fair share of candidates 
who possess all of these characteristics. 
 
As one of the “clever voters of Melville,” I attended the 
nomination meeting on March 3. Many Saskatchewan Party 
MLAs were sitting in the back of the auditorium, and I can 
guarantee that their behaviour was rude and unprofessional. 

 
Now, end of quote, but I will continue the same letter: 
 

If the party ultimately overturns the voter’s decision, it will 
prove to me and to many others just how corrupt those in 
power can be. 

 
And that’s Hali Oleksyn from Saskatoon. 
 
So again a sad, sad mark on their record. Now here’s someone 
else writing in, Dwain Drew from Carrot River. The 
“Saskatchewan Party in an uphill battle with the NDP.” 

 
And I’ll just put this simple quote, I quote: 
 

If they didn’t let the nomination stand, they will be seen as 
a political party willing to run roughshod over electoral 
democracy. Questions about what the Saskatchewan Party 
is trying to hide will abound. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps this is the saddest part of all 
of this. We see how the Sask Party . . . how they value 
democracy in other parts in our community. 
 
Today we had an earlier debate talking about labour law. And 
we know how the . . . what the Sask Party record is and how 
they would modernize labour law. And I think this is an attack 
on our working people and it’s an attack on our community. 
 
And here’s an article by Neil Scott in the Leader-Post of 
Thursday, April 3, 2003, “SFL upset with the Sask. Party.” And 
I can understand that . . . why that would be. And here I quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party has nothing to teach organized 
labour about democracy. 

 
And I’ll continue: 
 

That decision “clearly shows what kind of respect the 
Saskatchewan . . . has for democracy,” Hubich said, in a 
telephone interview. 
 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

 

“Certainly the SFL doesn’t need lessons about how 
democracy works,” Hubich added. 
 
Hubich was responding to a recent speech in the legislature 
by MLA Don McMorris, the Saskatchewan’s Party’s labour 
spokesman, calling for changes to (the) labour legislation to 
ensure that there are always secret ballots before the union 
is certified or decertified. 

 
And I’ll end the quote there. And I’ll continue: 
 

But Hubich said he might be convinced to support the 
Saskatchewan Party’s proposal that there always has to be a 
vote before a union is certified if arrangements could be 
made so that every worker in every workplace in the 
province would get a chance to vote on whether they want 
to be unionized. 

 
(16:30) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you really can’t have it both ways. 
You can’t have democracy when you want it and when you 
don’t want it, you don’t have it. I mean really, what you are 
really talking about then is power. And as I said, this is what the 
Saskatchewan Party is all about. They are looking for power. 
They are hungry for power. And they will take power at any 
cost. And if they dress it up as democracy, well, the people of 
Saskatchewan know the difference. They can tell the difference. 
And they see the record everyday and how the Saskatchewan 
Party goes. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to end my remarks. I know 
that there is exciting things that we can do to advance reforms 
or even more electoral reform and this type of thing, and I was 
excited today to hear about things about Braille, and what they 
are doing in Saskatoon — very exciting stuff. Reform never 
stops. And I think that we have to be looking for that kind of 
thing. 
 
And, you know, this past Christmas we passed the report on the 
Electoral Boundaries Commission and I was very glad about 
their work. It’s tough to balance all the interests. I think we 
need to do some more work there, especially around 
communities but I think that’s for the next time. We always 
leave a little bit on our plate to work at and I think this is good 
stuff. 
 
But we are committed to doing the best work we can in the 
interests of people. And therefore, I am pleased to second this 
motion. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with 
great pleasure I speak to this motion. Mr. Speaker, the previous 
couple of speakers from the NDP spoke a lot about democracy. 
And I would like to address the question of democracy. 
 
The members seem to forget what happened in 1999; the 
election of 1999. The people of Saskatchewan spoke. They 
elected a minority government — a minority government. They 
didn’t elect a majority government. They elected a minority 
government. But what did the then Premier Romanow, the 

premier of the day do? Well we all know what happened. He 
suckered the three Liberal members that were elected in 1999 
into a coalition government, a coalition government. He gave 
one of the members the Speaker’s chair and the other two 
members were in cabinet. 
 
The member speaks about power. Well I think the NDP Party 
and then premier, Mr. Romanow, knew all about power. It was 
about power — it wasn’t about what the people of 
Saskatchewan wanted and what they voted for in the election. 
The NDP settled that question and took what the people of 
Saskatchewan had said during the election and basically threw 
it out the door, into the garbage, and formed a coalition 
government, and they had the power then with the majority in 
the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we in the Saskatchewan Party value 
democratic rights. We are a political party that after the next 
election, after the Saskatchewan Party forms government, will 
set the next . . . the date of the next election — four-year cycles. 
We will set the date of the next election so we don’t . . . so 
we’re not put in this position of playing games and having the 
people of Saskatchewan wondering when the next election is, 
like the present government is doing, like the present Premier, 
kind of leading out there some hints about when the next 
election’s going to be and playing games with people’s lives. 
We as the Saskatchewan Party will set the next election date 
immediately after winning the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party also has an interesting proposal 
that members of the Saskatchewan Party caucus has the right to 
have free votes, to vote their constituents’ views and just not 
towing the party line. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
official opposition has demonstrated that in the past three and a 
half years by having free votes, and we’ll continue that in the 
future, Mr. Speaker. So those are democratic principles that the 
Saskatchewan Party upholds. 
 
There’s other principles that we should talk about, Mr. Speaker, 
talking about balanced budget legislation, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has run three deficits in a row. Saskatchewan Party 
believes in balanced budgets and the people of Saskatchewan 
believe in balanced budgets to get the fiscal management of this 
province under control so that we have the money for health 
care and education. 
 
And of course we . . . An obvious change that needs to be made 
in the budgetary process is having a budget based on summary 
financial statements so the whole picture of the financial state 
of the province is out in the open, there’s nothing being hid. 
The debt and the revenues and income for the Crowns are all 
meshed together with the general revenue so that the whole 
financial accountability process is there so the people of 
Saskatchewan can look at the books and see exactly where we 
stand as a province. And so there’s no monkeying around with 
the Fiscal Stabilization Funds and all these different terms that 
the present government uses to hide a deficit, moving money 
from Crowns when it’s appropriate so they can cover off 
deficits in the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the members talked a lot about 
democratic principles. And the NDP certainly have many . . . 
have a history of problems they’ve had to deal with, with 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

candidates or potential candidates in the past, Mr. Speaker. As 
we know, in 1999 the then nominated candidate there was 
forced to withdraw his nomination and another candidate was 
nominated. So it’s interesting that the NDP has a mechanism to 
deal with situations with their own party. 
 
And we certainly have seen in past situations . . . We 
understand that in Swift Current, the NDP forced a person not 
to run in their nomination a few years ago. So it’s interesting, 
the government and NDP Party speaks a lot about democratic 
principles but when it comes down to it, they certainly have a 
mechanism to deal with circumstances that arise. 
 
As we know on the federal scene, the federal Liberal Prime 
Minister appointed people to run in various ridings. So it’s 
different parties have different rules and different regulations, 
but all parties have a mechanism to deal with those situations. 
 
And I believe it’s a sign of maturity how the Saskatchewan 
Party handled a recent situation. We had an elected body within 
the party, the Executive Council that was elected by party 
members, come together and make a decision and review the 
decision and voted two times on the issue and the decision was 
made. And I fully endorse the decision and I approve of the 
decision and I support our party and how we handled that 
decision. I think it was a decision . . . it was a situation where 
we showed maturity and our leader showed leadership in 
dealing with that situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion . . . Actually the basis of the motion 
should have . . . And the member, the previous member did 
speak on it very, very lightly, but it’s concerning the change in 
how the House runs. And I’m on the Special Committee on 
Rules and Procedures. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting when the 
government talks about democratic rights and the rights of people 
in the province. But there is . . . The committee has been meeting. 
The first meeting concerning the rules and procedures was 
December 17, 1999, Mr. Speaker. That was the first meeting. 
Another meeting considering changes to rules were held in 
2001, July and in January. And also a meeting was held in April 
27 of 2000; then again January 8, 2002 and February 4, 2003. 
 
So the Rules and Procedures Committee has been meeting off 
and on for well over three years and there was never any big 
rush throughout those three years to bring in these rule changes, 
Mr. Speaker. And suddenly in the last couple of months there 
was a big push on by the government to get these . . . ram these 
rules through and change how we operate the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition certainly agreed with 
the changes that the committee struck but we felt that the timing 
was all wrong, on a couple of bases. 
 
The reasons why we did not want the rule changes to take place 
right now during session is because one of the changes in the 
rules were around having two committees sitting at the same 
time. And we believe that the people of Saskatchewan should 
have the right to view both committees while they sit, and have 
both committees have the technology and equipment in place to 
tape what was going on so it could be viewed later on the 
legislature channel so the people of Saskatchewan would have 
access to what was discussed in these committees. 
 

And right now we see that people watch the legislature channel; 
not only they watch question period, they watch what goes on 
in debate. They’re watching today, they’re watching right now, 
and they also watch what happens in committee. And people 
that follow a Bill from beginning to the end should have that 
right to view what was going on in the committees from 
beginning to end. 
 
And the way the government is pushing these rule changes 
through would leave the people of Saskatchewan without the 
right to see what is going on in one of the committees. And we 
put forward a proposal that we not introduce these rule changes 
till after they have a room set up with proper television 
recording equipment so that the work in that committee could 
be viewed later by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So it’s interesting now that the members are, well, they’re 
debating democratic principles but they’re hot and cold on these 
rule changes. And they could have had these passed two years 
ago if they wanted to, but suddenly they’re in a big rush to do it 
right now. So it makes you wonder what the government is 
thinking about, if the government’s thinking anything other than 
how they’re going to talk the people in Saskatchewan into 
trying to re-elect them, which I don’t think they will have the 
opportunity to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. The member spoke about the 
government having a plan and going out and speaking to the 
people of Saskatchewan as a form of a democratic principle. 
Well I’d like to remind the members on the opposite that the 
Saskatchewan Party has a plan, the Grow Saskatchewan plan. 
And we held public meetings and they were well received. We 
asked for input from people concerning our Grow 
Saskatchewan meetings and we listened to their concerns and 
we implemented many of their concerns into our Grow 
Saskatchewan plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the opposition . . . or the government will be 
hearing more about our Grow Saskatchewan plan as we proceed 
closer and closer to the next election, Mr. Speaker. And it’ll be 
very interesting how the government will see how this Grow 
Saskatchewan plan has connected with the people of 
Saskatchewan and how well received the Grow Saskatchewan 
plan will be during the election campaign. And we certainly 
will look forward to the next election, whenever, and the 
government gets the nerve up to call an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to the motion 
and the amendment is: 
 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 
calls upon the Premier to give the people the ultimate 
democratic voice by immediately calling a provincial 
general election. 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m glad 
to have the opportunity to speak to the motion today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But before I get into the rule changes, the 
same rule changes that this government’s had 12 years to make 
. . . And we’re at the very last window before the election and 
they bring them on the floor of the legislature, their own rule 



May 13, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

 

changes, and for some reason they’re bogged down. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The member for Swift Current as an example would like to see 
the Crown Corporations Committee sit. And the member for 
Regina Victoria doesn’t seem to have the intestinal fortitude to 
call the Crown Corporations Committee because what . . . 
Maybe this government’s got things to hide over there. 
 
I find it interesting today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how many times 
we’ve heard the word democracy used, and how many times the 
member for Regina Dewdney talked about the new 
Melville-Saltcoats riding and Grant Schmidt and the nomination 
process. I should mention to that member, Mr. Speaker, I think 
Grant Schmidt can organize NDP members better than the party 
on that side. He got more out for a nomination meeting than that 
party can get to any of theirs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about democracy from 
that side of the House. They talked about what the 
Saskatchewan Party did to Grant Schmidt and how we were 
undemocratic. Well think about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 
about the member for Saskatoon Meewasin? Does the name 
Sam Sambasivam ring a bell over there? Did anybody mention 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Oh, no. The government on that side 
or the members on that side would never consider doing 
anything like that. 
 
What about the constituency of Morse in the past? I think the 
name, if I remember it right, was a David Green. What 
happened to that gentleman? That same government on that 
side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, saw fit to make sure that that 
member didn’t run for them. Where did democracy go? 
 
I would say democracy will go out the window if Grant 
Schmidt decides he’s going to run for that party and the NDP, 
just like the Leader of the Liberal Party did when Grant 
Schmidt decided for a couple of days he’d run for the Liberals. 
He ran for cover as fast as he could go, just like the government 
members will do on that side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the members on that side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like to talk 
about democracy. Well let’s talk about the present day Premier. 
That Premier was elected by 6, 700 NDP members. The 
Premier was never elected by the electorate of Saskatchewan. In 
fact it seems he’s scared to let them have a say or he’d call an 
election. We probably won’t see an election this spring. We 
probably won’t see an election this fall. In fact the Lieutenant 
Governor may have to call it herself because the Premier on that 
side doesn’t want to go to the electorate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know how many times since this 
government’s been elected in ’91 have we actually seen the 
democratic process where there’s been a free vote? Never on 
that side of the House. The members on this side have had in 
the past, have experienced having a free vote. They’ve saw it 
happen on this side. Have we ever saw that happen? They’re 
like, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re like puppets on that side of 
the House. When there’s a vote, one after another, they look to 
the Premier or the House Leader — the guy that hid things from 
this electorate in this province for six years; that’s how 
democratic he is — they look to the Premier and say, what do 

we do, yes or no? And then like puppets they all get up. That’s 
a dictatorship, Mr. Speaker; there is no democracy on that side 
of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I read a comment 
once that Tommy Douglas, and I quote from Tommy Douglas, 
and this is what Tommy says. And we know how the members 
on that side believe everything that Tommy did . . . Tommy 
Douglas did was saintly. And listen to what Tommy said. 
Tommy said, when everyone thinks alike, no one is thinking 
very much. 
 
That’s the members on that side of the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the members on that side of 
the House to get up and talk about democracy is hypocritical. If 
they want to see democracy work, it works on this side of the 
House. It works when the members are on this side of the 
House. And, Mr. Speaker, in about two months, should the 
Premier get the intestinal fortitude to call an election, 
democracy will be shown on that side of the House by the 
Saskatchewan Party when we form government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, and the list can go on. Just little things. 
What about like the SaskEnergy rate hike we’ve had just lately? 
How does that work with democracy? We have a public utility 
rate review panel but before that review panel gets to take a 
look and see whether actually the public wants an increase to 
SaskEnergy rates, that cabinet on that side approves it. Now 
that’s a little backwards, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it? 
 
If democracy worked, they would let the rate review panel — 
which they never let that function properly — but they would 
let that process at least go through. They go out to the public 
and they listen. And they listen at some of their meetings to 
two, three, four, usually NDP members; and even they don’t 
say, we want to hike the utility rates. Everybody that goes to 
those meetings say, no, we can’t afford higher utility rates. 
 
But when democracy works on that side of the House, the 
government comes along and said, ah, we’ll raise them anyways 
because we’re the dictatorship and power today. We’re the 
government that had a minority government in ’99 and we had 
to buy two Liberal members to prop us up, two members who 
right now don’t even know who they are; two members from 
the past Liberal Party who don’t have a clue where they fit. 
 
You’ve got the one member, the Finance minister, Mr. Speaker, 
who now is pretty sure he’s a solidified member of the NDP, 
think he’s going to run there. You’ve got the present member 
for Melville — the seat that I’m going to win in the next 
election, Mr. Speaker — you’ve got that member. He hasn’t a 
clue where he’s going to run. He hasn’t got a party to run for. 
He thinks maybe he’d run NDP but then oops, maybe I 
shouldn’t. 
 
So where does democracy work, Mr. Speaker? Democracy, if 
you want to see it in action, to the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, take a look over here. Listen up for a while because 
this side of the House we’ve had such things as free votes. Not 
one member on that side of the House can stand up and say they 
actually voted what they thought. They voted what the Premier 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2003 

 

and the powers to be on that side tell them to do. It happens 
every time there’s a vote. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s disappointing that after elections 
in this province, when the people of Saskatchewan elected an 
NDP government, we’re stuck with a dictatorship for four or 
five years. Wouldn’t it be nice for once in the last three and a 
half years to have a premier that was elected by everyone in the 
province, not just a small group of NDP. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the time is coming very shortly where 
people are fed up with dictatorship. They want to see a little 
democracy. They want to see small business survive. They want 
to see big business create jobs and expand. 
 
And I think how they’re going to do that, Mr. Speaker, is that 
they’re going to elect a Saskatchewan Party government that 
knows what democracy is all about, knows what free votes are 
all about, knows what fall sessions would be. They know that 
we wouldn’t mind calling a fall session because we won’t be 
hiding from anything, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be upfront with the 
public because we will be doing what the public wants us to do, 
and that’s bring people back to this province, keep our young 
people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, things are looking good. In fact the WOW (Wide 
Open Week) campaign over there isn’t that far off. It’s going to 
be wow, we finally got a Saskatchewan Party in government, 
and wow, this province is going to take off. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a lot more that I’d like to 
say, but at this point I would adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:55. 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1045 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1045 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1045 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1045 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1045 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1045 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1045 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1046 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1046 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1046 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1046 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1046 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1046 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1046 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1046 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1046 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1046 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Space Travel from Saskatchewan 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1047 
 Swift Current Little Theatre 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
 Westmount Community School Celebrates 90 Years 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
 Cellphone Technology 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1048 
 Change of Command at 15 Wing Moose Jaw 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1048 
 Asquith 2002 Volunteer of the Year 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1048 
 Prince Albert Citizens Discuss Forestry Centre 
  Jones.........................................................................................................................................................................................1049 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Payment of Municipal Property Taxes 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1049 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1049 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1049 
 Regional Highway Maintenance Offices 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1051 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1051 
 SaskTel Max Service 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1052 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1052 
POINT OF ORDER 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1054 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1054 
 
 



 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Support for Small Business 
  McMorris.......................................................................................................................................................................1054, 1063 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................1056, 1064 
  Iwanchuk .......................................................................................................................................................................1058, 1064 
  Weekes (point of order) ..........................................................................................................................................................1058 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................1058 
  Lorjé...............................................................................................................................................................................1060, 1065 
  Weekes ...........................................................................................................................................................................1061, 1063 
  Jones...............................................................................................................................................................................1062, 1064 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 5 — Legislative Reform 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1069 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1073 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1074 
 


	POINT OF ORDER
	POINT OF ORDER

