















































Hansard: April 11, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 529 
 April 11, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I have more petitions regarding 
the condition of Highway 47 south of Estevan. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan, and 
even one on here from Calgary, Alberta. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province and the 
shape of the highways we have. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to make necessary repairs to Highway 47 
South in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people of Estevan and 
Hitchcock. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 13, 18, and 21. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: In 2002-2003 what 
flights were charged to the Department of Environment by 
Courtesy Air; what was the departure point, all stops, and 
final destination of each flight; what was the date of each 
flight; and who was aboard each flight? 

 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following question: 

To the Minister of Health: what provincial funding is 
available to municipalities for the control of West Nile 
virus; when will the criteria for access for this funding be 
made available for which the currently prepared . . . 
municipalities that currently are preparing their budgets for 
this information; will this funding be targeting those 
municipalities with problems with West Nile virus? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: what 
services were provided by Wascana Gaming incorporated 
in the year 2000-2001 for $169,500 paid to that firm by 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming; and was this work 
awarded based on a tender or a request for proposal? 

 
And secondly, I’d like to ask another question, Mr. Speaker. I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: what 
services were provided by Wascana Gaming incorporated 
in the year 2001-2002 for $254,250 paid to that firm by 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming; and was this work 
awarded based on a tender or a request for proposal? 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Revitalization: of 
the 10,458 existing Crown land leases in Saskatchewan, 
how many were renewed in the fiscal year 2003 . . . 
2002-2003; further to that, in the fiscal year 2002-2003 
how many of these leases were not renewed pending the 
proposed Crown land lease review; of the leases that were 
not renewed, how many were subject to a treaty land 
entitlement claim in the fiscal year 2002-2003; and in the 
cases where treaty land entitlement claims were denied, 
how many leases were still not renewed in the fiscal year 
2002-2003? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the previous 
fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 24 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: please provide a list of current 
publicly insured medical procedures; how many were done 
of each during 2001-2002; and the cost per procedure? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me great pleasure today to introduce to the Legislative 
Assembly my new constituency assistant, Bev Pirio from 
Radville and her son, Brett. And I’d just like to welcome them 
here today. 
 
And I’d also like to tell you that Brett is very interested in 
politics. Although he’s only 10 years old, he has aspirations of 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2003 

 

being the prime minister of Canada some day. 
 
So I hope that they both enjoy the session today and I’d like 
everyone to help me welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Regina Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure everyone 
here knows the importance of business and innovation to the 
future of our province, and especially the potential of small and 
medium business in driving the economy for growth and job 
creation in this province. 
 
Last night here in Regina the Regina Chamber of Commerce 
celebrated just such successes during their fourth annual 
Paragon Awards — that’s the premiere business awards, that’s 
the event in this city that celebrates these successes. 
 
A record attendance was present to help celebrate the awarding 
of nine Paragon Awards and the categories . . . and one of the 
special categories was the President’s Award. That honour was 
presented to Mr. Frederick Hill for outstanding achievement 
from his lifelong contribution to this city and to the province. 
 
Of the 27 finalists, all winners in their own right, nine received 
the Paragon Awards for recognition in categories from Young 
Entrepreneurs to Community Involvement, from Marketing and 
Promotional Achievement to Community Alliances, and from 
Export Achievement to Customer Service and New Ventures. 
 
In addition, the Athena Award dedicated to women 
entrepreneurs went to Brenda Klarer, Wascana Remedial 
Massage Centre. As well, the very prestigious Business of the 
Year was presented to Young’s farm equipment here in Regina. 
Congratulations also to Shannon Stewart at Curves for Women; 
the Co-operators Life Insurance; Jane’s Skin Care & Day Spa; 
and a special recognition to two double winners, Access 
Communications and Saskcan Pulse Trading Inc. here in 
Regina. 
 
Well done, everyone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well more 
good news for Regina, more good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We have some tremendous businesses 
in this province, Mr. Speaker, and some tremendous ones in 
Regina. 
 
Last night at the Paragon Awards we saw some of the exciting 
results of people who are committed to making their businesses 
go and to making this province thrive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was exciting to hear and to see what these 
businesses are doing in our community. And we had 

opportunity through Industry and Resources to present some of 
those awards through our Crown corporations, SaskPower and 
SaskTel. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at what these folks are doing, 
we see Business of the Year, Young’s farm equipment, even 
after their fire, accomplishing so much. Community 
involvement, the Co-operators, out there working in the 
community doing tremendous things. For export achievement, 
Saskcan Pulse Trading Inc. Mr. Speaker, Murad Al Katib and 
Saskcan Pulse Trading also won this year’s award for New 
Business Venture. And these folks are on the move for this 
province and for this nation. 
 
For Marketing and Promotional Achievement, Access 
Communications, and they were a double award winner. They 
also won the Community Alliance Award. Mr. Speaker, these 
folks are communicating. They’re out there competing and 
doing a tremendous job. For marketing and promotional 
achievement they showed their abilities. 
 
Winner of the Athena Award, Brenda Klarer of Wascana 
Remedial Massage, nominated in other categories. 
 
Tremendous work by these people to build our city, build our 
province. We have a lot to celebrate, a lot to be thankful for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Business at Craik 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House, in 
the Assembly today to give you an update about a remarkable 
young man from Craik who opened up a new business this past 
February. Curtis Heinen has opened a full-service machine shop 
called C & D Developments, located about 7 miles north . . . 7 
miles south of town. This is a remarkable achievement when 
you take into account that this young man is blind. 
 
The members will recall on June 26, 2001, I had the honour to 
rise in this legislature to give a member’s statement on behalf of 
Curtis’s achievements as a professional machinist who had 
invented a new grease saver which he was marketing at the 
2001 Farm Progress Show. At that time the members of this 
House were very impressed with the high level of achievement 
of this visually challenged individual. So I was not surprised 
when I heard that this same young man was now opening a 
machine shop of his own. 
 
I was pleased to be invited to the grand opening on February 14, 
2003. While it is always a good day when a new business opens 
in Arm River, it was an especially good day for Mr. Heinen, 
who has taken on the challenge of having no sight and 
succeeded. Now he is taking on the challenge of running his 
own business in the heart of the agricultural community. 
 
On behalf of the constituency of Arm River and the members of 
this Assembly, I want to thank Curtis for all his hard work and 
dedication that he’s put into his professional career on behalf of 
Saskatchewan farmers. Thank you, Curtis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

 

Artistic Talents in Regina Public 
Community Schools Celebrated 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Wednesday I 
had the opportunity to join in a celebration. Regina public 
community schools, in partnership with Weyerhaeuser, put on a 
day-long showcase of the many artistic talents of community 
school students. The packed hall at the Regina Performing Arts 
Centre was treated to powwow dancing, guitar playing, choir 
singing, square dancing, rhythmic gymnastics, stomp dance, hip 
hop dance, interpretative dance, multimedia, and cheerleading. 
 
It was quite the show, Mr. Speaker, and there were participants 
from Connaught, Arcola, Imperial, Albert, Kitchener, 
Coronation, Thomson, Ken Jenkins, McDermid, Herchmer, 
Cochrane, Scott, Thom, Rosemont, Wascana, and Martin 
community schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Such a day takes a big effort to put together and I would like to 
acknowledge the hard work and creativity of the four main 
organizers for the event: Lori Aitcheson, Marilyn Fazakas, 
Marla Dufour, and Marg Friesen. They in turn were assisted by 
the Regina Public School Board, by Weyerhaeuser, by 
volunteers, by the principals, the parent councils, the 
coordinators, and staff colleagues at all these community 
schools. 
 
They were particularly helped out by those who worked with 
the kids to get the performances ready. In fact one fearless 
teacher even joined his students on stage to dance some hip 
hop. This was Ed Friesen from Kitchener and it was just one 
more example of the dedication that Friesen brings to his 
classrooms, one that will not be soon forgotten upon his 
impending retirement after many years of teaching in North 
Central. 
 
Friesen, his fellow teachers, and the organizers and the folks 
that get involved with community schools are people who 
exemplify the spirit of a quote from Sitting Bull that was 
included in the celebration program. He said, “Let us come 
together to see what we can do for our children.” 
 
It was a great celebration and I am proud to be part of a 
government that comes together with communities and 
educators to see what we can do for our children in our 
community schools. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Qu’Appelle Valley Hockey League 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege today to rise to congratulate and recognize a couple of 
senior hockey teams. Now that the snow is gone and the hockey 
season is pretty much over, I’d like to recognize a couple of 
hockey teams in the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
The first one is the Indian Head Chiefs. The Indian Head Chiefs 
ended a long drought by capturing the Qu’Appelle Valley 
Hockey League championship on Thursday. Some 700 fans 
packed the Mac Davies arena where the Chiefs bounced the 
Milestone Flyers 7-3 to capture the best of three series, three 
games to one. Qu’Appelle Valley Hockey League president, 

Don McEwen, presented the trophy to league champs Chiefs 
captain, Lloyd Webster. 
 
The other team I’d like to congratulate are the Milestone Flyers, 
however. The Milestone Flyers captured the Saskatchewan 
Hockey Association’s provincial C title two weeks ago in 
Milestone. The Flyers defeated the Delisle — I’m not sure what 
their name is, but from Delisle — in the best of three final, two 
games straight. This is the second provincial championship that 
the Flyers have won in the past three years. 
 
I’d like to congratulate all the coaches and managers on a job 
well done. Mr. Speaker, I guess it doesn’t matter how you slice 
it, Indian Head-Milestone are the best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Three Inducted into 4-H Hall of Fame 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last weekend I had the honour of attending Saskatchewan’s 4-H 
Council’s annual meeting and banquet. Mr. Speaker, 4-H is a 
youth organization devoted to the growth and development of 
responsible citizens. It has the same optimistic view of the 
future of Saskatchewan and our youth that this government 
does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is proud to be a major financial 
sponsor of this program. We view our support of 4-H as a 
strategic investment in our province’s future. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, a special part of the evening was when three 
individuals who have made outstanding volunteer contributions 
to 4-H were honoured for their years of dedication and 
commitment by being inducted into the Saskatchewan 4-H Hall 
of Fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the inductees were Henry Putland of 
Churchbridge, Jacob Krupka of Luseland, and William Selody 
of Flintoft who was inducted posthumously. Mr. Speaker, 
family was out in huge numbers and many friends of the 
inductees enjoyed a wonderful evening. Mr. Speaker, these new 
members of the Saskatchewan 4-H Hall of Fame invested their 
time, effort, and skill over many years to the young people of 
this province. Saskatchewan is a better place today and will be a 
better place in the future because of their contributions to 4-H. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Speed Limit Increase 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker, has clearly and for a long time stood for raising the 
speed limits on divided highways to 110 kilometres. The NDP 
Highways minister has in the past, has in the past repeatedly 
said that he was dead against the increase. It would kill people. 
It would ruin the environment. We’d have to pump Tommy 
Douglas’s oil out of the ground, Mr. Speaker. The last 
NDP-CCF (New Democratic Party—Co-operative 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2003 

 

Commonwealth Federation) annual love-in of socialists soundly 
defeated the increase in the speed limit. So much for democracy 
in the NDP (New Democratic Party) ranks. 
 
The minister opposed the speed increase. The NDP membership 
opposed the increase. But if the Sask Party supports it, darn the 
torpedoes in democracy; it must be the right thing to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the public travelling at 110 kilometres 
will still never forget or forgive the NDP’s stack of fiascos: 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company), Dutch Lerat, women harassed in the workplace, 
Murdoch, Channel Lake, bingo. Mr. Speaker, is there no end to 
how badly these people can run a government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Speed Limit on Four—Lane Highways 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the NDP 
are in a hurry to get out of town after a bad week. Now they can 
go a little faster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased that the Minister of Highways has 
taken the advice of the Saskatchewan Party because the 
Saskatchewan Party was the first to call for a 110-kilometre 
speed limit on four-lane highways. 
 
But last fall the Minister of Highways rejected that idea. He 
said a higher speed limit would make Saskatchewan highways 
more dangerous and increase accident rates. The minister said, 
and I quote: “It just doesn’t make sense.” In fact at the NDP 
convention last fall, NDP delegates soundly defeated this 
proposal. 
 
So my question is: what caused the minister to flip-flop on this 
issue and ignore the democratic wishes of his own party? Was 
ignoring the wishes of NDPers the right thing to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I appreciate getting this very first question . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — . . . and it is an honour . . . Thank you. 
It is an honour be able to talk about a government that doesn’t 
have knee-jerk reaction to proposals; the government that thinks 
very, very clearly about what it’s going to do. 
 
This is a government that looked at all the factors, put those 
factors together, and made a responsible decision — not a 
knee-jerk decision. That decision is based on these wide range 
of factors. This province is on the move. They’re on the move a 
little faster come June 1. It’s a good decision. It’s going to be 
good for all the people of this province. Thank you for that 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation. Yesterday the minister would not answer specific 
questions about the status of the ethanol plant to be constructed 
at Belle Plaine and the financial arrangements for the deal 
between this NDP government and Broe Companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has publicly committed $20 
million of taxpayers’ money to this particular project. Yet the 
minister told the media yesterday that he can’t reveal details of 
the deal with Broe or the due diligence on this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister and his government are 
representatives of the people of Saskatchewan. The public have 
every right to know if this is the best use of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister release the agreement with 
Broe and the due diligence report into this ethanol project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’d be happy to answer the question on 
behalf of the minister today, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say 
just a couple of things first. 
 
Yesterday the minister said, Mr. Speaker, unequivocally, that 
the equity is in place, Mr. Speaker. The minister said yesterday 
that the debt financing for the project is yet not concluded, that 
those arrangements are being completed, Mr. Speaker, is what 
he said. And he said that the lenders have been identified, Mr. 
Speaker, and in fact the terms have been worked out today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite today, where does he 
stand, Mr. Speaker, on ethanol development in Saskatchewan? 
Because I know where the member from Saltcoats stands, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know where the leader stands — of the 
opposition — on development of ethanol in Saskatchewan, 
where they say there should be no public investment in ethanol, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, I’d like the member from Thunder 
Creek to stand up and tell us where he sits on the ethanol 
development, Mr. Speaker. Because as long as we’re investing 
in opportunities in Humboldt, and we were investing in 
opportunities in Canora, the members stand up and say, it’s 
good for us in our own constituency; we support it. When we do 
it for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, they’re opposed to it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House are 
100 per cent behind the development of an ethanol industry in 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — But, Mr. Speaker, the minister must have been 
dizzy after the media scrum yesterday, after the circles he 
danced around the questions about the status of the three 



April 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

 

ethanol plants originally proposed within this deal with Broe 
industries. Now it is obvious the construction of even one plant 
is questionable. 
 
In February the minister said if Broe’s financing was not secure 
by the end of March he would be worried. Well it’s mid-April, 
Mr. Speaker, and Broe’s financing is anything but secure. And 
now the people of Tisdale and Yorkton-Melville, who have 
been led to believe there are ethanol plants coming to their 
communities, have been put on the back burner by this 
government because the deal is on shaky ground. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP is so confident that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
I would like the members to allow the question to be heard in its 
entirety. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, if the NDP is so confident that 
their deal to build ethanol plants with Broe industries is such a 
good deal for the province of Saskatchewan and the taxpayers 
of this province, why won’t they release the details? What are 
they hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The minister yesterday made it very clear, 
and I will again today, that the equity, Mr. Speaker, for the 
project is in place. The debt financing for the project is not yet 
concluded but we’re completing the arrangements, Mr. Speaker; 
that the lenders have in fact been identified. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, this is a private sector company that’s 
involved in assisting in the development of the project in 
Saskatchewan. And I say to the members opposite, show me 
where Cargill grain has disclosed to the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool or to ConAgra what their competitive advantages are, Mr. 
Speaker. Show me where that occurs, Mr. Speaker, today. 
 
Show me where the private sector industry today, Mr. Speaker, 
divulges their competitive advantage to any other employer of 
which they’re going to be competing with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why would, Mr. Speaker, this particular company . . . Why 
would Broe? And I say, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite 
that the Scotia Capital has done the review of this, they’ve 
endorsed it, the process, Mr. Speaker, and we’re moving ahead 
to build an ethanol industry in spite of the Saskatchewan Party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not asking Broe industries 
to open their books to the taxpayers of this province. We’re 
asking the Government of Saskatchewan to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — The people of Saskatchewan have every right 
to be skeptical about this minister and the NDP government’s 
involvement in this deal. 
 
This is the same minister who brought us SPUDCO and lost 

$28 million and called that a success. This is the same 
government that managed to lose $6 million on bingo and 
claimed that that was to help charities. 
 
Given the recent history and the NDP’s track record, the public 
has every right to ask if due diligence was done for this project 
and if it is a good deal for the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister is not willing to release the details 
of the financing arrangement to us or to the media, and if he’s 
not willing to release the due diligence behind this deal, will he 
commit to letting the Provincial Auditor, on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan, review the financial arrangement and 
the due diligence report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’ve indicated on — as has the Minister of 
Crown Investments Corporation — the process that’s taken 
place to date. We’ve indicated that the working on this project 
remains on schedule, Mr. Speaker. We’ve outlined for the 
media and for the members opposite that the Scotia Capital 
have in fact done the review on the basis of the economic 
benefits and analysis of this project, of which the members 
opposite and the media has access to on any occasion they 
want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, and the member opposite raises 
again the investment in the SPUDCO piece, as does the member 
from Swift Current. And what we’re up to here again, Mr. 
Speaker, is clear. As long as you’re doing things for your 
friends, Mr. Speaker, and the SPUDCO issue identifies it 
perfectly . . . We just need to talk about Mr. Harry Meyers, Mr. 
Speaker. And for six months in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we 
had member after member stand up to protect the sale of the 
SPUDCO facilities in Outlook. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because 
they’re protecting an individual, Mr. Speaker, that’s why. And 
today, and today, Mr. Speaker, what we’re happening here is 
that we want to kill a Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. Speaker, in 
building an ethanol plant in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, for one week the 
minister of Liquor and Gaming has told us how . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for one 
week now the minister of Liquor and Gaming has told us how 
the NDP’s $6.2 million spent on mega bingo disaster has helped 
community groups and how there was no cost to charities and 
local organizations to run bingos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a letter here from one of those community 
groups the NDP helped — the Kindersley Lions Club. Mr. 
Speaker, in November 2000, the Kindersley Lions Club signed 
up for the mega bingo program. They spent $2,400 buying and 
installing new equipment — at their cost, Mr. Speaker, not the 
government’s. 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can this minister have the gall to say there 
was no cost to local charities when the Kindersley Lions Club 
had to spend $2,400 of their own money to get set up for mega 
bingo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
very much . . . As I did earlier table some documents that were 
quoted from, I would appreciate it if the member would table 
that letter for me as well. Because I have some other . . . Matter 
of fact, Charles Bodnar, with the Livelong and District 
Recreation Association, said the association is trying to make 
the best of a bad situation and hasn’t decided yet what to do 
with the televisions the group purchased. 
 
Now nevertheless, he said, some organizations show it for . . . 
use it for showing films; it’s not entirely bad. Some would like 
to see it sold; some want to keep it — we still have it as yet. 

 
So communities are in fact benefiting from some of the 
equipment that they have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this NDP 
government’s arrogant attitude and total disregard for 
taxpayers’ dollars is appalling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kindersley Lions Club also goes on to say that 
the NDP government are in breach of contract over the mega 
bingo program. In November 2000, the Kindersley Lions Club 
signed a contract to join the mega bingo program. The contract 
called for a minimum term of 53 weeks, but was cancelled in 
June 2001 when the NDP cancelled mega bingo. They say, and 
I quote: 
 

The early termination of the agreement is a breach . . . 
which the Lions Club can not afford either in the amount of 
the initial outlay or the loss of man hours that could have 
been directed to something more profitable. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Kindersley Lions Club is seeking to be 
reimbursed for its costs, $2,372 to buy, install, and secure a TV 
for mega bingo. Is the government going to reimburse this cost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I would really appreciate it if 
those letters were tabled. I’m not aware of any letters having 
reached my desk that have requested that. 
 
And I just want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) continues to 
work with the bingo industry and particularly the strategic 
planning committee, Mr. Speaker, to identify effective 
strategies that might enhance and continue to enhance the 
viability and accountability of the bingo industry. 
 
It does, in fact, support charities, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
point out once again that SLGA and all its efforts on behalf of 

the people of this province do contribute over $300 million that 
go into communities, highways, education, and health care, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the last thing that the 
communities in this province want is more help from this 
government and especially from that minister, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, how many other small community organizations were 
hurt in this way and how many other small bingo halls had to 
spend thousands of dollars buying and installing equipment 
only to have the NDP suddenly cancel the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this happened because they did not have a 
business plan, they did not have cabinet approval, and they did 
not have any control over how Liquor and Gaming spent 
taxpayers’ money. Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers got burned for 
$6.2 million and local organizations like the Kindersley Lions 
Club lost thousands more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are the NDP going to do to fix the mess that 
they created for the Kindersley Lions Club and dozens of other 
clubs just like it across Saskatchewan? Will you reimburse the 
Kindersley Lions Club? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the member 
should have gone through you to ask if I would reimburse the 
club. I would ask her, Mr. Speaker, through you, if she would 
table those documents. 
 
And I just want to point out that it never, never fails, Mr. 
Speaker. Members opposite always talk on the negative and the 
doom and gloom side. The operators in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the community where I 
reside thought it was an excellent idea. They had increased the 
participation of players by no less than 10 per cent. They were 
able to have their jackpots . . . matter of fact, paid out jackpots 
— 50,000, 20, and 10,000. That’s in the community of Fort 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
So there are those that truly benefited, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
see the letters that that member’s referring to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Community Initiatives Fund 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we 
definitely see . . . at least, we definitely see how that 
government helps the communities. And now it continues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. Mr. Speaker, on April 1, just days after the 
provincial budget was tabled in this legislature, the NDP 
cabinet passed an order in council moving over 7.6 million from 
the Community Initiatives Fund to the General Revenue Fund. 



April 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

 

Mr. Speaker, monies in the Community Initiatives Fund are 
lottery and casino profits that are supposed to go back to the 
Saskatchewan communities. They traditionally fund exhibition 
associations, non-profit community groups, hospital 
foundations, and problem gambling prevention and treatment 
programs. That’s just to name a few, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP moving over $7 million from the 
CIF (Community Initiatives Fund) to the General Revenue 
Fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, I find this interesting because the member opposite 
from Wood River and I had this same discussion in Hansard 
during last year’s budget debate. 
 
And I guess it’s good that we finally caught up to discussing 
last year’s budget, but it would be nice if the members would 
get around to this year’s budget at some point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — At any rate, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to 
answer the question. The answer is, there was no money — zero 
money — lost to the community. This was a surplus and in fact 
there was a $12 million surplus. And at year-end, surpluses are 
as a matter of course transferred back into the General Revenue 
Fund. 
 
In this case only 7.4 million was transferred. Sorry. My lip . . . I 
had a root canal this morning; I’m a little . . . Anyway only 7.4 
was transferred and the balance of the 12 million was retained 
and will be part of a three-year $20 million announcement that 
we’ll be making in the next few days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the second 
year in a row, as the minister has mentioned, that money has 
been taken from the CIF and put into the General Revenue 
Fund. During estimates last year, the minister said 7.4 million 
was moved and that these were one-time payments for science 
gallery and one other initiative. 
 
The question, Mr. Speaker, is: that money belongs to the people 
of Saskatchewan. Why, why is the NDP taking this money out 
of the CIF and putting it into the General Revenue Fund as a 
slush fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — . . . it’s a good thing that the member 
opposite was a pilot because as an archer he would have drawn 
a pretty long bow. 
 
I just want to say that zero money was taken from the 
community. They had an unexpected surplus, and the fact of the 
matter was there was no backlog of projects that were 
unfunded. Out of these $12 million surplus, in the year that the 
member and I already discussed in last year’s estimates, there 
was $12 million left over — 7.4 went to the General Revenue 

Fund, the rest was retained for a number of very good and 
important initiatives in the community that will be announced 
shortly. 
 
But I will mention that the money that was transferred created 
very important support in that budget year for a number of 
important things like the Wascana Centre Authority, Meewasin, 
the Science Centre, Wanuskewin, problem gambling — a whole 
range of things throughout government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In keeping with the intent of these expenditures . . . Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Reaction to Harassment Allegations 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. According to a report in today’s 
StarPhoenix, Murdoch Carriere continued to use his 
government car and his cellphone for six months after he was 
suspended from his job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Carriere was suspended with pay from his 
$85,000 per year job last October. In December, an independent 
investigation concluded that Mr. Carriere was guilty of sexually 
harassing female employees and, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
responded by making Mr. Carriere a senior adviser to the 
government at a salary of $85,000 per year. And Mr. Carriere 
never did have to give up the perks of his position — a 
government car and a cellphone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP allow Murdoch Carriere to keep 
his government car and cellphone even after he was suspended 
for sexually harassing six female employees? Is this the NDP’s 
idea of good zero tolerance policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I will just assure the 
House today that the vehicle and phone are restored to 
government and that all personal use — as per government 
policy as per any employee who is terminated with government 
— any personal use costs will be recovered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in today’s 
paper there’s also an article questioning the minister on the use 
of the cellphone and the government car. The minister’s 
response to the questioning was, there may be an amount 
deducted from Mr. Carriere’s final paycheque. 
 
Well I ask the minister today . . . And I state to her that Mr. 
Carriere was suspended last February without pay, with no 
severance, according to the minister. So I ask the minister, what 
final paycheque is she referring to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, employees 
have outstanding vacation entitlements and other things that are 
paid out when they’re severed from government, and last year 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2003 

 

was a very busy fire season. 
 
So I will just say that we will retrieve the money from Mr. 
Carriere first of all through payroll deduction and then through 
other legal means if that isn’t sufficient. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Carriere should have never had the car in the first place after 
suspension. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the NDP got caught in the media for 
rewarding Murdoch Carriere for years of sexually harassing 
female employees by making him a senior adviser to the NDP 
government, they were finally embarrassed into doing the right 
thing and firing Mr. Carriere. And the Premier also committed 
to investigating why Terry Scott, the deputy minister of 
Environment, decided to appoint Murdoch Carriere as a special 
adviser to the government instead of firing him. 
 
Was Terry Scott ordered not to fire Murdoch Carriere by 
someone in the NDP government or did Mr. Scott make the 
decision to appoint Murdoch Carriere as senior adviser to the 
government on his own? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has been informed that 
Terry Scott has not been at work since the Murdoch Carriere 
scandal broke. What is the current employment status of Terry 
Scott? Is he currently at work in his position as deputy minister? 
Or has he been sent home with pay? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we seem to be 
reviewing matters related to this case so I will just reinforce the 
fact that when the report came to my attention I committed to 
reviewing it. I did review it. Based on that report I decided that 
we hadn’t had a sufficient response to zero tolerance. I further 
directed that the policy be reviewed and that report be given 
back to me by April 29. 
 
I believe that I have fulfilled all my commitments regarding this 
matter, and we will be back to you as soon as we have the 
results of that determination to improve the policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, it was the Premier who committed to 
investigating why Terry Scott, the deputy minister of the 
Environment, decided to appoint Murdoch Carriere as a special 
adviser to the government instead of firing him. 
 
And it was the Premier who ordered . . . or who wanted to find 
out or was going to find out why Terry Scott . . . was he ordered 
not to fire Murdoch Carriere by someone in the NDP 
government? It was the Premier who committed to that. And so 
it is the Premier that I ask today to answer. Where is Terry 
Scott? Is he currently at work in his position as deputy minister, 
or has he been sent home with pay? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I continue to review the 
circumstances that led to decisions made around Mr. Murdoch 

Carriere. 
 
But I tell you what I also commit to is to respect people, to 
respect senior public servants, to respect process, and to respect 
long years of service. Not to make the kind of judgments that 
will be made by members of the opposition, the critic, and the 
leader in the House, based simply on newspaper reports. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker. I will respect the senior public service, I will 
respect the process, and I will continue to do the necessary 
review of the circumstances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
(10:45) 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Speed Limit on Four-Lane Highways 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to inform you and 
other members of this Assembly of an important change to our 
transportation system. 
 
As many of you will recall, the issue of speed limits on our 
major highways received some attention last fall. At that time I 
indicated that I was concerned that raising the speed limit might 
compromise safety on our highways. I believed then, as I 
believe now, that safety is a number one priority for our 
government. 
 
At the time I said I would have officials review the issue, 
provide me with additional information this spring, and that 
government would make a decision based on the available 
information. 
 
Based on the results of this review, I am pleased to announce 
that effective June 1 the speed limit will be increased to 110 
kilometres per hour on the four-lane sections of Highways 1, 
11, and 16. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Government has made this decision 
based on two key factors. First, the design standards of our 
major highways can safely accommodate a 110 kilometre per 
hour speed limit. Second, a review of the available evidence 
from other jurisdictions indicates that increased speed limits do 
not in themselves contribute to an increase in the number of 
accidents. 
 
Having said that, the evidence does indicate that increased 
speeds may contribute to an increase in the severity of 
accidents. In addition to the information provided by officials, 
Saskatchewan people have told us that they want to see an 
increased speed limit on the four-lane highways. And clearly 
the primary function of transportation systems is to provide for 
the quick and efficient movement of people and goods. 
 
Furthermore, the massive investments we have made in our 
major highways, massive investments, and our accelerated 



April 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

 

twinning program has increased the safety factors and will 
continue to increase those safety factors. And safety must be — 
must be, I repeat — a primary concern. 
 
As a result of the increased speed limit, it will be accompanied 
by measures to ensure that running speed, the speed at which 
most people actually operate their vehicles, remains within 
acceptable limits. These measures include an increased 
emphasis on public education to encourage safe driving 
behaviour. 
 
Saskatchewan drivers are not alone in accepting the risks 
associated with higher speeds. Other jurisdictions have a 110 
kilometre limit and drivers have responded in a safe and 
responsible manner. In fact the experience in other jurisdictions 
is that having less of a differential between posted speed limits 
and actual running speeds has reduced the number of collisions 
on the major highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s record investments in highways 
and our accelerated twinning program are allowing us to move 
forward with this decision to increase the speed limit on 
four-lane highways. And with this year’s highways budget 
being the second-largest highways and transportation budget in 
history, you will continue to see improvements on the roads and 
the highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In closing, Mr. Speaker, in closing I’d 
like to remind everyone that we’ll be doing a lot of work out 
there on the roads this year, and I want our department crews to 
be safe. 
 
I’d like to repeat this, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of noise, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is a very important piece. I would like to 
remind . . . if members . . . if you’d just quiet down for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order. Order, please. I would ask the minister to keep all 
of his remarks through the Chair, please. And I would ask 
members to allow the person who has the floor to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In closing, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind everyone that we’ll be doing a 
lot of work out there on the road this year, and I want our 
department crews and the contractors’ crews to be working in a 
very safe environment. So please, even with the increases, drive 
safely. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
respond to the ministerial statement. I’d like to thank the 
minister for receiving this about three minutes before the House 
sat so I had a chance to look at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I applaud the decision to increase the speed limit 
to 110 kilometres on the four-lane highways. I do agree with the 
minister that safety is the number one priority on the highways. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have been saying for some time that 
highways can accommodate, the four-lane highways, can 
accommodate the speed of 110 kilometres per hour. And also 
we have been saying for ages that increased speed limits do not 
in themselves contribute to an increase in the number of 
accidents. In fact I believe, if my stats are correct, that most 
accidents are caused in the 25 to 35 mile-an-hour range within 
something like five miles of an individual’s dwelling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also talked about the highway budget. 
And I think it’s worthwhile to note that the federal government 
has put some money into the highways and why this can be 
sped up, the twinning process can be sped up; although the 
minister and the NDP government would like to take credit for 
it, but there is federal dollars in there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I would like to comment on now is why all 
of a sudden the flip-flop from the minister. The minister himself 
was totally against the highway speed limit raising to 110. The 
minister suggests that he wouldn’t respond in a knee-jerk 
fashion, while in fact he is responding in a knee-jerk . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So in fact, Mr. Speaker, it appears that it 
was a knee-jerk reaction. The minister had said, it doesn’t make 
sense. But now the minister stands in this House and says, it’s 
the right thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
members opposite for their applause. I didn’t really think it was 
quite that necessary. 
 
But what they’re applauding for maybe was the long-term care 
fees because that’s what the minister had said was the right 
thing to do, was increase long-term care fees. Is that what 
members opposite are clapping so loudly for? Because that’s 
when he referred to the increase in long-term care fees was the 
right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also I would like to just comment on the NDP 
stance on being the party of democracy, Mr. Speaker. It 
appears, Mr. Speaker, that the convention, the party, voted 
against having the speed limit raised to 110. So the party voted 
against the speed limit going to 110. Is this government going 
against the wishes of the party? 
 
Is this a democratic move, Mr. Speaker? Or, or is this, is this the 
government’s . . . this current government’s response to the 
party for misspelling the Leader of the NDP Party’s name at the 
convention? Maybe this is how they’re trying to get even with 
the party by using this undemocratic move. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I applaud the decision to go to 110 
speed limit. Here is another example though, Mr. Speaker, of 
. . . Members opposite are always saying, what is the 
Saskatchewan Party’s position and plan? Well this was our 
plan, Mr. Speaker, and now they’ve come ahead and done it. So 
I applaud them on it because this is . . . a Saskatchewan Party 
platform plan is to raise the speed limit on Saskatchewan 
highways to 110 kilometres per hour on four-lane highways. 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2003 

 

Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the interest of time I 
will, on behalf of the government, table responses to written 
questions nos. 60 through 80 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to . . . of questions 60 to 80 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan 4-H 
Foundation Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 
of the amendment of the 4-H Foundation Act. 
 
The 4-H Foundation Act was last amended, Mr. Speaker, in 
1990. The Act outlines the operational requirements for the 
Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation, which is a registered charity. 
The 4-H Foundation is responsible for the investment, 
disbursal, and overall management of money donated to the 
foundation and to the Saskatchewan 4-H Council. 
 
The changes in the foundation Act are these, Mr. Speaker. 
Firstly, the removal of potential conflicts of interest between the 
goals of the foundation and the financial needs of the 4-H 
Council, thus ensuring funds are disbursed appropriately. 
 
Secondly, ensure that the composition of the trustees of the 
foundation can operate within the boundaries of its Act.  
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, reflect on the current mission of the 
goals of the 4-H organization and ensuring further that the 
gender neutral talk terminology is reflected in the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are the direct result of a series 
of consultations with the stakeholders who work with the 
government to improve the strength of The 4-H Foundation 
Act. These stakeholders provide their expertise and thoughtful 
advice. They spoke, Mr. Speaker, and we listened, and today we 
act with the introduction of the amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consultations were conducted with the 
Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation and the Saskatchewan 4-H 
Council. Members of this Assembly will have an opportunity to 
debate and review the specific line-by-line amendments during 
committee. And my purpose today is to provide an overview of 
the amendments and reasons for these changes. 
 
The Saskatchewan 4-H program provides an opportunity for 
rural youth to foster practical skill development and leadership 
through the project-based activities. 
 

The 4-H Council is comprised of a leader and member 
representatives from local clubs and staff. The Saskatchewan 
4-H Council oversees the administration and operation of the 
4-H programs. 
 
The 4-H Foundation supports the financial needs of 
Saskatchewan 4-H program through the annual grant to the 
council, originated from donated funds. And the Saskatchewan 
4-H Foundation requested a review of the Act because the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is no longer participating as a 
trustee. 
 
After initial review of the foundation reorganization, the need 
for the additional amendments, maintaining the status quo it 
was determined could potentially result in a conflict between 
the goals of the foundation and the needs of the council. And 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, these changes are . . . could be 
recognized somewhat as being housekeeping in nature, but are 
important to ensure that the 4-H Foundation and the 
Saskatchewan 4-H Council continue to provide the important 
services to the youth of this province for the years to come. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move the amendment of 
The 4-H Foundation Act now be read a second time. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as a past 
4-H member, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that the 4-H 
program in Saskatchewan and indeed across North America is 
an extremely valuable one for every participant in the 4-H 
program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, over the years . . . 4-H started out, Mr. 
Speaker, as mainly agriculturally oriented, with farm families 
being a part of it and the children mainly learning, Mr. Speaker 
— in our area at least — dealing with the raising of cattle, 
livestock industry, and then it expanded to take into part the 
equine industry, Mr. Speaker, and grew, Mr. Speaker, over time 
until now it involves many, many practical skills. 
 
(11:00) 
 
In fact in a large number of communities, Mr. Speaker, the 4-H 
program actually takes place in the school buildings — not 
during school time, Mr. Speaker, but in the classrooms that the 
children are familiar with. And it involved children from the 
rural background, from the urban background, and that’s across 
the piece, Mr. Speaker. And we believe this is a very, very 
valuable program. 
 
The Bill makes a number of changes, Mr. Speaker, to the 4-H 
program, one of which is the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool no 
longer being a trustee on the board. Mr. Speaker, the Pool has 
had a long history with the 4-H movement in Saskatchewan and 
has been a very valuable contributor to the 4-H movement, and 
I think we need to thank them for the efforts that they have 
made on behalf of the children of Saskatchewan in being a part 
of the 4-H program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of these changes that are taking place 
will have an impact, an impact on the direction that 4-H will 
take in the future of this province. So I think it’s incumbent on 
us as the opposition to talk with the 4-H to gain an 



April 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

 

understanding of just what these changes will have as an impact 
on them, and what they see happening in the future for the 4-H 
movement as a result of the amendments being brought forward 
by the government today. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, to give the people of Saskatchewan as 
well as the opposition to ask some questions and to determine 
what impact this piece of legislation will have on the 4-H 
movement, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
After my comments I’ll be moving second reading of The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2003. Saskatchewan people take a great deal 
of pride in our provincial parks. And our parks are seen as 
models of environmental quality and are an important legacy 
for future generations, Mr. Speaker. These amendments before 
us will help continue to improve the parks systems. 
 
Firstly the amendment will facilitate a land exchange between 
the Lac La Ronge Indian Band. Land will be removed from the 
Lac La Ronge Provincial Park and will be added to the 
community of Sucker River. The parkland will be exchanged 
for reserve land at Bittern Lake. 
 
The community of Sucker River of the Lac La Ronge Indian 
Band has requested that land be withdrawn from the Lac La 
Ronge Provincial Park to be added to their reserve. The reserve 
is completely surrounded by a park, a lake, and a highway. This 
will allow the reserve to expand its land base and accommodate 
future housing needs for its growing population, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, amendments will increase the term of park permits 
from one year to a five-year period. 
 
Concern had been raised with regard to grazing permits. 
Currently permits are issued for grazing in provincial parks for 
a one-year period. This is not sufficient time to allow the permit 
holder to make the kind of improvements required, such as 
fencing and water access, that promote an environmentally 
responsible grazing regime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a permit period of up to five years, depending 
upon conditions contained in the park grazing management 
plans, is beneficial to both the department and to its permit 
holders. Park grazers will have more time to better plan and 
manage their grazing operations while at the same time 
providing environmental benefits to provincial parks. 
 
Thirdly, small areas of land from Meadow Lake, Greenwater 
Lake, and Last Mountain House provincial parks will be 
removed and a 65 hectare, 160 acre area of land will be added 
to the Meadow Lake Provincial Park. 
 
A point three eight hectare, which is one acre, area of land in 
Greenwater Lake Provincial Park located on a road allowance 
adjacent to the park boundary will be removed. The land is not 
needed for park purposes and will be incorporated into adjacent 
. . . (inaudible) . . . private campground development. 
 

A 15 hectare, 37 acre area of agricultural land at the Meadow 
Lake Provincial Park will also be removed. It is not suitable for 
park purposes and the Waterhen River cuts off this piece of 
parkland from the rest of the park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a small area of land will be removed from Last 
Mountain House provincial park that has been used to 
accommodate an expansion of the railway right of way. This 
expansion was required for safety reasons. 
 
And the amendments also include updating park legal 
descriptions. Park legal descriptions and boundary changes are 
necessary to provide for a more effective and efficient park 
management and to divest the department of small areas of land 
that are not suitable for park purposes. 
 
These amendments will make an already effective piece of 
legislation work even better for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to speak to the amendment, Act to amend The Parks 
Act, Bill No. 13, here in the House today. 
 
The Bill talks of a number of changes. And one of the changes 
that it talks about the most is . . . And as I was listening to the 
minister talking about taking land from park status and moving 
it into different classification, taking it out of the park 
classification and moving it into different classifications, and 
there are a number of questions that surround that, as to where 
the land is going; is there any tendering process; and were all 
the people notified in the area as far as if they had ideas of what 
they wanted the land to do. 
 
I know in the constituency that I represent there is some land 
that — it’s not talked about in this, in this Bill — but it’s 
government land that is looked at as possibly going to the 
private sector, and there are lot of people that are interested in 
that type of land. And the minister talks of a number of parcels 
in this piece of legislation that will be moved. So there are 
questions as to the process of where that land goes and who has 
say in that whole process. 
 
The minister also talks about grazing permit holders and 
extending that from one to five years — up to five years, I 
believe he said. And there are again a number of questions that 
come into play when we’re extending leases for grazing land 
and how open a process that is — what are some of the costs; 
what are the environmental impacts of extending leases from 
the one year to the five year; why were they at one year and 
now being expanded to five years. 
 
We’ve talked a number of times on different pieces of 
legislation, how the TLE, the treaty land entitlement Act, will 
that be in effect; will there be any situations where that may 
come into play, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are a number of questions that we have with this piece 
of legislation that I think until we find answers, whether it’s the 
interest groups, third party interest groups, that will be 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2003 

 

interested in this, or even just straight answers from government 
as to some of our questioning on this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But until we get more information on the Bill and have the 
parties that this will be affecting getting back to us once they’ve 
had a chance to look at this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, I 
move that we would adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. My 
officials that are with me here today, seated directly beside me 
is Mr. Hal Cushon; he’s the assistant deputy minister. Next to 
him is Mr. Stan Benjamin who is the executive manager of the 
research and development branch of the Crop Insurance 
Corporation. And directly behind me is Karen Aulie who is the 
director of corporate services branch. And seated beside Karen 
is Ross Johnson who is the manager of operation service and 
from operation services branch. And in the back row in the 
House, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Greg Haase who is the director of 
lands branch; David Boehm who is director of financial services 
branch; Rick Burton, director of policy branch; Donn Farrer, 
director of inspection and regulatory management branch; and 
Laurier Donais who is the senior manager of the financial 
services, corporate services branch. Those are my officials, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I would like to 
thank the minister for bringing his officials and welcome those 
officials here today. 
 
First and foremost, I have the globals, Mr. Chair, and these are 
questions that we ask every year so I’m sure there won’t be a 
big surprise for the minister. And I will just hand them in if 
someone could pick them up. And I’m looking forward to his 
expedient response to those questions, so thank you. 
 
Mr. Chair, it was a devastating year last year for the producers 
of the province, and indeed a very busy and trying year for the 
Crop Insurance Corporation. The claims were extremely high 
and largely due to the widespread drought. But there were other 
reasons that made the claims a little high in the last crop year. 
 
Could the minister tell us today what the total of the claims 
were for last year because it seems like with every report that’s 
out there, it varies. So could he give us an exact figure today of 
what the crop insurance claims were for the last crop year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as we’re getting the exact 
number for the member, the member accurately identifies not 
just in the last year but in the last two years the crop insurance 
program has had a significant demand on it. 

What we’ve seen of course is a significant change in the overall 
financial status of the crop insurance program, where we had — 
and I’ll be able to provide those numbers in greater detail in a 
couple of moments — where we had a surplus fund in the crop 
insurance in excess of $300 million. And within a two-year 
period we’ve seen that now exceed itself to where we’ve paid 
out somewhere in the neighbourhood of $1.4 billion over the 
last couple of years and now have a Crop Insurance Fund that’s 
sitting with a deficit in the neighbourhood of $500 million. 
 
And the reasons for this of course is that we’ve had the kinds of 
pressures across the province which have not just been in 
regionally . . . regionally focused, Mr. Speaker — or Mr. Chair 
— but they have been all across the province. And so this is the 
reason for why we see the kind of shift in the crop insurance 
program that the member identifies and accurately stated. 
 
I want to provide the numbers in greater detail in a moment; my 
officials are still getting the detail for them. But if we could 
work around the premise that we had a surplus in the crop 
insurance account three years ago that was in the excess of 300 
million, today we have a deficit in the crop insurance account 
that’s somewhere in the neighbourhood of around 500 million. 
We paid out over a period of two years 1.4 billion. And I’ll get 
the exact numbers for the member in a moment. 
 
I want to provide the numbers in greater detail in a moment; my 
officials are still getting the detail for them. But if we could 
work around the premise that we had a surplus in the crop 
insurance account three years ago that was in the excess of 300 
million; today we have a deficit in the crop insurance account 
that’s somewhere in the neighbourhood of around 500 million. 
We paid out over a period of two years 1.4 billion. And I’ll get 
the exact numbers for the member in a moment. 
 
Mr. Chair, the claims last year were 1.088 billion, and the fund 
balance today is at 550 million, in the . . . 550.13 million is the 
deficit number in the Crop Insurance Fund. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. And 
could he tell us . . . You know, there’s no doubt that there’s a lot 
of acres, particularly in my area, but I think in a lot of areas of 
the province, there’s a lot of acres that are still out in the field. 
They have not been harvested. Do we have any estimate as to 
how much larger that those claims may be? Because there’s no 
doubt that a lot of times when the crop is left out for the winter, 
there’s a significant loss in either the quality or the quantity that 
can be picked up in the spring. 
 
So do we have an estimate as to how much higher those claims 
may be for last year’s crop year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials tell me that there is 
about 800,000 acres that are still out to be harvested, but they 
don’t . . . they aren’t able to project exactly what that additional 
cost will be to the fund. 
 
But I could accurately state that there will be a further increased 
debt to the fund and would be charged against last year’s payout 
of the 1.088 billion that I’d given you earlier. I don’t have that 
exact number yet. It would be speculation but we can safely say 



April 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

 

that both the overall payout will be greater, as will be the debt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. When he was giving 
the numbers previously, he said that we entered two years ago 
with approximately a $300 million surplus, and over the past 
two years we’ve had $1.4 billion worth of claims. So that’s a 
$1.1 billion difference. And how is that paid? Who is 
responsible for the crop insurance when it goes into a deficit 
position? How much is paid by the federal government, how 
much is paid by the provincial government? How is that sharing 
handled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’ll start, Mr. Chair, by first saying that in 
the year 2000-2001, the Crop Insurance Fund had in it 385 
million which was a positive figure, Mr. Chair 
 
The second question I believe that the member is asking 
attaches itself to . . . Could you just ask me that . . . I missed 
that last part of your question, Madam Member. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Sure, Mr. Minister. The question that I was 
asking is, when the crop insurance program goes into a 
significant deficit position, which it has due to two years of 
drought, who’s responsible for paying those claims between the 
provincial government and the federal government because it’s 
a cost-share program? What percentage is the responsibility of 
the provincial government? What percentage is the 
responsibility of the federal government for crop insurance 
claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, once the fund is exhausted, 
what happens is that the percentage then is 25 per cent 
provincial and 75 per cent federal. And this would be, I expect, 
the reinsurers . . . The reinsuring fund then would be the one 
that would pick up the cost of covering the payouts to the 
producers. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. So if the fund started 
with a surplus of . . . two years ago started with a surplus of 
$385 million and over the past two years, if I heard the minister 
correctly, he said that the crop insurance program paid out $1.4 
billon, that would make approximately a $1 billion shortfall. So 
therefore, if 25 per cent of that is provincial and 75 per cent is 
federal, that would mean the province would only be 
responsible for $250 million. Do I have that calculated 
correctly, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what needs to be included in 
the numbers of course is the amount of premiums that are paid 
in, which are the producer premiums. And then of course they 
would be part of the calculation then in determining what 
percentages of the remaining debt that’s outstanding on 
reinsurance. 
 
And I expect that the member will then ask what portion of the 
reinsurance debt of the $550 million belongs to whom. And 82 
million of that reinsurance fund would be about . . . eighty-two 
billion, seven hundred would be Saskatchewan’s share. The 
federal share to that reinsurance fund would be 467 million. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer, but I 
have to say it made the whole question a little bit cloudier 
instead of clearer. When we were going through the numbers 

earlier, it was my understanding we were talking about 
Saskatchewan, so, you know, we should be staying within the 
parameters of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance funds. 
 
And I’m still going back to supposedly we were told that in the 
last two years, there was $1.4 billion worth of claims that 
needed to be paid; there was $385 million surplus going into 
that two years ago, which makes approximately a $1 billion 
shortfall. 
 
So who is responsible to cover that $1 billion shortfall over the 
past two years between the provincial government and the 
federal government; and what amounts are they responsible for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well what I . . . what might be easier for 
me to do, Mr. Chair, is to provide a copy of this document that 
I’m reading from, which is the Crop Insurance Corporation’s 
payout over the period that I was talking about, which is when 
you take the 2000-2001 end balance, which I said was 385 
million, then you add to that the premiums that were collected 
through the course, the net premiums that were collected 
through the course of the 2001-2002 crop year, which was 225 
million, then subtract from that the actual premiums . . . or the 
claims, sorry, that were paid out in that year 2000-2001, which 
would have given you an end balance in 2000-2001 of 285 
million. 
 
Then carry the 285 . . . 87 million across to 2002-03, add to it to 
the premiums that were collected in that year, subtract from it 
the overall payout that was made this year, which was 1.088 
million, which is . . . or 1.088 billion, that gets you then to the 
550. That’s how that number is arrived at. 
 
So when we began back in 2000-2001 with the surplus of 385, 
include in there the premiums that were collected and paid by 
the levels of government and the producers. Subtract from that 
what the claims that were paid out in the last year . . . in the last 
two years, that’s when you get to the overall final number of the 
debt. 
 
Included in that of course are various different interest costs 
that need to be included as well in each of those three years. 
And certainly I can make this sheet available for you, Madam 
Member, so that it would be easy for you to follow it through. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that. And I will 
appreciate getting those calculations because definitely it’s 
very, very difficult to understand all the calculations that must 
go on in order to account for the debt that the province says that 
they have incurred over the crop insurance claims. 
 
So I’ll appreciate receiving that document, and I’m sure going 
through there probably will lead to more questions that we can 
address at a different time. 
 
But the bottom line, according to the minister, is approximately 
5 . . . or $550 million deficit that the province has incurred from 
crop insurance claims to date. And I would like to know where 
that shows up on the budget statement on the schedule of debt, 
which is on page 17 if he wants to refer to that page. The entry 
for the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation is forecast 
for 2003 to be 110 million, which is quite a shortfall from the 
550 million that the minister is saying that he has incurred. 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2003 

 

And in fact that has been one of the excuses that the Finance 
minister gave for difficulties within the budget’s, or the 
province’s, fiscal situation. It’s always been touted it’s the 
agriculture’s fault because of the claims, and yet I can’t find this 
$550 million anywhere in the budget document. 
 
So where is it accounted for? And if it is accounted for 
somewhere in this document, or is not, what is the meaning of 
the 110 million that is forecasted for 2003 and again 102 
million which is forecasted for 2004? What is the significance 
of those numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what we’re getting for the 
member now is that . . . where the number as to the payout 
that’s required for the Crop Insurance Fund would be in the 
consolidated financial statement of the government, because 
where it really appears is as a loan of which the government 
now needs to go and obtain a loan in order to cover off the debt 
to the reinsurance and to the Crop Insurance Fund. And my 
officials will have for me, in a minute, that portion of the 
consolidated . . . that within the consolidated statement where 
that number appears so that you would have a better 
appreciation of it. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. If I heard him correctly, 
he’s saying the entry on page no. 17, forecasts for 2003, of $110 
million is actually a loan that they have to obtain in order to 
cover the crop insurance program claims. So the other, 
approximately $440 million that they made claims was not a 
loan, it was something that was taken out of the General 
Revenue Fund — or how did that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In the, Mr. Chair, in the schedule of 
lending and investment activities which is on page 15, on that 
page when the member looks at it, under Crown corporation 
loans, what you will find under the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance forecast for 2002-03 is the 110 millions. And it’s that 
110 million, which also has included in it the projections for 
what the additional costs for payout that were earlier described 
by me, given that there’s still 800,000 acres that are out, to 
cover off some of what’s required here. This is where that 
number appears. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. So there was no 
documentation in this particular budget document of the $550 
million that supposedly was short in meeting our claims for 
crop insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That, Mr. Chair, to the member, that will 
show up in the Crop Insurance annual report. As you know, the 
Crop Insurance is a corporation and it’s within that corporation. 
When we table our report at the end of this year, you’ll be able 
to see the debt that’s still required . . . will show the debt that’s 
outstanding on the reinsurance for crop insurance. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and that definitely will 
be another area that I will enjoy discussing with our member 
from Canora-Pelly who, you know, understands how a lot of the 
expenditures over the course of a year in the government seems 
to disappear, and it isn’t always openly . . . we aren’t openly 
able to find it in the budget documents. 

Mr. Chair, the minister has had a lot of fun playing around with 
words and talking about how I obviously don’t have an 
understanding of the amortization formula for how this is dealt 
with when the crop insurance year goes into a deficit claim. So I 
am, you know, really excited today to have this minister totally 
explain to me how the amortization formula works so that I 
won’t be so foolish in the future, and if you could do that today. 
It’s the reason why he has said that the premiums have to rise 
by 52 per cent, so I’m looking forward to his in-depth 
explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I’d be happy to provide for the 
member the rationale around this given that I know that she has 
some sensitivity about her own language when she indicates, 
when she indicates you can retire this over a shorter period of 
time. 
 
The reality is that, the reality is that when you have a couple of 
wrecks like we had in the province over the last 10 years, from 
the period, period of 1998 to today, what happens of course is 
that when you have surpluses in the account, Mr. Chair, the 
surpluses are then used to look after the kinds of claims that you 
have in a given year. And provincial governments and federal 
governments and producers continue to place a premium into 
the fund to make sure that it remains stable over the period of 
years. 
 
Where you have back-to-back droughts like you had in this 
given year, what happens of course is that you have then a 
larger payout than premiums that you’ve taken in over a period 
of time. And when that happens, what . . . the reinsurance 
companies then backfill the dollars on behalf of the provinces 
and the federal government so that farmers can continue to get 
the kinds of payouts that they’ve insured themselves for. 
 
Now within the crop insurance contract or agreement that we 
have nationally in Canada, there is an arrangement under that 
process that when there is repayment that needs to be in place, 
when you have debt, that it can be amortized out over an 
extended period of 15 years to recover it. And clearly in the 
case of Saskatchewan’s situation we’re always going to have, 
from one year to another, parts of the province that are going to 
draw on crop insurance. 
 
Now hopefully we will not have situations into the future where 
we have the kind of major disasters that we’ve had and 
exposure of the Crop Insurance Fund to pay the same kind of 
. . . to pay to the same degree as we’ve had in the last couple of 
years. 
 
So when we have this kind of payout, the reinsurance 
companies of course are going to say to us that we’ll want that 
recovered over a period of time. And accordingly, the rates to 
recover that are established collectively with the federal and the 
provincial governments to do that over a period of time. 
 
And so when we say this year that the required premium 
recovery is about $31 million, that will help us . . . or sorry, it’s 
about 28 per cent of that 53 per cent increase this year. It is to 
begin the recovery process of that debt. And in order to keep the 
funds secure, it’s important that you start. And to keep the crop 
insurance program solid into the future, you have to recover the 
debt. And that’s why you see, this year, the 28 per cent increase 



April 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

 

of the 53 to recover that debt over a period of time. 
 
Now hopefully we’ll experience a good crop in Saskatchewan 
this year and next, that we won’t have to pay out larger claims 
on claims to our producers, that that fund will be able to recover 
itself far quicker than a period of over an extended period of 
time, and that we’ll be able to build that fund back up again 
where we might be able to do other initiatives within the 
program. 
 
And I mean, you just need to look to our neighbours to the east 
who, in Manitoba, have not had the same kind of draw on their 
crop insurance fund last couple of years and so have a very 
healthy crop insurance fund. Why? Because they didn’t have to 
pay out large claims. And when you don’t have to pay out large 
claims, then you can do things to improve the crop insurance 
program significantly. And the new agricultural policy 
framework with the larger adjustment this year, where the feds 
are putting more money into the crop insurance program, will 
help us in terms of making those changes once we’ve got some 
of that debt repayment looked after. 
 
But we’ll always need to be prepared for a situation like we had 
this year into the future because when you look at the 
Saskatchewan landscape, you’ll find that every six or seven or 
eight years, we’re going to have a disaster. And when we have a 
major disaster of this kind, this is when you get those major 
payouts. And that’s the reason for why we have the kinds of 
premiums that we have today and that’s why we’re retiring the 
debt over time. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I thank the 
Minister of Agriculture and the opposition for allowing me to 
interject myself into these proceedings. 
 
I would like to introduce to you and to other members of the 
Assembly, a group of students and teachers and chaperones 
from St. Peter’s School, which is in my constituency in 
Saskatoon. And they are 34 grade 7 students, accompanied by 
their teachers, Anita Romanoff and Erin Johnson. And also with 
them are chaperones, Mrs. Ray, Mrs. Kanutson, Mrs. 
Lafontaine, Mrs. Schroh, and I think Mrs. Gilowitz. 
 
And I understand the students, the teachers, and chaperones had 
a breakdown with their bus this morning but now they’ve 
arrived. And I hope they had some kind of fun while the bus 
was broken down. And I know they’re going to have fun in 
Regina here. 
 
They’re going to be touring the Legislative Building and doing 
some other things in Regina. And we are going to meet after the 
students have an opportunity to observe the Chamber and see 
the building and we’re going to get our picture taken on the 
stairs. And then we’re going to the members’ dining room and 

we’re going to have drinks and we’re going to have Dixie cups. 
 
And when we get our picture developed, we’re going to get a 
photograph of the entire good-looking class for each student. 
This is a very good-looking group of young people, Mr. Chair, 
which the Speaker and I met with, and it’s no surprise that it’s 
such a good-looking group of young people when they have the 
best looking MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in the 
legislature. 
 
So I want all members to join with me in welcoming the 
students, teachers, and chaperones from St. Peter’s School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. That’s a hard act to 
follow there. 
 
But the question that I have for the minister is what kind of 
flexibility does the province have when calculating how they 
will address the deficit over the 15 years? Do they divide it by 
15 or . . . and it increases by so much per year or how . . . like 
what kind of flexibility do they have in calculating how the 
debt’s going to be addressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — My officials . . . I don’t have the actual 
details with me but we could try and provide that. 
 
But there are three things I think that are important here for the 
member to understand. That the formula is specified in the 
national agreement so it isn’t something that the province on its 
own decides. This formula has been historic. It’s practised by 
each of the provinces across the country and so . . . And it’s in 
each of our agreements. 
 
Secondly, that the debt repayment process that’s determined is 
verified by the actuary. So the actuary needs to determine 
whether or not the process in which provinces are retiring the 
debt in fact meet the principles of the crop insurance program. 
So if there’s some sense here that individual provinces can 
determine on their own what those guidelines will be or what 
those specified repayment periods might be, they need to pass 
the test of the actuaries which are, as I’ve stated, part of the 
national agreement. 
 
Can there by some flexibility in terms of shorter periods of 
time? There may very well be but they would have to be 
negotiated with the actuarials . We think that a 15-year period 
would not be an unreasonable one, it’s within the time frame. 
 
We’re cautious this year that coming off two years of drought in 
Saskatchewan, even though the landscape of the province looks 
good, the projections for an average crop year are now 
predicted across the province. And when that . . . if that were to 
happen then we could retire this portion of the debt, in my view, 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2003 

 

in a far quicker way, get to the positive side of the crop 
insurance program again, and begin to do some of the things 
that we want to do to a larger degree to enhance the program to 
the way in which we’ve been talking about wanting it enhanced 
and producers wanting it enhanced across the country. 
 
So can there be some flexibility to shorten the period of time? 
There may be. But if you do that and you run into another year 
of difficulty, then all you’re doing is loading additional debt on 
to the fund and extending the period of time of which before 
you can make any other adjustments that will enhance the 
program further. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — It’s with a great deal of humour that I hear 
the minister stand in the House today and say that he can’t 
really tell me what that formula is, that he could maybe get it 
for me at a later time, when he has been touting that I have a 
lack of knowledge. Well obviously he’s got a little bit of a lack 
of knowledge on that formula as well. So it’s kind of 
interesting, even with his officials here, that he can’t give a 
detail on the formula that’s used. 
 
Mr. Chair, can the minister tell us, so that if this . . . This year 
this increase is absolutely unavoidable. There is no other way of 
perhaps having a little less of an increase this year and trying to 
address that again the following year. I’m not suggesting that’s 
my policy. I’m just asking the question just so the minister 
understands. So could this have been lessened this year, some, 
and in hopes that it is indeed a normal crop year? 
 
And I know our Finance minister based his whole budget on the 
fact that it will be and needs to be a normal crop year and then 
hopefully it wouldn’t have to be increased next year. But if it 
needs to be, that could be the year. What kind of flexibility is 
there in order to work with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I just want to say to the 
member opposite that the crop insurance formula, of which my 
officials have access to and that I have access to, the member 
opposite and the Saskatchewan Party have access to. So if the 
member opposite wants to have information on the absolute 
intricate details of the agreement of which Saskatchewan signs, 
or any other province has signed in Canada, she has full access 
to that information. And if this is the . . . And I don’t know the 
technical detail of this particular agreement, Mr. Speaker, and 
nor do I plan on learning it in that . . . from that perspective. 
Now I can provide that for the member and then she could 
address it from the kind of detail which she wishes to. 
 
But the premium rate components are tied into three specific 
areas. They look at prior year loses, where they take the claims 
for the yield loss, established and unseeded acreage, and this 
will vary by crop for risk area, and the 2003 premiums used 
2001 claims of all previous years. That’s one of the first areas 
of review. 
 
The second is that it loads to meet actuarial guidelines adjusted 
for participation to meet reinsurance requirements. That’s part 
of the formula of which the rates must then be at certain levels 
to be sure that they have access with the federal reinsurance. 
There will be detailed formulas in that of which would be used, 
of which I don’t have and don’t intend to have that kind of 
specific detail because we have people who have that on our 

behalf. 
 
And the member opposite from Watrous can get that from my 
department or from my officials or from the federal government 
or anybody whenever she wants to get that. There’s nothing 
keeping her from knowing that specific detail, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, if she wishes to have that. 
 
And then you attach to it, Mr. Speaker, the program debt load. 
And attached to that of course is the increases or the decreases 
depending on the balance of the Crop Insurance Fund, and then 
how large the fund debt requires to increase the load each year. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, if you want that kind of 
detail, which are signed by the individual provinces, I can 
provide that for her fully and she will then have a full 
understanding of how it is that the national crop insurance 
program works. And I say generically to this House from time 
to time because I think that’s the questions that people are 
asking. They don’t want the intricate details of how the formula 
works. 
 
(11:45) 
 
If the member wants that, certainly could provide it. If she 
doesn’t have it, she has the same sort of access to that kind of 
information as anybody else in the province has. She can 
contact the federal government. She can certainly contact my 
department, ask me to provide it. She can make arrangements to 
meet with my own officials to get that kind of information. 
That’s available for her, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if the request today is to find out the detail of the crop 
insurance program in detail, I’d be happy to provide it to her in 
detail and my hope is that she’ll understand it in the kind of 
degree that it requires. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer, but it’s 
rather misleading here when he says he’s just so open and ready 
to give information, etc., etc. He knows full well, and it’s 
documented dates through my office, of days that he said that 
he would return phone calls that I put to his office. His office 
set up a time and a place that those phone calls would take 
place, and he’s never returned them. 
 
So he’s a little bit not accessible, and he is less than forward in 
giving me information. So I am looking more than forward to 
getting all the information from him that he is saying that he 
will provide here today. 
 
So with that, Mr. Chair, I would like to turn it over for a while 
to the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Crop insurance requires 
to have some stability and some longevity within the program 
itself. And you need to have participation with all the producers 
in the province as much as possible to sustain that program. 
 
And there is a formula within the crop insurance program that is 
a good experience discount. And if the minister could explain to 
us how that good experience discount works within the 
program, and how that experience discount right now is going 
to affect especially the people from the west side of the 



April 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

 

province that have had some problems over the last two years, 
and how that’s going to be recognized for the difficulties they 
may be having as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair — or Mr. Deputy Chair — the 
member is absolutely right that someone who has been in the 
program over a period of time could have as high a discount, 
purchase discount, of as much as 50 per cent. Through the 
course of a given year if you don’t have any wrecks on your 
farm, then you would get that kind of a discount year over year. 
 
When you have a wreck on your farm or you need a claim on 
. . . in a particular bad year, then the most that you would ever 
lose is 10 per cent. 
 
Now if you have a number of years of which you have a 
problem or a disaster on your farm you could easily . . . If you 
have five consecutive years, you would lose that discount that 
you had awarded to you. 
 
So when you don’t have a claim you’re rewarded to a maximum 
of 50 per cent. When you have claims, consecutive, you could 
lose it to a maximum of 50 per cent but never in a given year to 
more than 10. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess again it’s the 
sense of keeping producers in the program. And to keep the 
good producers in the program we need to recognize that the 
good experience discount needs to worked with and it needs to 
have some value within the program itself. 
 
But I think we need to understand and the people need to 
understand that with, you know, the last two years of difficulty, 
again especially with the west side of the province, to try and 
retain those good producers in the program, is there any kind of 
initiatives, are you looking at the enhanced program of seeing 
what changes you’re going to make to retain those kind of 
coverages for those . . . or those kind of programs for that type 
of producer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well that’s . . . I mean you ask a very good 
question and a very important one, Mr. Member, because the 
whole idea and the notion of the crop insurance program is to 
make it stronger within the province. And it’s far easier to make 
the crop insurance program stronger when in fact you have a 
surplus account that you’re working from. 
 
When you have back-to-back disasters in the province and you 
have the kind of debt that the program has accrued, you then 
have to repay the debt. And when you’re repaying the debt, then 
you aren’t building on improvements to the crop insurance 
program. 
 
And partly why I’m pleased about the agreement that we’ve 
been able to sign with the federal government, in terms of the 
new agricultural policy framework. Because all along we’ve 
said what we need to do is we need to load more money into 
our crop insurance program federally because that will allow us 
in the future to make the kinds of adjustments that will be 
necessary to improve the program. 
 
And it’s not only do we want the good . . . want to see not 
specific producers that are in the crop insurance program, I’d 

like to see all producers in Saskatchewan in the crop insurance 
program. And that’s partly why we did the rebalancing this year 
to see some improvements in the yield averages, which will in 
our view hopefully enhance or entice people to be part of the 
program. And this is why we’re offering some additional 
options this year within the program to ensure that producers 
can take advantage of it. 
 
But our notion is not unlike yours. Our notion is to try and find 
the stronger crop insurance program because it has been a very 
important instrument to Saskatchewan producers over the years. 
And it would be hard to imagine, in the last couple of years, 
what the farm economy in Saskatchewan would look like had 
we not had the $1.4 billion payout in the last couple of years. 
 
I’ve had a number of producers who’ve come to me and said, 
thank God for crop insurance; otherwise I wouldn’t be in the 
farming operation today. And so when you make the point that 
there’s a strong interest and a need here to enhance the value of 
the crop insurance program to make it stronger so that we see 
greater participation and . . . And we’d like it. 
 
We have today, I think, somewhere in the neighbourhood of 70 
per cent or 72 per cent last year of enrolment of producers in the 
program. We’d like to see this at 100 per cent. And the way you 
get there is by enhancing the level of the program, providing 
better yield coverages, providing better benefits to producers, 
and keeping the premiums where they’re reasonably, where 
they’re reasonably sound so that you can make an investment in 
an insurance program and yet you know that you have the 
coverage. 
 
So we don’t disagree on the principle. The issue is that what 
happens when you have the kind of back-to-back disasters that 
we’ve had in the province that have affected the fund to the 
degree in which it has. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Once again, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chair, I guess just a suggestion in the sense of how you can 
enhance the participation in crop insurance program is that back 
in the early ’90s we had the marketing agent system that was in 
place. And I know the whole side of the province that I worked 
in and was involved with at that time it was . . . (inaudible) . . . 
that whole participation went anywhere from the mid-’60s to 
about 90, 95 per cent participation of crops that were being 
covered. And I think that was an excellent program that was in 
place. 
 
And I think it helped the producers understand the programs 
that they were taking a look at and some of the options that they 
had working within the program. And when you’re making 
changes within the crop insurance program, it is always very 
beneficial when you have those people available that can 
support and direct the producer in the sense of the options they 
may have. 
 
And that’s just a suggestion that that might be a direction that 
might be taken a look at in part of the enhancement of the 
program, that you have that type of a system back out there that 
those programs can be facilitated in that way. 
 
Just wanting to go over to the area of producer coverage in the 
sense of the bushel coverage that they receive. There’s an 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2003 

 

actuary number that is used when you do the calculation with 
the actual bushel coverage. And that actuary number sometimes 
really distorts a little bit the actual value of production that has 
come in by the producer and it’s not an actual producer number 
any longer. 
 
Can the minister explain to us how that actuary calculation is 
done and to what extent it really affects the coverages? Because 
it seems to have somewhat of a difference between one risk area 
to the other. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — So the components of the individual 
producer’s yield coverage. We have as you know, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, excellent records now on individual averages across the 
province. So individual producer records — the amount of 
bushels produced on how many acres, and summerfallow and 
stubble yield acres — the average yields are used when 
producers does not grow the particular crop. 
 
These yields are adjusted by the index and on how the producer 
traditionally compares in the area, and the formula that’s used 
here is the nine-tenths of previous long-term history and 
one-tenth of the year that is brought into the formula. And for 
2003, the 2001 yields are being added, which I think the 
member would understand, or does understand. 
 
And the changes that were made in 2003, we updated all of the 
yields and the history in most areas of the province. We made 
the stubble areas yields equal to the summerfallow area yields 
this year, and we did not change the producer individual yield 
coverage. 
 
I think that’s the, sort of the answer to the latter part of the 
question. 
 
For the first part of the question about how you might enhance 
the crop insurance program into the future, I accept the notion 
that the member has some past interest in the way in which crop 
insurance was sold in the province and that the member knows 
and understands the crop insurance program well because I 
expect that he was closely tied to the marketing agencies that 
were established in the mid-’80s to market crop insurance in the 
province. 
 
This administration in my view would not move back to a 
marketing agent concept. And it would be in my view some 
indication here from the member about whether or not there’s 
an interest here in privatizing the Crop Insurance Corporation, 
and I can tell you and those who are watching that we have little 
interest in moving down that path. 
 
I would say to the member opposite that the strength of a crop 
insurance program is not because farmers don’t know what it 
provides — and more information to producers is always 
healthy, it’s always welcome — but I would stand behind our 
Crop Insurance Corporation today and the men and women who 
work in it, that we have an exceptional crop insurance program 
in terms of its delivery, in terms of its marketing, in terms of its 
understanding and its future stability. 
 
And we’ve taken a crop insurance program that I would suggest 
to you, sir, in the late ’80s and mid-’80s was in a great deal of 
difficulty, and saw it through some very difficult times in the 

’90s. And this program has now recovered. It’s been able to 
sustain itself to a level of which we’re extremely proud of in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Even when we have had the two worst droughts in the history 
— or last year the worst in the history of this province — you 
still have in Saskatchewan some of the lowest premiums to 
producers across the country. 
 
So this is not, in my view, about taking a corporation and 
restructuring it, providing a different model in the way in which 
you deliver it. That is not the position of this particular 
administration. It would not be a recommendation that I would 
be making. And I would say to you, sir, with all due respect, it 
would not enhance the level of enrolment by producers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s not about marketing. It’s about providing a better quality 
product is what I’m interested in doing. And when we provide a 
better quality product for producers, you will have far more 
people that will be engaged in enrolling in the program. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I guess I 
can appreciate where the minister’s coming from in the sense of 
the direction that crop insurance has taken. But I still get 
questions on the fact of how the program’s changes are coming, 
and getting the understanding of the program, and getting an 
understanding of the changes. 
 
And there is some movement afoot of even closing down some 
of the temporary offices that are out there in rural Saskatchewan 
as well. It becomes a little bit more difficult for the producers to 
have access to the information, and the distance they need to 
travel sometimes to get to a situation where they can sit down 
with an individual from the Crop Insurance office to talk about 
the changes that are coming in. 
 
And an enhanced and better developed program is always 
beneficial, but I think the producers need to be comfortable in 
understanding the type of program they’re getting into and have 
that access to that information, the individual, so they can sit 
down and talk with as well. 
 
Just wanting to go back to the actuaries again with the sense of 
the coverage. There was an actuary number calculation that was 
used with the specialty crops. Has that actuary been removed, 
and you’re using and working just with the actual production 
numbers that the producers bring in at this time? 
 
(12:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — On the specialty programs, or when we 
have new crops that come on, what we do is we use actuarial 
numbers for a period of time. With some of the specialty crops 
now we have now enough individual information on each of the 
producers where we’ve now removed the actuarial. 
 
What I also want to indicate is that we shouldn’t suggest for a 
moment that there’s been a shutdown of offices across the 
province because there is no attempt to do that, nor has there 
been. And we have a large number of consumer service offices 
across the province and I have a list of them here that went out 
with the instruction guide this year. And I see here somewhere 



April 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

 

in the neighbourhood of maybe 18 to 20 different communities 
across the province which in my view is an extremely, 
extremely large level of service that customers can attach 
themselves to. We have this information on-line now. It 
surprises me to a large degree about the number of producers 
today in Saskatchewan that have on-line and can access 
information on-line. 
 
So I continue to make the case that this is not about, in my 
view, enrolment in the crop insurance program. It’s not about 
people not knowing what the program is about. It has more to 
do with the level of service . . . or the level of support that the 
program can provide to producers. And it’s that piece that I 
think we need to work harder at achieving. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. At this time I will 
turn the questions over to the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I welcome the minister 
here, and his officials. I have a question dealing with . . . I 
talked to a constituent and I just basically just talked to him, so 
I don’t have the information in front of me. He’s going to be 
sending it to my office. But since Crop Insurance was up today, 
it turned out to be a very timely phone call. So I may see this 
individual over the weekend so I would . . . maybe I’ll ask the 
questions now and try and get some information on it. 
 
And I may be a little wrong on some of the names but I think 
what it was called . . . he said that with his crop insurance 
package he was asked to do a farm assessment coming up, Mr. 
Chairman. Now he’s never had to do this before. He’s been in 
crop insurance for a number of years, hardly collected except 
for the last two years of being in the area of a very severe 
drought. Naturally he was having to collect the last two years 
and also with grasshopper . . . some grasshopper damage. He 
hasn’t been changing his farming practices or what he’s been 
seeding or what he’s been going for the amount of coverage. He 
hasn’t changed that at all. 
 
So his question was, why did he get this one? Is the office doing 
more farm assessment plans this year than normal, or is it just a 
random pick, or in the drought areas are you asking for more of 
that? Or in areas that have to deal with grasshopper damage, 
were you doing more of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
member asks a good question in terms of how is that process 
conducted. Well from time to time, on an annual basis, we do 
random . . . the kind of reviews that the member asks about just 
to make sure that the stability of the program remains intact. So 
we do randoms on an annual basis across the province. 
 
Secondly, on occasion we actually . . . where we may receive a 
complaint, where somebody might issue a complaint about a 
particular producer, then the Crop Insurance Corporation and 
their staff would then do the kind of work that you are 
suggesting is done. And it would be done in some fairly detail. I 
don’t know the circumstances around this particular individual 
but it could be a random or in fact it could be something more 
specific tied to a concern that somebody might have issued or 
levelled against the individual producer. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Can you tell me how many were asked . . . sent 

out last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Deputy Chair, my staff tell 
me that on an annual basis we might do a couple of hundred. 
That would be at random, random checks across the province, 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of a couple of hundred. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member from Moosomin on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, in the 
east gallery we have 28 students from Dr. Isman Elementary 
School. These students are grade 3 and 4 students. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Tim Fisher, and a number of 
chaperones. And, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to invite the students 
to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
First of all I’d like to indicate that what you see on the floor of 
the Assembly right now is not question period but it’s a time of 
debate between opposition members and departments — and 
specifically involved today is the Department of Agriculture — 
where we talk specifically about the actual expenditures in the 
Department of Agriculture. 
 
So I’m pleased to invite you to the Assembly and pleased that 
you’ve taken the time to come. And I invite the members to join 
me in welcoming the students and the chaperones and their 
teacher from Dr. Isman School to the Legislative Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You said roughly a 
couple of hundred last year. How about this year? Would you 
have that already, how many you’re doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, we have been 
doing it historically so we wouldn’t do any more or less this 
year so the number that we would do this year would not be 
increased, I don’t imagine, unless we have more complaints. 
 
If we have more complaints from individuals out in 
Saskatchewan land who believe that somebody got crop 
insurance inappropriately . . . and being a producer as you are, 
from time to time at the coffee shop we hear a whole bunch of 
things about what might be happening, and the next thing you 
know you might find, you know, a letter from somebody from 
the coffee shop sitting on the desk of the minister. And as a 
result of it, then you need to send it on to the Crop Insurance 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2003 

 

Corporation and accordingly they would do that kind of 
investigation. 
 
So we’re not anticipating to do any more than we have 
historically. It’s about a couple of hundred every year. And I 
can’t say to you whether or not we’ve had more complaints this 
year than other years. But certainly we’ll pay attention to that to 
see whether or not that number rises. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess my 
constituent’s concern was that you were going to be doing this 
more in what they call the grasshopper . . . where they were 
more infested heavy areas, that you were going to be asking for 
more of a detailed farm management plan in advance. 
 
He had heard that same thing this is just talking about. You 
brought up the coffee shop thing, and he had heard this as a 
rumour, that through the grasshopper heavily infested areas that 
you would be asking for more detailed farm plans in advance, 
of what the producers were going to be doing — if they were 
doing more . . . planning on doing more spraying. Or you would 
be asking for a financial plan for them in advance before you 
would issue them crop insurance. 
 
Is this going to be more prevalent this year in the grasshopper 
infested areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, when you’re out 
on your grasshopper patrol again this coming year, and you’re 
having coffee at the coffee shops, you should say to producers 
that we’re not enhancing our level of examination. We are not, 
nor will we be, attaching it to any particular issue that 
individuals might be experiencing, whether it’s grasshoppers or, 
you know, whether it’s consecutive frost or whether it’s the 
aphid that’s eating the canola crop. It is not targeted to one 
particular sector of loss in the province. When we’re doing the 
examinations we’re doing it across the piece, across the 
province, and it’s not specific to any particular issue that we 
might be having in a given year. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If you take the full 
top coverage, which I think this year is 80 per cent, do you 
automatically have to do a farm . . . I think it’s called a farm 
practice application — in advance? Is that automatic? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — No, Mr. Deputy Chair, it’s not automatic 
at all. It’s as I’ve said. The only time we do it is when we get a 
complaint or we do the random checks through the course of a 
given year like we’ve been doing historically. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Last year 
what became of great concern throughout the province with the 
producers was the expediency with which their crops could be 
assessed. And so therefore the number of fieldworkers became 
quite critical. And the reason being of course, as the minister is 
well aware, is because a lot of the producers were hoping to 
have their crops written off early enough to cut for feed or to 
use in some other fashion because it wasn’t going to mature in 
time to be harvest or, quite frankly, there wasn’t enough there to 
make it worthwhile to go through the expenditures of 
harvesting. 
 
What is the ratio in our Crop Insurance of the management to 

the fieldworkers who actually go out and do the assessments of 
the fields and make those critical decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, my officials tell me that 
there are about 300 people who are employed in the crop 
insurance program. About 40 of those are management people 
who would be working in regional offices across the province. 
And we have 250 field staff then that would be doing the 
appraising. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. In the 
budget for this year, it is stated that the Agriculture department 
will be hiring 20 more staff. Will any of those be working in the 
crop insurance department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the increase in staffing 
to the Department of Agriculture is really the transfer of 
employees that are coming from the irrigation file, which used 
to be housed in the past over at Sask Water. And that 
department is now under the purview of Agriculture and Food, 
and it’s just those employees that are coming across. So this 
isn’t new people that we’re adding to the department. This is 
simply a transfer of employees from one department to another. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Again talking 
about having a good program and having a program that’s very 
acceptable to the producer and it’s a program that’s going to 
have some sustainability value to it, when the hail coverage was 
removed from crop insurance, that was a benefit and that was a 
real attraction to the program in itself. 
 
Could the minister explain why that part of that coverage was 
removed and the basis of, I guess, the thinking around that 
decision. And also there was about 17 and a half million dollars 
of savings that came back to the government; how that offset 
the premium costs for that year and how that adjustment went 
into the calculation of the premiums. We realize the premiums 
went up in the neighbourhood of 48 or 50 per cent last year as 
well, but I guess there was a coverage component of the 
program that was lost with it. How did that take effect in there 
in that calculation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, the movement of the 17 million, the 
member is quite correct about. What we did with that 17 million 
of course is that we enhanced some additional programs within 
crop insurance, like the forage program. 
 
We used some of that money to also invest in buying down the 
all-peril. Last year we had a long debate in this House, and the 
weekly or daily petitioning of the Crop Insurance Fund, 
whereby it was said on a number of occasions that in fact we 
didn’t put enough money into the program when in fact we 
actually exceeded the federal level of contribution last year. 
 
So a portion of that 17 million, because we built all-peril 
contribution to crop insurance last year by adding an additional 
$10 million, which kept the producer premiums last year under 
the old formula more sustainable for producers, we thought. 
 
At the same time we did remove the hail coverage from the crop 
insurance program partly because we believed and received 
from the crop insurance agents across . . . or the hail insurance 
agents across the province from the private sector who said to 



April 11, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

 

us, why is it that you’re in the business of selling hail insurance 
when in fact this is . . . you’re competing directly with us? You 
should provide an opportunity for us to do that for producers 
across the country or across the province. We’re doing it 
anyway. Producers are buying the crop insurance program and 
then they’re going out and buying additional hail insurance at 
the same time. 
 
And so we made the decision last year to have the private 
sector, as you talked earlier about the importance of having the 
free market enterprise involved in the sale of the product which 
producers were already exposed to, so we made that change last 
year. 
 
(12:15) 
 
I know that it wasn’t popular with some producers across the 
country or across the province. But in reality, we do have agents 
today who provide very good rates on the hail insurance, people 
who make a living in this province selling hail insurance to 
farmers who are accustomed to buying top-up hail insurance all 
the time. And it was a decision that we made to provide an 
opportunity for private sector business in Saskatchewan to 
continue to make a . . . to continue to provide a product to 
producers — and at the same time taking that chunk of money 
in a year that was very tight and putting it into areas where we 
thought we could get far more protection for producers. 
 
Last year, I have to say to you that the lowest priority on my list 
was hail insurance. The bigger priority on my list was, what are 
we going to do about the drought and how do we protect 
livestock producers in Saskatchewan? How can we get a forage 
program and a grass program in place? Where will we find the 
revenue to be able to do that, given that we’re working in fixed 
dollars with the federal government, and ourselves, and what 
producers are prepared to pay? 
 
And so where we found some of that additional money to be 
able to do that and provide, in my view, a very substantive grass 
protection program and cover program for farmers last year, 
which was very beneficial when you take a look at the number 
of acres that were insured last year . . . I think we went from 
about 300 or 200,000 acres to well in excess of 3 million. And 
in my view, that was a good investment for Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. And it’s astounding 
that he’s saying that his priority was the livestock last year 
when he was called upon time and time again by the producers 
themselves and by the opposition party to allow crops that were 
not going to make it, quite frankly and were not worth 
harvesting, to allow them to be written off so they could still be 
used for feed for that year when producers were desperate for 
feed, Mr. Chair. 
 
And yet the minister sat and he made fun of our proposal and he 
didn’t acknowledge that this could be done and said it was 
impossible. And it simply wasn’t true. There was crops out 
there that could have been cut for feed or turned into grazing, 
and it’s just that simple. 
 
Mr. Chair, I have no further questions today considering that 
the minister has promised quite a considerable amount of 

information. I will be looking forward to that information. I 
hope that it comes in a more expedient fashion than his answer 
to the question of how the Nokomis bull feeding station is doing 
because I’ve been waiting for well over a week for the answer 
to that one and I’ve yet to hear. So hopefully the information 
that he’s promised this time will come a little more timely. 
 
So with that, Mr. Chair, I have no further questions. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish everyone a safe journey home. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:21. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................529 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................529 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................529 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................529 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................529 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................529 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................529 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................529 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................529 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................543 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................547 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Regina Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................530 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................530 
 New Business at Craik 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................530 
 Artistic Talents in Regina Public Community Schools Celebrated 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................531 
 Qu’Appelle Valley Hockey League 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................531 
 Three Inducted into 4-H Hall of Fame 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................531 
 Speed Limit Increase 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................531 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Speed Limit on Four—Lane Highways 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................532 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................532 
 Ethanol Industry 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................532 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................532 
 Mega Bingo 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................533 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................534 
 Community Initiatives Fund 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................534 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................535 
 Government Reaction to Harassment Allegations 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................535 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................535 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................536 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Speed Limit on Four-Lane Highways 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................536 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................537 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................538 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................538 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................538 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................538 
 Bill No. 13 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................539 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................539 



 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund—Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization—Vote 1 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................540 
  Harpauer ...........................................................................................................................................................................540, 548 
  Lorenz ................................................................................................................................................................................544, 548 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................547 
 


