















































Hansard: May 09, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 991 
 May 9, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of my constituents who are concerned about the high 
cost of education tax on property. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Rama, Quill 
Lake, and Wadena. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise once 
more on behalf of the constituents of Cypress Hills to present a 
petition with regard to the government’s reluctance to renew 
Crown grazing leases in our constituency. Their prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the Cabri 
area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petitions just 
keep rolling in. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister 
of Highways preserve the old bridges across the North 
Saskatchewan River between Battleford and North 
Battleford. 

 
Your petitioners come from Hamlin, North Battleford, and 
Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition by 
citizens concerned with the almost unbelievable lack of a 
hemodialysis unit in the Union Hospital in Moose Jaw. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the city 
of Moose Jaw and the community of Caronport. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise again with a petition from citizens of rural 
Saskatchewan who are very concerned about their lack of health 
care services. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen, and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
this morning to present a petition with concerns regarding 
health care from west central Saskatchewan. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure that current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Flaxcombe, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at its current level of service at 
a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctor 
services available, as well as lab services, public health, 
home care, long-term care services available to users from 
the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 

I so present. 
 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

Signed by the good citizens of Davidson and Girvin. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 18, 21, 27, 35, 36, 40, and 90. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Crown Investments Corporation: 
how much did it cost SaskTel in advertising to attract the 
5,000 customers of Max? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Highways minister: can the minister please say 
when the plans will begin to repave the section of Highway 
42 from the junction of Highway No. 2 to the junction of 
Highway No. 19? 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: for the fiscal year 2001-2002, 
what was the total dollar value spent by your department on 
the sexual harassment prevention program; further to that, 
how many sexual harassment prevention program general 
awareness workshops were conducted and in what specific 
departments? 

 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, again with regard to the sexual 
harassment prevention program: 
 

How many manager/supervisor workshops were conducted; 
how many sexual harassment prevention program training 
facilitator workshops were conducted; and how many 
sexual harassment prevention program consultation 
workshops were conducted? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the CIC minister: have SaskTel officials recently 
travelled to Peru or any other South American country on 
Crown corporation business; if so, what was the nature of 
the trip and the business opportunity involved? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you two friends of mine seated in your gallery, and 
I’d ask them to stand. Mike Androsoff, who is an emergency 
medical services consultant, and also my friend, Wally 

Duychah, who is the CEO (chief executive officer) of WPD 
Ambulance in the beautiful Battlefords. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them here this 
morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a good friend of mine from the opposite 
end of the province, Mr. Speaker — not the width but the 
length. We have the mayor of Stony Rapids who is visiting the 
Assembly today. I’d like to ask the members to welcome 
Georges Mercredi. 
 
And Georges was here for a New North gathering in which we 
had a number of ministers meet with a number of northern 
mayors. And Georges of course is very pleased because this 
year Stony Rapids received a $7 million — or last year, sorry 
— water and sewer system that wasn’t there before. And he’s 
here of course to work on other issues that the Far North needs 
to have addressed. 
 
And I want to ask all members of the Assembly to welcome Mr. 
Mercredi. And I’ll say in Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
And welcome to the Assembly today, Mr. Mercredi. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Mother’s Day Wishes 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Sunday 
is Mother’s Day, a special day set aside to honour our mothers 
who loved us no matter how many times we made mistakes, 
fought with our brothers and sisters during six-hour car rides, 
broke curfews in high school, or played our music too loud. 
Despite all of that our mothers seemed to love us anyway. 
 
One day is not enough to reflect upon how our mothers 
contribute to our lives and society. They guide, nurture, love, 
and support us. They let us have that last piece of rhubarb pie. 
They make us chicken soup when we’re sick. And for those of 
us in political life, they are our biggest fans and sometimes — 
not often — our greatest critics. They are indeed shining 
examples of selflessness. 
 
It’s a wonder our moms have time to do all of the things that 
they do when increasingly society demands more of mothers. 
But this is a testament of how strong our mothers are. They 
have a knack for being in 10 places at once, and wearing several 
different hats. They’re amazing women. 
 
I think the following Moroccan proverb captures the essence of 
motherhood perfectly, as the saying goes and I quote: 
 

In the eyes of its mother, every beetle is a gazelle. 
 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to salute all mothers and 



May 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

 

grandmothers who deserve this very special day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the 
member has said, this Sunday we will be celebrating Mother’s 
Day. 
 
While we set aside many different days throughout the year to 
celebrate other events and achievements, Mother’s Day is truly 
a special day for each and every one of us. 
 
The facts are none of us would be here today if it wasn’t for our 
mothers. They were the individuals who brought us into this 
world; who put up with the scraped knees, runny noses, torn 
clothes, messy rooms, etc. And many times they did it without a 
word of complaint. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as members of this Legislative Assembly, I’m 
certain each and every one of us have been encouraged at some 
time or other by our mothers. While we were asked to seek . . . 
or when we were asked to seek nominations to public office, we 
probably sought our mother’s advice. After all, she was always 
there in the past when we needed an answer to a question or 
advice on a particular issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my remembrances of my mother are ones of a 
loving, caring, encouraging, and patient individual. And Lord 
knows she needed patience. 
 
She was a person who took great pride in her family, a mother 
who enjoyed cooking her sons’ favourite dishes especially on 
their birthdays, one who enjoyed reading to us when we were 
younger and helping with that school assignment, and on 
occasion administering correction when needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as members we all have fond memories of our 
mothers. To all the mothers across this province, happy 
Mother’s Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Statistics 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a very 
important day. Today is a very happy anniversary for 
Saskatchewan businesses and our province as a whole. 
 
In April, Saskatchewan recorded its 12th consecutive increase 
in employment on a year-over-year basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Despite two years of severe drought, Mr. 
Speaker, there were 12,900 more people working this April than 
last. This follows increases of 11,400 in March, 10,600 in 
February, 16,800 in January, and 25,000 in December, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
These numbers tell me, Mr. Speaker, that among those who 
believe in Saskatchewan are the business people of this 
province who hire the people and who give us these numbers. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I add my optimism for Saskatchewan and 

that of my colleagues for the business and workers who are 
driving this economy — not bad for a province that the 
Saskatchewan Party leader describes as a mess in his speeches, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s more good news. In April 2003 there was an increase of 
5,400 youth employment jobs. The youth employment rate 
dropped by more than 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Our youth are 
finding jobs at home in Saskatchewan close to their families, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Regina has the second lowest unemployment rate of all 
Canadian cities, Saskatoon tied for fourth. Mr. Speaker, there is 
moisture in the ground and activity in the workplace, reasons to 
feel good about where we live. I thank the business people of 
Saskatchewan for their efforts and their confidence in our great 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

YWCA Woman of Distinction 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to applaud the achievements of 
Lori Besplug of the Kindersley area. 
 
Lori is the owner/operator and resident artist of the Garden 
Gallery. She was recently recognized, along with 38 other 
Saskatchewan women, at the YWCA Women of Distinction 
Awards for women who represent an exceptional range of 
talent, achievement, and commitment. 
 
Lori was nominated in the business and trades category and 
chose to decline a nomination in the arts area. An accomplished 
artist in her own right, Lori sees art not only as a hobby but as a 
business as well. 
 
Ms. Besplug houses her galley in two reclaimed buildings, the 
Madison Legion Hall and the Brock Catholic Church, both of 
which have been moved to the Besplug farm. 
 
Lori has been a farm wife for 20 years and has three children. 
She has worked tirelessly for 14 years to make her business the 
success that it is today. She values her lifestyle in rural 
Saskatchewan and promotes it at every opportunity. 
 
She is well known in the Kindersley area for the wine and 
cheese galas that feature different local, national, and 
international artists along with live musical talent and valet 
parking, all on the open prairie. 
 
Lorie has an encouraging word for any budding or established 
artist who is fortunate enough to come into contact with her. 
She strives continuously to make her gallery better and to offer 
the arts to anyone who is interested, by way of workshops and 
exhibits. 
 
Lori Besplug certainly deserves the recognition given her by 
this prestigious nomination. Please join me in congratulating 
Lori and wishing her continued success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

Writing Awards Reception 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night myself 
and the Minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation had the 
privilege to attend the reception for the City of Regina 2003 
Writing Award. This annual award of $4,000 is designed to 
enable a writer to devote three months to work on a specific 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to say that Trevor Herriot is the 
winner of this year’s award. Mr. Herriot is a Saskatchewan 
naturalist, writer, and illustrator who is perhaps best known for 
his work, River in a Dry Land about the Qu’Appelle watershed. 
Of this book one critic said, and I quote: 
 

Every once in a . . . while a book comes out that is so 
entirely persuasive, so beautifully written, so well 
informed, so brimming with humanity, so obviously 
inspired, that it changes my way of viewing the world. 

 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t agree more. And in fact, I’m such a fan 
of this book that I’m on my fourth copy because I keep giving 
them away to friends and family. 
 
The Regina Writing Award is the latest in a long list of honours 
for Mr. Herriot. Others include the Canadian Booksellers 
Association Award for a first-time author, the Writers Trust of 
Canada Drainie-Taylor Biography Prize, the Saskatchewan 
Book Awards Book of the Year, and the Regina Book Award. 
He was also shortlisted for the 2000 Governor General’s 
Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Trevor Herriot and his wife, Karen, and their 
family on receiving this well-deserved award. And I’m sure we 
are all looking forward to reading his new book, Jacob’s 
Wound, that he is hoping to complete this summer. 
 
As well, compliments of this Assembly to the city of Regina 
and the Saskatchewan Writers Guild and their funding 
supporters in the Saskatchewan Arts Board and Saskatchewan 
Lotteries for providing this excellent award. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hafford Students Win at Drama Festival 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize a group of 25 students from the Hafford Central 
School who braved a huge spring storm to participate in a 
drama festival in Moose Jaw on April 3 to 5, 2003. The group 
presented the play, Barry Wotter Son of a Witch — that is with 
a W — a parody of the popular book and movie, Harry Potter. 
 
The group did extremely well, bringing home the following five 
awards: Wendy Linnell received the Cheer Award; Chad 
Michalenko and Stephen Parchewski each bought home acting 
awards; the group was recognized with an award for Excellence 
in Costumes and Special Effects; and also their favourite 

distinction, Most Courteous Cast and Crew. 
 
It is refreshing even though not surprising to see such a talent 
pool of up-and-coming actors and actresses, costume designers, 
special effects technicians, and set designers coming from all 
areas of this great province. 
 
Please join me in congratulating directors Janet Baranieski and 
Jim Shevchuk, along with those who received special 
recognition, and the entire cast and crew of Barry Wotter Son of 
a Witch for their achievements at the Moose Jaw drama festival. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Psychiatric Nurses Honoured During Mental Health Week 

 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 5 to May 11 
is Mental Health Week. The theme this year is Respect, Don’t 
Reject and focuses on reducing the stigma that is often attached 
to having a mental illness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a healthy society is based on healthy attitudes and, 
although awareness and understanding has increased over the 
years, there still remains a sense of fear and shame about mental 
illness and social exclusion continues to be one of the largest 
barriers faced by people who experience mental illness. A 
mentally healthy society, Mr. Speaker, is one where this fear 
and lack of acceptance will finally be overcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take this opportunity to 
acknowledge a group of people who work every day with and 
on behalf of people who are experiencing a mental illness. I’m 
speaking of course about psychiatric nurses. May 10 is 
designated as Registered Psychiatric Nurses Day, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would like to thank these men and women for the 
excellent job they do, delivering quality mental health care 
services across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is through the efforts of people such as the 
RPNS (Registered Psychiatric Nurses of Saskatchewan) and the 
Canadian Mental Health Association that negative attitudes 
towards mental illness will change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Centre on 
her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and to all my colleagues, 
some very important guests. We had an opportunity to meet this 
morning as they arrived on the steps of the legislature and had 
breakfast together. 
 
We’re joined today by a number of individuals committed to 



May 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

 

raising awareness about the tragic problem of youth suicide on 
reserves and in our communities. They began their walk in 
Nanaimo, BC (British Columbia) on April 1, 2003. They are 
hoping to finish in Ottawa by June 21, 2003, which as I think 
we all know here is National Aboriginal Day, and I believe 
hope to meet with Jean Chrétien about the issue of resources for 
suicide prevention, and not only conventional supports and 
approaches but the benefits of sweat lodges and other cultural 
and traditional approaches. 
 
So I’d like you to welcome each, and please stand as I mention 
your name: Steve Rush, who’s the elder with the group, Gina 
Meldrum, Candice Clappis, Vincent Watts, Sheila Simpson, 
Greg Brown, Thomas Watts, Reno Trimble, and Dave Elliott. 
 
And I know that any help they receive is appreciated, Mr. 
Speaker. If everyone would please join me in recognizing the 
important work they’ve taken on here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to members. I’d 
like to join with the minister in welcoming her very important 
guests here today from British Columbia, on your way to 
Ottawa. We all know that suicide hurts. It hurts families and 
friends and it’s a hurt that nobody ever gets over. And it’s 
especially incomprehensible when it’s a young person. 
 
So on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party, we congratulate you on 
taking up this very important initiative. And good luck in all 
your endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Corporation Investments 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, just a few days ago the 
Minister for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) promised that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
would be more forthcoming about its money-losing foreign 
investments. But, Mr. Speaker, I guess he failed to clear that 
with Don Ching. 
 
Don Ching said that SaskTel will never disclose its losses. So 
we have the minister saying one thing and we have Don Ching 
overruling him. Mr. Speaker, who is in charge over there? 
 
My question — this minister is helpless — will the Premier 
intervene and order Don Ching to disclose these 
multi-million-dollar losses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as is often the case, we will 
be anxious to find out what Mr. Ching may or may not have 
said because what is reported in this House from members 

opposite is very, very often not accurate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will know that this government has provided, 
in accountability of the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan, a 
higher level of accountability of transactions and affairs that 
ever has existed. Is there work that we can yet do, Mr. Speaker? 
Yes, there is work that we can yet do. 
 
Now if we want a question of accountability, how about the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party being a little bit accountable, 
for once, to the people of Saskatchewan about his plans for the 
Crown corporation should he ever form government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party, to make known to the people of 
Saskatchewan, what is it? Is it the policy they announced in the 
last election that before he’s going to sell things off, he will 
have a referendum? Or is it . . . And I will reserve my further 
question for further answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it appears 
to us that SaskTel has lost about $66 million in foreign 
investments over the last few years, but the Premier says he 
doesn’t agree with our numbers. Mr. Speaker, the problem is 
that they have a big credibility problem because they won’t tell 
us what they think the numbers are. That’s the problem, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
A few years ago the Saskatchewan Party suggested that the 
NDP might lose as much — as much — as $20 million on the 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) fiasco. The NDP said that was crazy, Mr. Speaker. 
They said they were just having a few start-up costs. Well it 
turns out, Mr. Speaker, that they didn’t lose $20 million, they 
lost a whopping $28 million. 
 
Now they’re saying exactly the same thing about their SaskTel 
losses and, Mr. Speaker, they’re covering them up. 
 
Will the Premier live up to his own commitment that he made 
after the SPUDCO disaster? Will the Premier take charge and 
order Don Ching to tell us how much SaskTel is losing on their 
foreign investments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition leader, the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party said . . . says, well it seems to 
them and appears to them certain things are true. I will tell you 
what does not need to be seeming or appear to be true. The fact 
of the matter is that the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan, 
the public utilities and public enterprise and public investment, 
has returned to the people of Saskatchewan in the last 10 years 
$1.6 billion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that $1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker, will 
disappear from the people of Saskatchewan if that Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party should ever form government. Because it’s 
clear to the people of Saskatchewan it is his intention — it is his 
intention — to sell off the public utilities. It is his intention to 
cease all — all — public investment in the economy. 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

I ask him therefore, which is the position of today? Is it the 
position that he identified in the last election, in his own 
platform material, that he would provide for the people of 
Saskatchewan a referendum? Or is it the position then taken by 
his party in resolution that the Crowns would be just simply 
sold? Or is it the position he takes on public radio two years ago 
that in fact the Crowns should be kept and should be allowed to 
expand outside of the province? Or is it the most recent position 
which is sell them all? Which is it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is not aware that a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Apparently the 
Premier doesn’t realize that a $1.6 billion return on Crown 
investments is a very low return. The Crowns are not reporting 
well because they’ve lost their way, Mr. Speaker. They are 
investing where they oughtn’t to invest. 
 
And in the wake of the SPUDCO scandal — one of those 
wayward investments, Mr. Speaker — the Premier in this very 
House promised, he promised to be more accountable to the 
people of Saskatchewan about how his government was 
spending the people’s money. Yet in today’s paper, if you could 
imagine, SaskTel President Don Ching says he’s never going to 
tell us how much money SaskTel is losing. He will not do it. He 
will overrule the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know SaskTel is losing millions of dollars on 
foreign investments. So we ask, who is running things over 
there? Is it the Premier or is it Don Ching? The evidence 
indicates that Don Ching has the upper hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP continuing to cover up its losses 
on SaskTel’s investments out of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat. This government 
over the last several years has extended accountability into the 
Crowns, as they have never been accountable or available . . . 
the information available to the public of Saskatchewan in the 
history of the province. I repeat, are there ways we can extend 
this accountability; are there ways we can better inform the 
people of Saskatchewan? Yes, there are and we are working 
towards that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I committed to this legislature, I committed to the 
people of Saskatchewan, for instance, that when public 
investment is going to be made in the economy, that there will 
be third party review of those investments. That is happening. 
That has happened and it will happen in the future. There’s no 
difference there. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the man who leads the Saskatchewan Party, 
who would seek to be Premier of the province, will not stand 
publicly and declare what he intends to do with public utilities. 
He will not stand publicly and tell us what he intends to do with 
public investment. 

He has his House Leader, the member from Cannington, saying 
there will never be a public investment if they form 
government. I wonder what the member from Wilkie thinks 
about that when he knocks on the door of government asking 
for support for his community. I wonder what other members 
think about that when they coming asking the support of 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, people close to the Broe ethanol 
deal at Belle Plaine tell us they do not believe that anything is 
going to be done on the project this year. They believe the deal 
may be dead, but at the very least construction is unlikely to 
begin this year. 
 
For the minister responsible, Mr. Speaker, what is the current 
status of the Broe ethanol project at Belle Plaine? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a fair question, a fair 
question from an opposition. What is the status of the ethanol 
growth in our province? What is the status of the project at 
Belle Plaine? As the Minister of CIC has indicated, we have 
committed in an arrangement with the Broe group of companies 
to see the ethanol industry grow in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the terms of that agreement 
are the same. They are not changing. We are working together 
with the Broe group of companies to put the financing together, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re doing. 
 
Now why is it that the member of Thunder Creek, and why is it 
that the Saskatchewan Party is so opposed to developing an 
ethanol industry in this province? Why is that, Mr. Speaker? An 
industry that will support agriculture and the diversification of 
agriculture, an industry that brings more jobs to the people of 
Saskatchewan, an industry that will be helpful to the 
environment of our province. Mr. Speaker, why is it that the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party and all of his MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) oppose every economic 
development in this province? 
 
It’s just a good job they’re not in government, Mr. Speaker. The 
evidence is in today with this government in power — 12,900 
new jobs, year over year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier and those members 
opposite and every person in this province understands that this 
party supports the ethanol industry. In fact . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, we announced our 



May 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

 

ethanol strategy some months — some months, Mr. Speaker — 
before they announced theirs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — And that member from Regina South, who 
was minister of Energy and Mines for a heartbeat in history, 
announced their strategy. Our only question at the time — we 
supported the strategy — our only question at the time, Mr. 
Speaker, was we didn’t believe. We didn’t believe him when he 
said that the private sector would finance this venture. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, apparently, apparently nothing is being done 
at the site this spring. They haven’t even started site 
preparation, let alone construction. Mr. Speaker, can the 
minister confirm whether or not construction will begin on the 
Belle Plaine ethanol project this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of government I 
can confirm that we continue to work towards the financing of 
this project. The terms of the agreement are not changed. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it will be unknown of course to members opposite, 
that to build together with a partner you work carefully. You 
work carefully to ensure that you’re getting the best, the best 
arrangement that you can possibly receive to build the ethanol 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this session, this whatever day we’re at — 36, day 
36 — has been very illustrative about the Saskatchewan Party. 
They come into this legislature with nothing but negative 
criticism, nothing but negative criticism. They fight the ethanol 
industry in that member’s own constituency. They fight the 
forestry industry. They fight the film industry. They fight, they 
complain about our Wide Open Future campaign. Negative, 
negative, negative. Mr. Speaker, this government is not 
interested in these negative nabobs’ opinion. What we are 
interested in is building and expanding our economy. And the 
evidence is in today — 12,900 new jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the only construction that site 
has seen to date was when they put up a tent for the Premier’s 
photo op, and pulled in an ATCO trailer that was flooded this 
spring. Since then nothing has been done, and there are 
apparently no plans to begin construction or even site 
preparation any time soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier confirm whether construction of 
the Belle Plaine ethanol project is going to begin this year? And 
if not, is the deal dead? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this deal is far, far from 
dead, I can guarantee you that. And I hate to disappoint the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party who obviously wish it 
were dead. 
 
Now there’s been a peculiar change of heart, Mr. Speaker, in 
the member from Thunder Creek and in the Leader of the 

Saskatchewan Party, because the day we were at the tent to 
celebrate this tremendous opportunity for the province of 
Saskatchewan, who was in the tent? The member from Thunder 
Creek. Who, Mr. Speaker, was clapping in the tent? The 
member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s because we will work with partners, 
community-based, international investors, it’s because this 
government believes in building and expanding the economy 
that we see the results today — 12,900 new jobs, 5,400 of them 
for our young people, and 12,000 of those jobs, Mr. Speaker, 
full-time jobs. 
 
Now if I can just conclude with this. There are going to be a 
few folks out of work pretty soon, and they’re all sitting right 
across the House from here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, this is another deal where we’re 
not getting clear answers from the NDP, which is sort of ironic, 
Mr. Speaker, given what the Premier said about another deal — 
ironic, Mr. Speaker, given what the Premier said about another 
deal at Belle Plaine a few years ago. 
 
This is what the Premier had to say about the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. This is what the 
Premier had to say about the Belle Plaine Saskferco fertilizer 
plant when he was in opposition. And he said, and I quote: 
 

It’s very strange the deal would be announced without the 
details in place. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that exactly what the Premier has now 
done at the Belle Plaine ethanol plant? He made a big 
announcement last October when obviously the details were not 
in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and this question is for the Premier: why did the 
Premier do that after he criticized the former administration for 
exactly the same thing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me tell you exactly the 
circumstances here. When their government, when their 
government — you know, the cousins, the Devine government 
— when they were doing the deals, they weren’t talking tens of 
millions; they were talking hundreds of millions, Mr. Speaker, 
let’s remember that, of straight public investment, straight loan 
guarantees. They announced Saskferco with no detail. 
 
When we commit to work with a partner, we have the detail. 
The detail is available. This government is in for equity of 20 
per cent. The Broe Companies are in, there’s financing in place, 
the detail is all known. Mr. Speaker, and when we can find, and 
there is interest, our segment will of course be moved out, down 
to 10 per cent. 
 
Now that’s a government that provides the information as 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

opposed to what was going on in the 1980s when these people 
were in government signing hundreds of millions of dollars of 
loan guarantees, bankrupting the province while they’re at it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I hear the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
sitting in his bench, talking about flip-flops, flip-flops. Well 
some of us are now describing this as the pickerel party, the 
pickerel party. Isn’t that what . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, 
the walleye; I’m sorry, the walleye. I’ll come back in a moment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, that isn’t the only thing the 
Premier had to say about the Saskferco deal. He also questioned 
why the government of the day was being so secretive about the 
financing arrangements. 
 
He said, and I quote: 
 

It’s very difficult to judge the merits of the deal when the 
facts always seem to be changing. 

 
Well isn’t that exactly what’s going on with the Broe deal? Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the Premier who announced the Broe deal, it’s the 
Premier who had the big photo op at Belle Plaine, and it’s the 
Premier who promised to be more accountable to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the Premier give us a straight answer? What is the status of 
the Broe deal and are they seeking new partners? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in my enthusiasm I want to 
again say to this House with clarity, this government is 
partnering with the Broe group of companies. The maximum 
investment of this government will be $20 million — $20 
million or 40 per cent of the equity. 
 
Our plan of course is to see that industry prosper in the 
province. And as it grows and prospers, we are entirely willing 
to see our equity investment reduced to other partners, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the plan. We’ve made that very public. 
 
I challenge the member of Thunder Creek to show me how once 
— once — that when they were in government, they displayed 
that kind of openness and that kind of accountability to the 
people of Saskatchewan, when they were signing us up for 
hundreds of millions of dollars of loan guarantees to put us in a 
situation where the bond raters of the continent said, this 
province is in bankruptcy. 
 
Now we were talking about fishing, about fishing for a party . . . 
a position of the Saskatchewan Party. You want to talk about 
flip-flops. What has happened this week? 
 
We’ve got the member of Sask Rivers coming in here saying, 
this party opposes the forestry centre. We’ve got the member 
then of Sask Rivers going home and saying, no, no, no, I’ve 
listened and this party now supports it. The leader says they 
don’t support it. What is the position of the Saskatchewan 
Party? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is again for the 
Minister of Learning. The SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) is reporting that at least 61 school 
divisions are being forced to increase their mill rates this year. 
Some school divisions have to increase their mill rates by at 
least 2 mills because the NDP government has broken its 
promise to cover the increased costs of the teachers’ salary 
contract. But, Mr. Speaker, according to the minister, a 2 mill 
increase is minute and insignificant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a 2 mill increase would drive education property 
taxes up in an average community by 10 per cent. That’s a 
massive tax hike for Saskatchewan families, and it’s an all-out 
attack on Saskatchewan seniors. 
 
Will the minister explain how the NDP government can think a 
10 per cent increase in property tax is small and insignificant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nobody likes a 
tax increase, but I want to add some perspective to this 
conversation. Two, two school divisions have decreased their 
mill rates. Twenty-eight school divisions have held their mill 
rates at the same. Twenty-one school divisions had increases 
under point five mills. 
 
This year’s budget invests a record $1.2 billion into education, 
500-plus million of that going into the grants for school 
divisions. This is a $23.6 million increase or 4.9 per cent over 
last year’s grants. 
 
Nobody likes to see tax increases, as I said, Mr. Speaker. The 
average mill increase across the province will be point six mills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, 61 school divisions in this 
province had to raise their mill rates to cover the contracts that 
this government said they were going to cover. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s becoming increasingly clear 
that the Minister of Learning doesn’t have the foggiest idea 
what a mill rate is, and she clearly doesn’t understand how 
difficult it is for a 2 mill increase in property taxes for our 
families. She doesn’t understand how devastating a 10 per cent 
education property tax will be for seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister will understand this. If every 
school division in Saskatchewan increased property taxes by 2 
mills — an increase that the minister describes as minute and 
insignificant — it would translate into a $68 million tax 
increase across Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the minister please explain to the people of Saskatchewan 
why her and her NDP government thinks $68 million is 
insignificant? 



May 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was going to 
move on to a different answer, but I don’t think this member 
understands what I said the first time. Two school divisions 
have dropped their mill rates; 28 school divisions have held 
their mill rates; 21 school divisions had increases under point 
five, and the average increase across the province will be point 
six mills. 
 
What we do understand, Mr. Speaker, is that yesterday the critic 
for the Sask Party said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please, members. 
Order. I’d ask members on both sides . . . Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we do 
understand is that yesterday the critic for the Saskatchewan 
Party said that their plan was to fund education at the cost of 
inflation — nothing over and above that. That’s what he said in 
Hansard. Well since 2001-2002, we have increased the K to 12 
(kindergarten to grade 12) school operating grant by 9 per cent, 
while inflation was 5 per cent. 
 
Their plan would have left school divisions short $23.3 million 
over this period. Their plan would have had . . . at the freeze of 
the level of inflation would have had this year’s increases to 2.1 
per cent. That wouldn’t have covered the cost of the teachers’ 
salaries. We do understand what their plan means to education 
— it means freeze. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what this party understands and 
what the people of Saskatchewan understand is if this 
government would have froze the money that they are giving to 
K to 12 education at the 1991 level, there would have been an 
additional $385 million in education in this province by up to 
1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — And that’s something that’s a fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Learning admitted that she didn’t 
know what impact a 2 mill increase would have had on each 
community. Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Minister of Learning’s 
job is. She’s responsible for knowing what kind of an impact 
the mill rate would have because she’s part of a cabinet that’s 
supposed to know what the impact will have on education and 
the economy. 
 
(10:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister truly was excited about knowing 
about education issues, she would have put the same weight 
behind ensuring education was funded adequately as she did at 
getting a cabinet position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said, and she was given a cabinet 
position, that if she wouldn’t have, she would have quit politics. 
Mr. Speaker, who in this government really considers education 
a priority? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to speak on 
behalf of government. This government considers education to 
be one of its top priorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This is the government that in the last 
four years has increased funding to K to 12 education by over 
20 per cent. This is the government that has instituted the 
nation-noted SchoolPLUS program. This is the government that 
has doubled the number of community schools. This is the 
government that has doubled the number of pre-kindergarten 
spaces. This is the government that’s adding 1,200 spaces of 
child care in this province . . . (inaudible) . . . education. 
 
And what do we get from this opposition? That’s what we get, 
opposition from the Saskatchewan Party. All the time criticism, 
criticism, criticism. The member opposite says . . . bases her 
questions, if you can believe it, on if — if this and this, it’ll be 
this. 
 
Well let me put an if on the plate. If they’d never seen the 
benches of government, we’d have the $650 million we’re 
spending on interest payments to pay for their debt, available to 
education, health, and everything else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been in this session 36 days — nothing but 
negative criticism; not one new solution, not one new idea in 
education, health, or the economy. Mr. Speaker, they’re 
exposed. They are exposed to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security 
Management) Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 32, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security 
Management) Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced and 
read for a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security 
Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2)/Loi corrective 

(gestion de la sécurité) de 2003 (no 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 33, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security 
Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 

 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 34, 
The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2003 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please. Order, 
please, members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 35, The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Members — order, please, members. Order, 
please, members. I’m finding it difficult to conduct the business 
and to be sure that we have all the statements and motions 
properly recorded. And I ask members just to tone it down a bit. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 39, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 
be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 40, The 
Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 41, The 
Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, leave to move a motion regarding sitting hours. 

Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Cannington: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, the times for 
daily meeting and adjournment on Thursday, May 15, 2003 
shall be 10 a.m. until 1 p.m.; and further, that when the 
Assembly rises on Thursday, May 15, 2003 it do stand 
adjourned until Wednesday, May 21, 2003 at 1:30 p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions 198 through 210 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 198 to 210 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 3 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
a pleasure to join in the debate on Bill No. 3, An Act to amend 
The Child and Family Services Act. This Bill focuses on 
priorizing and using kinship care as a preferred alternative of 
foster care which, Mr. Speaker — and I’ve gone through the 
Hansard and listened to a number of our speakers, and I’ve 
looked at the minister’s speech when they introduced the Bill 
— and it looks like it’s going in the right direction. 
 
I think unfortunately there are times in society that people 
aren’t able to live in a family unit as lucky as I was to live in a 
family unit growing up in a small town and a mom and a dad 
that were there all the time. And so many of us have grown up 
in those family units, and how strong and protective that family 
unit can be. 
 
It’s interesting that this Bill would come up today. And at the 
end of my remarks we’ll be moving it on to Committee of the 
Whole. But it’s interesting on not quite the eve, but very close 
to the eve of Mother’s Day, and talking about the two members’ 
statements that talked about mothers and how instrumental they 



May 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

 

are in our lives, and how instrumental the whole . . . Really it’s 
not just mothers although they’re a major, major part of it, but 
it’s the whole family unit that raises children. 
 
Unfortunately there are situations where that isn’t the case for 
some children as they’re growing, and in past the whole process 
of putting them into foster parents’ home, although intent was 
good, I don’t think the results were always what we wanted to 
see. And that’s what this Bill addresses. It looks at kinship care 
as opposed to foster care. 
 
And of course kinship care talks about moving the kids, 
children, into relatives, aunts and uncles, grandma and 
grandpas, or people that they know very well. So it’s an easier 
setting for a bond with the family members that are still around 
to make with those kids so that there is still sort of a family 
structure around even though it is extended, Mr. Speaker. But 
even an extended family structure is better than, I think, what 
we were looking at before. Even though often, you know, the 
best results, intent . . . the greatest intent for best results were 
there in the foster home, I don’t think you can ever replace the 
issue of parents or relatives or close family members raising 
those children. I think it must be a bit of an intangible there of 
having someone close, as far as whether it’s a relative or aunts 
and uncles, that type of thing, or family friends. It’s an 
intangible bond that’s there that helps kids reach their potential, 
I think even greater than in the other setting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this Bill, after we’ve had the opportunity to look at it and 
listen to a number of people that have spoke on it and raised any 
concerns that they have, we think is going in the proper 
direction. I guess our only concern is it’s too bad it hadn’t been 
done years earlier because we see the benefit of it now. And I 
think when you talk to the Child’s Advocate they were talking 
about this many years ago, that they would have liked to have 
seen kinship care in place. So I guess that would be the negative 
side that it wasn’t done sooner, but it is . . . been introduced this 
year. 
 
And as an opposition party we would support the Bill. So at this 
time I would move that we put it into Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 8 — The Youth 
Justice Administration Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to enter into the discussion and debate 
on Bill No. 8, An Act respecting the Administration of Youth 
Justice Services and making consequential amendments to other 
Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill basically outlines a whole number of 
definitions and basically nothing more. And one of the concerns 
that we have with this is what is the government, the NDP 
government, going to do with this? Is it going to end up turning 
it over to bureaucrats and let bureaucrats run it and they would 
be less accountable, as we’ve seen in the past, to the public? 

(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to crime, Saskatchewan has the 
dubious distinction of having one of the highest crime rates in 
the province. Mr. Speaker, this city of Regina had the 
distinction of being the number one car-theft capital of Canada, 
if not North America, when it came to population. 
 
And what did this government do about it? They waited until, in 
fact, this province became number one as car-theft capital 
before there was any action. And I’m happy to say that there 
was some action taken, prompted by the city of Regina, to 
reduce car thefts. And that program has been working, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But it is also interesting to note that on the day that it was 
announced, the then minister of Justice, his car was stolen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also interesting to note that as we see car 
thefts going down in this province and in this city, that break 
and enterings . . . break and enters are on the rise. And I don’t 
think that really says much for our crime prevention program. 
As one area of crime is reduced, another one is rising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of issues and when I look at 
issues related to crime, and youth crime specifically, what 
causes this? Why is it such a high item? Why are we such a 
high rate of crime in this province? 
 
One of the reasons is that youth, if they don’t have anything to 
do, if there is no jobs . . . And we know the job creation 
program by this government who promised 30,000 new jobs, 
and we hear rhetoric today of they’ve created 150 new jobs or 
something. Well really what is the job status of this province? 
What do youth have to look forward to in this province? 
 
If there are jobs available and if there’s a challenge for the 
young people in an environment of . . . a work environment, 
something that they can look forward to, I personally believe 
the crime rate will subside. 
 
I spoke to some people in the Battleford area who were talking 
about corrections facilities and remand facilities. And in my 
discussion with the people there, they said it would cost in the 
neighbourhood of $5 million to build a remand centre that they 
figured that they would need. 
 
And I asked them, I said if we took that $5 million and put it 
into programs for work or earmarked the money for getting 
young people to work, would we need the remand centre? And 
the answer was quite loud and clear. We probably wouldn’t 
need the remand centre if we had all of these young people 
doing productive work. 
 
So I think there’s a lesson to be learned in that statement, Mr. 
Speaker, that if we tunnel our efforts into helping out young 
people, that maybe we’ll take them away from the crime and the 
direction that they’re going. 
 
Another issue, Mr. Speaker, is youth addictions I’d like to talk 
about. We have in this province a problem with youth 
addictions. And how’s it being addressed? We spoke about this 
last year. I questioned the Minister of Health in this Assembly 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

last year about what we were doing for youth addictions. And 
the answer was, basically, nothing. Youth with drug and alcohol 
related problems were dealt with in the same manner as adults, 
which we know is a huge problem. And, Mr. Speaker, when 
questioned, the minister said we have 12 beds in this province 
dedicated to youth addiction. 
 
Now I relate youth addiction to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, because 
youth with addictions require funds to support their habits. And 
where do they get their funds from? In a lot of cases these 
people turn to criminal activities to support their addiction 
problems. 
 
Now if we had a program in this province for youth with 
addictions, I again think that we would reduce our crime 
problem substantially. And I think the emphasis is actually 
going in the wrong direction when it comes to this. We should 
be looking at youth addictions and how we can treat the 
problem with youth and getting them back into a . . . as a 
productive member of society and getting them back where they 
can actually be part of the workforce. And again it goes back to 
what I mentioned earlier. Some of our focus should be creating 
jobs for our young people also. 
 
So there’s quite a build-up here, if you wish, and look at the 
systemic problems that we have. And it goes back to how this 
government’s been operating over the last decade, of total 
mismanagement of resources. And if it would tunnel their 
efforts into doing something productive for this province, rather 
than straying off into other parts of the world and the country 
with investments, if some of that money was placed into 
programs to help our youth, we would not have the same 
problems and issues that we’re talking about today with youth 
justice. 
 
Another issue I’d like to touch base on is the problem that we 
have with FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) and FAE (fetal alcohol 
effects). At present, Mr. Speaker, we have no way in this 
province to adequately deal with people, youth that have FAS 
and FAE. 
 
And the propensity is, if these people with fetal alcohol 
syndrome or fetal alcohol effects are involved in crime — and 
there are a number of them that we know that have been — 
what do we do? They go into our system and they’re locked up. 
Well one of the problems with individuals with FAS or FAE, 
they don’t really realize that they’re doing anything wrong. And 
so we lock them up and they sit incarcerated, not really 
knowing why they’re there. 
 
And so there’s another example, Mr. Speaker, where I believe if 
we tunnelled some of our efforts into dealing with the direct 
issue of youth with FAS or FAE, that we may detract from the 
crime rate. We may lower the crime rate by dealing with the 
problem rather than dealing with the results. 
 
Another issue I’d like to just quickly address is our crime rate is 
still extremely high. And what have we done about it? We had 
an election promise from the NDP in the last election to provide 
200 more police officers in this province. And how have we 
made out? It’s just another broken promise by this NDP 
government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is a dubious honour that we have that we have 
the highest rate of young offenders in Canada. And I know the 
NDP just love to stand up and say that they’re leading in certain 
areas. Well unfortunately, they’re leading in crime rate in 
Canada and I don’t think that’s a very good distinction to be 
having. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little about this Bill and the 
legislation that was handed down from the federal government. 
It has a number of different targets; among them seeking to 
deter first time offenders by looking at extra judicial measures 
instead of custody and implementing measures that can range 
from intervention to community service to fines. 
 
And I’d like to just talk a little bit about the community service 
issue because again there’s been a distinct lack when it comes 
to preparedness for this. And this is very much outlined by 
Vice-Chief Lawrence Joseph who talked about this initiative, 
this Bill 8 initiative. And basically what he said, communities 
have not had the time or resources to prepare for the change. 
Here’s another example of introducing a Bill without the 
stakeholders having time to prepare for it or not having the 
resources to deal with it. 
 
It’s also worth noting that under the new federal legislation, 
violent or repeat young offenders will face custody sentences 
that are to be served in conjunction with intense rehabilitation 
and reintegration programs. 
 
Again, where are these intense rehab and reintegration 
programs? Where are they being set up? Is this going to be after 
the fact that they’re going to be set up or are they being worked 
on right now? And we very much have a concern with that. 
 
Yet an overriding concern, Mr. Speaker, that has been 
mentioned time and time again by various stakeholders, is that, 
while Ottawa appears to be giving the provinces some latitude 
in adapting the new federal legislation to each province’s 
specific requirements, in reality what Ottawa is also doing is 
virtually leaving it up to each province to try and figure out how 
to implement the various programs and services that will be 
required to enforce the Act while working without adequate 
funding or resources to do so. And with Ottawa leaving this up 
to the NDP government of this province, I think that’s a 
concern for a number of citizens of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of issues that we have some 
concerns with yet in this Bill. Aside from those that I’ve 
mentioned, there’s a couple of issues surrounding this Bill that 
we have some concerns with. And it deals with the funding and 
resources; there’s no mention of funding or resources in this 
Bill. It doesn’t give specifics about existing or new programs 
and services; it doesn’t tell us how police forces, social 
workers, community workers, victims’ groups, or educators will 
be better equipped to enforce this Bill or the federal legislation. 
 
So that being said, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a number of 
other people that would like to talk to this Bill and we’re 
waiting for some replies to come back in from some of our 
sources. So at this time I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



May 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I have 
with me today, Mr. Hal Cushon, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of the Department of Ag and Food, and Kari Harvey, 
just seated right behind me, who is the manager of operations of 
extension branch. Those are the two officials that are with me 
this morning. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I want to thank 
the minister and his officials for the changes that they made to 
this Act. Again I would like to stress how important the 4-H 
club is to Saskatchewan and the youth of Saskatchewan. With 
that, we have no questions. 
 
The Chair: — I think we’ll do it by clauses this time. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(11:15) 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Agricultural Implements 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister if he has an additional 
. . . Well we’ll pause for a moment while the minister assembles 
his officials because they are disassembled. 
 
I see that the officials are now reassembled; I would recognize 
the minister to introduce them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I have 
Mr. Cushon, as well still with me. The additional official who is 
with me this morning is Mr. Lorne Tangjerd. He’s the senior 
policy analyst from policy branch and he’s seated right beside 
me . . . right behind me, Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do have a few 
questions on this particular Bill, and I will begin by thanking 
the minister and his officials for being here today. 
 
The first question that I would have is, how many formal 
complaints did the Ag Implements Board receive last year? And 
how many does it receive on any given average . . . or average 
amount any given year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I’ll just mention to the member 
that there have been, through the course of the year, about 100 
to 150 more inquiries as opposed to complaints through the 

course of the year. 
 
The board hearings have been between two and three. The 
issues primarily have been around warranty and around 
performance and the . . . Since we’ve taken over the issues, 
there have been two hearings with payouts now, my officials 
advise me, of about $5,000. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So just to follow up on the minister’s 
answer. There’d be two hearings, that would be over the course 
of the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, Mr. Chair, there were two hearings. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. I notice that this 
changes . . . or the changes to the Act increases the maximum 
amount that can be awarded for any one claim. That will be 
raised from 5,000 to $10,000. 
 
So what would an average claim usually be? There obviously 
seems a need to increase that and I think it’s probably a 
necessary change, but what would an average claim be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials tell me that most 
of the awards in the past have been under the $5,000 level. But 
we have had now, well one of the two hearings, were paid out at 
the max, which was 5,000. 
 
There is some sense here that had the threshold been higher 
than the $5 million . . . or the $5,000, that the award would have 
been higher than that but would have fallen within the 
benchmark of the 5 to the 10,000 which we’re amending the 
legislation to protect the producer. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. How 
much money is presently in the Ag Implements Compensation 
Fund to cover these claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, there’s $153,851 in the 
account. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. Changes to the Act, if 
I’m understanding it correctly, gives the board the discretion to 
impose a penalty fee on a dealer or a dealership if they’ve failed 
to attend hearings or if they have repeated violations or if they, 
you know, intentionally violate the Act. And the amount of the 
penalty fee, if I’m understanding the Act correctly, is to be 
determined by the board. 
 
Why did the minister feel that it was necessary to add this 
provision in the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the request was really at the 
request of the industry. The industry wanted to have that. They 
wanted to ensure that the board had a bit more authority and so 
that was the rationale for including it. To hold, I expect, the 
manufacturer a bit more accountable would be the response. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. I am curious as to what 
sector of the industry would have made that request, simply 
because I find that usually the market will dictate or eliminate, 
quite frankly, a poor dealer, because it soon gets out there that 
he’s not to be trusted or his deals are less than honest and 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

therefore he loses business and can no longer stay viable. So I 
found this unusual. 
 
Can the minister tell me what segment of the industry had asked 
for this request, and is there any examples of dealers who have 
posed a problem, that there have been a number of complaints 
filed on any one given dealer that would have made this change 
necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the Ag 
Implements Board is made up of producers or farmers, of 
dealers, and of manufacturers and to ask specifically about, was 
there opposition from one group as opposed to another, my 
officials tell me that that’s not the case in the consultation; that 
really the recommendation for the change came from the board 
and because the board is composed of or made up of all of those 
sectors that we’re simply responding to the request of the board. 
 
Now there may be on an individual basis here across the 
province — and I don’t have any sense of that; the member 
might — where you have individual either dealers or maybe 
manufacturers that might have some concern of it. But 
collectively the wisdom of the board is what initiated this 
particular change. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Presently, prior to any changes, does the 
board have the jurisdiction to suspend or cancel a dealer’s 
licence; and if so, has that ever been done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, under the current Act that 
authority currently rests with the minister. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Could the minister tell me how often the 
board meets and if they have any duties outside of handling 
complaints from implement customers? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, we are very pleased to have 
in the gallery, in the west gallery today, from the YMCA 
(Young Men’s Christian Association), hosting the Nibinimik 
Adventurers from Summer Beaver, Ontario. Boy, they have 
come a long way to see us, Mr. Chair. 
 
There’s 15 youth, grades 7 to 11, plus three advisers who have 
come from Summer Beaver. And together with them from the 
YMCA, who as we know does a lot of good leadership 
development work, Shawn Weimer and Christine Ashcroft. So 
if you could just join me in welcoming these folks who have 
come so far today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Agricultural Implements 
Amendment Act, 2003 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much. Mr. Chair, to the 
member. Normally they would meet once a year, but as I 
outlined in the first question that the member had asked, they 
met two additional times around complaints or concerns that I’d 
raised with you or shared with you. 
 
Now as well, what they do is they review the calls or the 
inquiries that are made through the course of the year, that are 
made to us, in case there’s some sense here that they need to 
intervene. And so they review those calls. 
 
And in the past year, my officials tell me that collectively 
they’ve met a few additional times outside the times that they 
were dealing with complaints because they were providing 
advice to us as we were preparing to do the amendments on this 
piece of legislation. So there would have been some additional 
meetings through the course of this year. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. Could the minister 
provide for us the cost of operating this board on an annual 
basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, we don’t have that specific 
detail with us but we’ll provide it for the member as quickly as 
we can now. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. Could he also provide 
for us a list of the members that are on the board and when they 
were appointed. Once you’re on the board, is it an evolving 
membership or is it something that changes every two years? So 
if the minister could also provide that information for me, it 
would be greatly appreciated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, we’ll undertake to provide for 
the member not only the amount that is paid to this individual 
board, but also provide the names of the individuals. And I 
believe the member’s interested in the terms of each of the 
members as to whether or not they’re consecutive or whether or 
not . . . or what the length of those terms are for each of those 
members. And we’ll have that available for her. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and I’ll be looking 
forward to that. 
 
I noticed another change was increasing . . . The fines for 
operating without a dealer’s licence went from 2,500 to 10,000. 
Has a fine ever had to be levied within the last year or two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the answer is no. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Also, Mr. Chair, it appears that the minister 
. . . The changes to the Act allows for the minister to impose 
additional terms and conditions on the dealer for their licence 
that the minister deems appropriate. It gives more power, in my 
mind, to the minister and this is not a provision that’s in Alberta 
or Manitoba. Why did the minister feel that this provision was 
necessary to put into the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well the accountability, Mr. Chair, is — in 



May 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

 

our case — is directly here to the legislature. If I might use the 
Manitoba model for example, the Farm Machinery Board itself 
is given the authority. In this case it allows for the opposition to 
bring to the legislature this very discussion that we’re having 
right now, where the authority is vested with the ministry. And 
as a result of that, then the accountability for the decisions that 
are made here can be addressed in this environment which we 
think is an appropriate exercise. 
 
Furthermore I think because the board is appointed at the 
discretion of the minister, the board would then have the 
presence — or the ministry would have the presence — of 
having that dialogue with the board, changing whatever policy 
needs to be changed. And then bringing to this Assembly the 
opportunity for us to do what we’re doing here today, is to hold 
the government accountable for the decisions that it’s making as 
it relates to change of legislation or its practices within the 
regulation. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. And I 
guess that’s another debate, as to whether or not questions in 
the House provides better accountability, because we obviously 
debate that every day. 
 
One more change that I would like to ask the minister about is 
that the fund . . . The Ag Implements Compensation Fund is 
being moved out of being a separate entity into the General 
Revenue Fund, if I’m understanding the changes correctly. And 
that creates some concern quite frankly because if a designated 
fund is moved in the General Revenue Fund it rather disappears 
and it may not be there to address the issue that it’s meant for. 
 
So could the minister please provide for us an answer as to why 
he deemed it necessary to move the Ag Implements 
Compensation Fund into the General Revenue Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the fund continues to be 
maintained by the individual board. And what we’re simply 
doing here is just showing that this particular fund will be 
accounted for under the General Revenue Fund in the normal 
fashion of which we do under many occasions where the . . . in 
fact funds are collected. We’ll report them through the financial 
reporting of the government, but the proceedings of the funds 
that are within the account will continue to be managed by the 
Ag Implements Board. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — To follow up on the minister’s answer. So it 
will be an entry, if you have a list of funds in the General 
Revenue Fund, it would have its own entry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It would be . . . The fund would be 
continued to be held separately. Where it would get reported is 
when the Ag Implements Board reports its annual statement, it 
would show up then in their annual statement as to the amount 
that’s in the fund, the number of fines that are collected, which 
payouts are made. So it would be in that area of reporting. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for 
being available for questions, and his officials. I would like to 
join the other minister in welcoming the youth to our 
legislature. And I have no further questions. 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, just before we conclude I want 
to thank my officials and the member for helping us through 
this piece of legislation. It will be very, very useful for the work 
of the ag implements folks and the people within the 4-H 
organization. 
 
I’d hoped though, Mr. Chair, that as we’re heading into the 4-H 
Bill that the member opposite, who I listened carefully in her 
comments in second reading, said that she knew the song to the, 
to the . . . the 4-H song. And I would have hoped that she might 
have sang it, but she didn’t, Mr. Speaker. So we’ll be looking 
forward to that in the future. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Agricultural Implements 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
The Chair: — And I recognize the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To my 
right is Christine Tanner, the deputy minister of Labour. 
Directly behind Christine is Jim Nichol, the assistant deputy 
minister. Directly behind myself is Peter Federko from the 
Workers’ Compensation Board, the chief executive officer. And 
behind Jim Nichol is Sharon Ackerman, manager of budget and 
operations. To Jim Nichol’s right is John Boyd — sorry, John 
— John Boyd, the executive director of planning and policy 
division. 
 
Also sitting behind the bar, we have Corinne Bokitch, director 
Status of Women office. We have Eric Greene, director of 
labour standards. We have Glennis Bihun, manager of 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

occupational health and safety partnerships. And also Gail 
Kruger, vice-president, finance and information technology 
from the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
minister and to all your officials. I appreciate the opportunity to 
ask some questions today. And most of my questions are going 
to revolve around what used to be known as the Women’s 
Secretariat and is now the Status of Women’s office. 
 
I know that this Status of Women department was moved into 
Labour two years ago and since then has taken a dramatic 
decrease in budget and in the number of people. In 1999-2000 
the Women’s Secretariat had a budget of 1.19 million; 
2000-2001 it had a budget of 1.15 million; 2001-2002 it had a 
budget of $1.17 million. 
 
Now I would imagine that the work that the Secretariat is still 
trying to undertake is still going on. I don’t believe their 
philosophy or vision has changed, but I’m going to give the 
minister the opportunity to explain it to my . . . and the people 
that are watching, what the work of the Secretariat now 
involves. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I’d like to thank the member opposite for 
her question. One quick clarification. The changes to the 
Women’s Secretariat was made a year ago, March. So it only 
has been one year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? 
Partially it was . . . That accounts for some of the changes in our 
budget numbers. 
 
Since the Status of Women office has been moved into the 
Department of Labour and become a unit within the Department 
of Labour, some drastic changes have taken place. The member 
is accurate. 
 
And really what this is, is a different focus and way of 
achieving many of the same goals. When we look at the 
restructuring, instead of a stand-alone department or secretariat, 
integrating it back into the Department of Labour has offered us 
some very good opportunities, and some new opportunities, and 
some new opportunities of achieving the goals that are needed 
throughout the province for women and women’s organizations. 
 
Very few things . . . I’m sure the member opposite is aware that 
very few things are done in isolation within individual 
departments and that’s appropriate for women’s issues. They 
are not handled that way. It’s more appropriate, and we felt it 
was more appropriate, that women’s issues be looked at across 
government and that every department have a responsibility to 
look at the initiatives and the programs that they were putting 
forward and are putting forward, and have a look at those 
initiatives and programs to see how they affect women and 
equity issues throughout the province. 
 
(11:45) 
 
A more appropriate way of doing that is to have contacts within 
each of the departments. And that’s what part of the changes 
that began a year ago, that’s what has been worked on over this 
past year, that in each of the departments and the Crown 
corporations there has been policy advisers that have been 
designated and have been trained to look at issues within their 

departments that pertain to women and make sure that the 
equity issues are addressed and are taken into consideration at 
the beginnings of programs and policies and in their early 
formation. 
 
So that’s something we’ve been working at. 
 
Also there’s been a number of consultations that have been 
done. I know myself, I took on a number of meetings and 
travelled in the province to meet with as many women’s 
organizations and community groups that we could, once the 
changes were first announced, because there was some unrest 
with the decision. Some folks weren’t happy with it. We took a 
great deal of time to go out and explain the changes and what 
we were focusing on and how we were working to achieve the 
goals within government and the equity issues that are out there. 
 
I undertook a round of meetings with many of the groups and 
we talked about the things that they felt were important that the 
Women’s Secretariat had done previously, what they would like 
to see maintained. There was some variety of opinions that 
came back but in many instances the things that they had felt 
were important — some of the research, the communication, the 
connect point in government for women’s organizations to have 
a central one-window connect to government — they all felt 
that that was very important. 
 
So what we did, the changes that took place when the 
secretariat moved into the Department of Labour, became the 
Status of Women office. The staff was put in place. Our new 
executive director was hired. 
 
Then our executive director went out and did another round of 
meetings with women’s groups, again seeking input on what 
they felt was important and giving her a feel for the issues that 
were out in the province and the areas that they felt needed to 
be maintained and things that they would like to see addressed. 
 
After that, the decision was made to have a forum. That was 
held in the fall. Many women’s groups were invited. Those that 
could attend, attended the one-day forum, where we had the 
senior policy analysts from the government departments and the 
Crown corporations also in attendance, and representatives 
from the women’s organizations and community-based 
organizations throughout the province that deal with women’s 
issues were present. Those that couldn’t attend that day were 
sent a questionnaire so they could also have some input and 
feedback into the process. 
 
And what our ultimate goal is to look at the issues and set 
direction for what we feel and what women’s groups feel are 
important areas that we can work together to have a better 
gender balance through . . . not only through our policies but in 
services that are provided throughout the province. 
 
It’s been a very interesting year and a very enlightening year. 
We have some remarkable women’s organizations and women 
in this province and it has been a very good year. Lots of work 
has been done. We have a great deal more to do, but that is 
where our focus is right now, is on the action plan for 
Saskatchewan women. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I agree with you 



May 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

 

— we do have a lot of very remarkable women in this province. 
And the opportunity that they have to get together for this . . . in 
the forum you discussed was important. I’m wondering if there 
was actually a compilation of all the reports or information that 
was gathered at that forum and if it’s something that’s available 
for the general public. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The document . . . After the forum was 
held, there was a document that was compiled to summarize the 
comments, the issues that had been raised not only at the 
one-day forum but also through the questionnaires. 
 
This summary document was again sent out to over 100 
women’s organizations and groups throughout the province for 
input again back to the Status of Women office. And that 
information is being used in the . . . our eventual goal of having 
the status of . . . or the action plan for Saskatchewan women. 
But it is available if you would like copies. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the minister, I 
believe you had indicated this report would be available and I 
would appreciate a copy of it if that’s possible. 
 
The minister indicated that she’d spent, or her staff had spent a 
lot of time travelling around the province to discuss the 
amalgamation of the Women’s Secretariat into the Department 
of Labour. Can you give us an idea of how much money was 
spent on the travel around the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, the travel that I 
do is itemized but we don’t have it broken down as to specific 
meetings. We can get that information and do the breakdown 
for you. 
 
But I would like to say to the member opposite, one of the 
things that we have done is, we coordinated our meetings to 
meet with as many groups as we could in various centres, and 
also to alleviate the concerns that these organizations would 
have pay for their travel to come to Regina. That was unfair to 
many of these groups. 
 
So we felt for us to coordinate the meetings and us to go out 
and meet at their location, wherever possible, because many of 
these groups are volunteer-based, work on a very thin margin, 
and don’t use their dollars that they have or any funding they 
have for travel. So it was more appropriate that we did the 
travelling to them instead of expecting them to come to us. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I would 
appreciate the list of the expenditures, not just of the minister 
herself but of her staff, so we could . . . It would be interesting 
to determine how much of the $257,000 was actually spent on 
that travel part of it last year. 
 
I do see that there’s a considerable increase this year — up to 
379. Can you give me an idea of how you’re going to be 
spending the increase in money this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The increase to the 379,000, when the 
initial changes were made we had made some decisions. When 
the shift was first done, in the beginning, that was the budget 
that was earmarked. But when the decision was made to 
establish the Status of Women office within the department, we 

had not made accommodation for the executive director’s 
position, also communications, and the administration help for 
the executive director. So that’s what that would take into 
account. 
 
Also it’s some additional grant money. The member may know 
that the International Women’s Day grants, that are very small 
in total value but mean a great deal to women’s organizations 
throughout the province, and it has been a very successful 
program. It was . . . The decision was made. 
 
That was one of the things that the women’s groups said to me, 
and to I know to the executive director when we had our 
meetings, was that was something that they felt was important 
to maintain. 
 
So there’s a bit more grant money in that, also the 
communications executive director and administration position. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, this Women’s Secretariat or 
Status of Women office is part of Labour, and yet now you’re 
telling me you need an assistant executive director. Could you 
give me an idea of the cost of an assistant executive director of 
this department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I apologize. Maybe I didn’t explain this 
clearly enough. Your question — my understanding previously 
— you had been asking as to the difference from the 257,000 
that was in the budget to the increase of 379,000. That 
difference was put in there to accommodate these positions 
when the Status of Women office was structured to be a unit 
within the Department of Labour, to accommodate the position 
of executive director for the Status of Women office, and also 
an administrative person . . . assistant for the executive director. 
 
And also one of the issues that women’s groups had raised with 
us was the communications that is done, not only within in 
networking but more formal communications with the 
pamphlets, the literature, etc. The communications position . . . 
So that is the difference in the figures to the 379,000. It 
accommodates those positions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So just to clarify then. There are three 
positions that have been created? 
 
(12:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The people that are in the Status of 
Women Office . . . I’ll be more precise. There are four actual 
staff people within the Status of Women Office. There is a pay 
equity analyst; there is a senior policy analyst; there is an 
administrative assistant; and also there is the executive director. 
 
But also within the Department of Labour there is a dedicated 
communications person, and those costs and the resources for 
that position would be found under the information services 
budget in the Department of Labour. So there’s five people that 
are dedicated to the Status of Women Office. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Okay, Madam Minister, thank you. That 
means that not everyone that’s working within the Status of 
Women Office is paid for under this department, or this part of 
the department. 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

You’d indicated that there was now someone in every 
department and Crown corporation that’s looking at programs 
and women’s issues within government. And I’m wondering if 
these personnel get together on a bimonthly basis or some type 
of basis to compare notes and determine policies and programs 
that should be brought forward by the department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — As the member opposite can well 
appreciate, because we designated women in the departments 
across government as policy advisors, we can’t assume that 
because we are women we understand all the gender-based 
analysis and equity issues. 
 
So there has been a real effort to do training. There has been 
about two and a half days of training on gender-based analysis. 
And this group and what is referred to as an interdepartmental 
committee of policy advisors dealing with women’s issues, they 
get together about every six weeks. And other than training, 
they have had input into the development of the Saskatchewan 
. . . the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Women. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Women is an issue that I’d like to go into in a lot 
more detail but it’s not something that we’ll be talking about 
today. But I think it’s important that we are given an update on 
it. It was an important issue. I know that when it was introduced 
a couple of years ago, it was something that a lot of work had 
gone into and we’re wondering about the outcome. So I guess 
we will talk about that. 
 
But I have one issue that I would like to talk to you about today 
and that is regarding alcohol and drug centre client profile, and 
this is women in recovery services. Now I know that it’s talked 
. . . it was brought out by the Department of Health, but because 
your department is dealing with women’s issues, I’m sure 
there’s a number of the issues in this report are something that 
has affected you and probably concerns your department a lot. 
 
In 2000-2001, the total number of female clients in the alcohol 
and drug centre, women in recovery services, increased 18 per 
cent from 1995-1996. And amongst . . . the proportion of 
Aboriginal clients, it’s 66 per cent compared to 9 per cent of 
Aboriginal persons in the Saskatchewan population. 
 
Is this something that your department is looking at, you’re 
concerned about? And what is . . . What kind of steps are you 
taking to deal with the issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, this is not 
something that we would be specifically involved with within 
the Department of Labour or the Status of Women office. We 
are dealing more with the policies. 
 
So this would be something that the women’s policy advisers in 
their departments may be able to put the gender lens on, to 
ensure that the women’s areas for alcohol and drug 
rehabilitation are being addressed, that it’s not . . . that it’s 
something more specific. Because many times women’s needs 
are different than what the general population needs may be. 
 
So I’m pleased to hear that the Department of Health has been 
specific in establishing this program for women. Obviously 
there is some need by the statistics that you have given me but it 

would be . . . That specific program would be something better 
addressed by the Department of Health. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I guess it’s quite upsetting 
when you think that the Status of Women now . . . although I do 
agree with the idea that we should have someone in each 
department checking to ensure that all programs and policies 
that are brought out by different departments have the women’s 
issues at heart. But they were all supposed to have a focus point 
under the Status of Women and when we’re talking about an 
issue that’s important as this issue, I believe that we’re missing 
the boat here. 
 
We have to find . . . It’s going to be . . . I can, as a critic, or any 
one of us can ask questions of each department and ask them 
how they’re dealing with this. But as an overall gender issue in 
the government, it’s something that should be brought forward 
to your department. 
 
And I know that you’re going to be concerned that in 2001 . . . 
2000-2001, 35 per cent of female clients were unemployed. 
And in 2000, it was only 4 per cent were unemployed. 
 
Also, Madam Minister, the one area that I’m always concerned 
about and that is FASD (fetal alcohol spectrum disorder). This 
report shows that 78 per cent of all pregnant clients had 
problems with alcohol alone or in combination with drugs; 43 
per cent have a problem with both alcohol and drugs; and 22 
per cent had a problem with drugs alone. 
 
These kind of statistics are very alarming and it’s the type of 
thing that I believe that your department, the Status of Women 
has to be looking at seriously because even though each 
department is going to be keeping their information — and I 
know that it’s an intergovernmental concern — it is still 
something that somebody’s going to have to take the lead for. 
 
I know that the Minister of Community Resources was at a 
conference earlier this week and discussed this issue and that’s 
important, but somebody has to take the lead for it. 
 
We introduced a Bill last year that was unanimously supported 
in this House. We all recognize that it’s a concern that has to be 
dealt with and some place in the department, in the government, 
somebody has to be watching over it. 
 
I asked the Minister of Justice the other day what his area was 
doing and he said there really wasn’t . . . Even though people 
were talking about it, there really is no one person that’s 
responsible for this. 
 
And I was really hoping . . . I’m hoping to hear that your area, 
your Status of Women is going to be taking hold of this issue 
and ensuring that we can put all our resources and all our not 
only financial but personnel resources together to ensure that 
this issue becomes something that is not ever swept under the 
rug in this province. 
 
How is your department dealing with this issue at this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. In the 
discussions, and when the member opposite spoke of specific 
programs, we’ve had this discussion within the Status of 



May 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

 

Women office and within the Department of Labour. 
 
And when you look at the previous forms, whatever they may 
be — when it began in 1964 as the women’s bureau within the 
Department of Labour and the various stages that it has evolved 
through to the present-day Status of Women office, back in, 
within the Department of Labour, the women’s bureau, 
Women’s Secretariat — Status of Women office has never been 
a program deliverer. 
 
What we have always focused on is more the research, the 
policy, the statistical research that is done on Saskatchewan 
women. And we have been a resource area more, I think, for the 
departments so that when there is programs that are being 
developed across the government for women, or programs in 
general, that they have access to information and resources 
concerning Saskatchewan women. 
 
But we have never been a program deliverer as such. That’s not 
a role we have ever taken. 
 
And when we look at the policy advisers within each of the 
departments, that is what we are working towards so that we are 
the single-window entry into government as a whole, and we 
have access and connections right across government in each of 
the departments so that the information, the resources that we 
have, can be shared in the development or to enhance the 
development of initiatives and programs coming out of those 
departments when it deals with Saskatchewan women. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My questions are 
going to be regarding the WCB (Workers’ Compensation 
Board) so I’ll let the officials get into place. 
 
And the report was released last week, last week, and we all 
came to the agreement that this past year, in the year 2002 the 
WCB suffered a $93.5 million loss. That’s the one point that we 
have agreed on so far. 
 
There are a number of other points that we haven’t agreed on. 
And so maybe with the time we have left we can work our way 
through that. And I’m not saying we’re going to come to a 
whole lot of agreement, but maybe I can understand why your 
numbers are where they’re at. 
 
First of all, the $93.5 million loss. I guess I would . . . When I 
look at the report, would it be fair to say that if we compare the 
2001 numbers on page 4 and the 2002 numbers, the Reserve 
and Injury Fund, it drops down from 50 million surplus position 
to a minus or a negative position of 43.5. That’s a difference of 
$93.5 million. Would that be fair to say that’s where you came 
up with that loss? Is that how you would calculate it? 
 
Or I know the minister has referred to some other pages. Is it 
just a pure coincidence that that number is $93.5 million as 
well? So I would ask that question to begin. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would say to the 
member opposite, go to pages 33 and 34. Those are the audited 
statements. Your page 4 does not create the numbers for the 
report. That is a quick glance, kind of a simplified version of 

the year, just to give you the year at a glance. But you should 
really go to the audited statements. And on pages 33 and 34 it’s 
easier to understand. 
 
When you look at the year, coming from page 34, I mean quite 
simply your expense over revenue was the $93.5 million. We 
had in reserve the $50 million which leaves us with the $43.5 
million that is stated on page 33 and 34. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I realize it’s 
not exact, it’s not precise, it’s at a glance, but it does show the 
$93.5 million deficit position, well loss, not a deficit position, 
wouldn’t be correct, but the loss that the WCB has realized. 
 
When I was talking last week and stating that if you go back a 
year, the loss was shown at 55 or $56 million. But if you look at 
the ’91 or the 2001 — sorry, ’91, wow that’s stepping back — 
but the 2001 annual report and you compare it to the 2002 
annual report, there are some real discrepancies there. There’s a 
$30 million discrepancy there. And that’s what I was asking the 
minister last week. 
 
If you look at the 2001 report and you look at the number below 
the 2000, on reserves and injury fund, it shows 105.8 million. 
But when you look at the 2002 report and you go to the year 
2000 and you follow right down to the reserves and injury fund, 
it shows $137 million. There’s a difference there of about $32 
million. 
 
Why . . . I guess, first of all the question would be, when you’re 
looking at a year previous, let’s say 2002, and you look at the 
annual report from one year and you look at the annual report 
the next year, and you see a discrepancy of a number — the 
year later the number has been changed — I would like to 
understand, have . . . so I could answer the question, why would 
the number have changed in the annual report from 2001 to 
2002? And if that’s an incorrect number, why was it in there? If 
it’s correct, doesn’t that show an $87 million loss instead of the 
55 which is shown in the 2001 report? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, I would again 
refer you to the audited statements. When you’re using the year 
at a glance that is on page 4, that is not an audited statement. 
And there is a proofreading error that occurred in the year at a 
glance in the restating of the numbers from 2000. There was an 
adjustment that had been made that was not accurately listed on 
the 2000. 
 
That’s why I’ve said a number of times, please use the audited 
statements. Pages 33 and 34 will give you the accurate 
numbers. They’re very easy to understand and listed quite 
clearly. That’s the audited statements that have been audited by 
WCB’s auditors, also by the Provincial Auditor. They are 
accurate. 
 
But there is, in the restating of figures on page 4, there was an 
inaccurate number that had been adjusted and in the 
proofreading it was missed. So that’s where a lot of the 
confusion has come. The fact is that there was the $93.5 million 
shortfall this year. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well that’s interesting. So the numbers, 
year in a glance, are really just numbers. It’s the audited 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

statement, and I can understand that, but I would think that the 
year in a glance would mirror the audited statement, I would 
think. 
 
And yes, there was . . . I guess there was a proofreading mistake 
for the year 2000. Can you then explain to me for 1999, was it 
also a mistake when in 1999 you show a $1.1 million surplus 
and in 1999, in the year . . . the annual report, 2001, the year 
1999, it was 1.1 million — and I’m seeing some heads shaking 
there — and in 2002 it was $132 million. Was that another 
proofreading mistake in the 2002 annual report? 
 
Or if I go back, do I go back and check out the audited 
statements and realize that there was a discrepancy and . . . I 
guess I’m questioning that the year in a glance doesn’t mirror 
what the audited statements are — give or take, you know, a 
plus-or-minus small factor — but I mean there’s some major 
differences here. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
restatement was applied retroactively to 2000 in 1999. It is the 
same 31 million. And if you look at 2001 annual report, the 
year at a glance is correct. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Let me get this right then. So the 2001 
annual report is correct and the 2002 annual report is incorrect. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The year at a glance in 2001 is correct. 
In the 2002 annual report, the audited statements are correct. 
 
The error is made in the year at a glance, which is meant to be a 
year at a glance, a quick overview. But the statements are not 
derived from the year at a glance. The year at a glance has a 
proofreading error in it. When the restatement was done, 
retroactively to 2000 . . . or 2000 and 1999, the mistake was 
made in printing of the year at a glance in the 2002 annual 
report. 
 
But the statements contained in the report, the audited 
statements that are audited by the auditors at the WCB, also the 
Provincial Auditor, are correct. The facts, the figures, the 
information contained in the audited portion of the statements is 
correct. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — And I think that’s more or less what I said. 
The year in a glance 2001 report is correct. The year in a glance 
2002 report is incorrect. The audited statements in the year 
2002 annual report are correct, but the year in a glance is 
incorrect. The year in a glance in the 2001 is correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now I apologize. When you had first 
said it, you said the 2001 report is correct, the 2002 report is 
incorrect. And that’s why I was a little defensive maybe 
because it is the year at a glance where the problem is. It isn’t in 
the actual report. It is just on that quick view summary, year at a 
glance page where the restatement errors were made. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Okay. So we’ve got . . . I think we’ve got 
that down. The 2002 here in a glance report is incorrect. And 
it’s incorrect then in more than just one year. We see a 
difference in the year 2000. But if you go back, there’s a 

difference in 1999 as well. 
 
In the annual report of 2002 year in a glance, it’s more than just 
one mistake. There are a number of mistakes in the year 2002 
annual report when you look at year at a glance. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it is one mistake that 
has been carried through on two years. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Let’s leave the year at a glance alone for a 
little while. And we’ll move . . . The question regarding 
unfunded liability and going back to the audited statements on 
page 33 — make sure I’ve got the proper year here — 2002 
report, on page 33 and it shows unfunded . . . We’re in an 
unfunded position. 
 
I guess I would ask the minister’s comments on that, about 
being in an unfunded position. We could get into the numbers 
exactly but can you make a comment on the fact that WCB for 
the first time, I would think, is in an unfunded liability position. 
Is that a correct statement to make? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I guess this is another . . . It’s easy to 
explain but I guess it can be misinterpreted many times. And I 
know the member opposite when we were at a function the 
other day made the comment that the WCB is going broke or 
what if it went broke. 
 
So those type of exaggerated statements cause me some distress 
because the board is . . . The board is 99.2 per cent funded and 
the WCB has the ability to meet 50 years of future benefit 
obligations to injured workers. So we’re talking to the year 
2053. Now we may still be here duking this out but the benefits 
will still be there. 
 
The only WCBs that have the ability to even come close to the 
funded position that Saskatchewan has maintained is BC, 
Alberta, and Manitoba. And our WCB is very prudently 
managed and its status as a funded compensation board is 
consistent and has been year-in, year-out. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well I’m glad we agree on that then, that 
the WCB is in an unfunded position. I notice that in the 
newspaper clippings the Chair of the board mentions that it’s 
99.2 per cent in a funded position. 
 
It’s interesting, because when we had questions last year and 
we’re looking at the loss, your statement in Hansard of May 24, 
2004 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . May 24. I won’t give you 
the page but it says here in a statement, your statement: 
 

By requirement . . . of the Act, Mr. Speaker, the WCB 
needs to remain 100 per cent funded. 

 
Can you explain to me what you mean by that, when you said 
last year in the House that in a requirement by the Act the WCB 
has to remain 100 per cent funded and you’ve just finished 
saying that we’re not 100 per cent funded? We’re 99.2 per cent 
funded, and if the pattern keeps going, dropping. If the pattern 
keeps going the way we’ve . . . over the last couple of years — 
dropping. We won’t be in a 99.2 per cent funded position next 
year. 
 



May 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

 

Even though you stated in Hansard that by the Act, according 
to the Act, by requirement of the Act, it has to remain in a 100 
per cent funded position. Can you enlighten me on that 
statement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the Act requires that 
we remain able to provide benefits and to meet the obligations 
of benefits that we have to injured workers, both currently and 
into the future. 
 
And as I’ve said, the benefits are secure until the year 2053. 
And more discussions will be held on this during the annual 
meetings which will be held later this month, May 21 and 22, 
here in Regina and in Saskatoon. And they will look at other 
issues and maintaining the funding into the future. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So I guess then the statement that you made 
last year during question period is incorrect then. It doesn’t 
have to remain 100 per cent funded. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — 99.2 per cent is pretty close to 100. But 
pretty close is not 100. Still, maintaining benefits currently for 
injured workers and into the future, those dollars are there, 
those benefits are there, and they are secure. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — To the minister then, the 99.2 is close. We 
heard yesterday that 2 mills was minute. When you put 2 mills 
over the province it’s not minute. And anybody that pays 
property tax and knows what a mill rate is worth — and people 
that have farm land — knows that a 2 mill rate is not minute. 
 
I guess my question would be to the minister, 99.2 is close. 
How many million out is it from 100 per cent funded then? 
How many were 43 point . . . Is point eight per cent $43.5 
million? Would that be correct then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well now, the member opposite can 
make light of 100 per cent or 99 per cent but it’s a heck of a 
long ways from being broke, as you stated publicly yesterday at 
a function we were at. 
 
And when we were talking about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, he did. And the difference, the difference between 99.2 per 
cent funded and 100 per cent, is $7 million. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The $7 million is the difference on a point 
eight per cent? We’ve gone from being well funded, well over 
the 100 per cent, to a 99.2 per cent, which is $7 million. It will 
be interesting when the report comes down next year, whether 
we’re below that. 
 
But I think it’s interesting that the minister would say that I said 
that the WCB was broke. I never said that at all. I said that it 
didn’t have the money in reserve right now to cover its 
liabilities. If all the liabilities were called in right now, it 
wouldn’t have the money to pay for it. You’re $7 million short 
and you’ve just said that. I didn’t say that it would go broke. So 
there’s a huge difference there. 
 
I think I would have one last question then to the minister. The 
Act says that it’s supposed to be 100 per cent funded and we’ve 
kind of touched on that. What is the projection going forward? 
What are the steps that the WCB are taking? 

You know, it’s interesting. We just as of yesterday passed a Bill 
through regarding workers’ compensation and the change in the 
firefighting . . . the Act to coverage . . . cover firefighters. And I 
asked the question specifically: would there be any increase in 
costs? The answer was no, there’d be no increase in costs to the 
WCB going forward with the change in that Act, which is quite 
a bit different than what happened last year when we passed an 
Act and we look at the cost increase of that Act — I believe it 
being $37 million roughly going forward. 
 
What type of insurances do business owners around the 
province have that this new Act won’t reflect a huge deficit like 
the Act last year did? So I guess in a go-forward basis, what is 
the WCB doing to make sure that they’re not increasing their 
unfunded liability with some of the provisions in this new Act 
as didn’t happen last year when the Act was passed last year? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, Bill 72, I guess 
the major difference between Bill 72 and the firefighters’ 
legislation is that Bill 72 introduced a number of new 
entitlements to injured workers. And the cost and the actuarial 
adjustments that were made to have those benefits in place into 
the future, into the 2053, that accounts for the adjustment, the 
actuarial adjustment of the $36.7 million. That’s providing for 
those benefits into the future. 
 
The difference with firefighters’ legislation that we passed 
yesterday is that it’s not a new entitlement. What that piece of 
legislation does is recognize the link between the cancers and 
the occupation. 
 
There has been some difficult issues and this is not an easy 
subject to understand. But I know at the annual meetings last 
year, the adjustment that had to be made, the actuarial 
adjustment for Bill 72 was reported at the annual meetings. 
There was projections of a shortfall this year. I mean, that was 
done at the annual meetings in discussions with stakeholders, 
before the rates and premiums. The five-year plan was released 
at that time to look at rejuvenating the injury funds and the 
funds that had been depleted with the shortfall last year. That 
was discussions that were held at the annual meetings. 
 
This board has had a very good record when you look at this 
past year. Administration costs have gone down. Operational 
expenses have decreased over this last year; there has been 
efforts made. And we had talked last year that they were 
working on plans to improve, that the board had gone through a 
number of changes probably over the last three years — 
team-based case management, a number of other areas where 
improvements were made — and we’re starting to see the 
benefits from that. 
 
So we see the reduction in administration costs last year. We 
also see the reduction in operational expenses. That’s good 
news. 
 
When you look at it, a closer look at the investment portfolio 
from WCB, which is operated by professional management 
companies that look after this fund, we have outperformed the 
WCB in Alberta and in Manitoba. They have done a very good 
job. There is good news coming out of this report also. And 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2003 

 

when you look back during . . . WCB will, through its annual 
meetings, it will work through these issues with stakeholders as 
they have done in other years, when during the years of high 
surpluses they paid rebates to employers over three years — 
$95 million. 
 
The WCB has a history of working with the employers in this 
province to provide good benefits to injured workers in this 
province. And, Mr. Deputy Chair, we will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I’d just like to thank the minister for the 
answers today on the number of questions that I had through the 
WCB and also my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena had. I 
look forward into the future a number of more times getting a 
little bit further in depth with the WCB report. We touched on a 
few of the things today but I’m looking forward to some extra 
time into the future because there will be many more questions 
arising from some of the answers today, quite frankly. 
 
So I’d like to thank the officials today for coming in, also from 
the Department of Labour too, not just the two departments I 
mentioned. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you to the members opposite and 
I would like to thank the people from the Department of 
Labour, also the Status of Women office, and the Workers’ 
Compensation Board for the work they do, and for appearing 
here today. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House now stands adjourned 
until 1:30 p.m., Monday. And I wish everyone a good weekend 
and a Happy Mother’s Day. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:52. 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................991 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................991 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................991 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................991 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................991 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................991 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................991 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................992 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................992 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................992 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................992 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................992 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................992 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................992 
  Crofford ...........................................................................................................................................................................994, 1004 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................995 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Mother’s Day Wishes 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................992 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................993 
 Job Statistics 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................993 
 YWCA Woman of Distinction 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................993 
 Writing Awards Reception 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................994 
 Hafford Students Win at Drama Festival 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................994 
 Psychiatric Nurses Honoured During Mental Health Week 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................994 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Crown Corporation Investments 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................995 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................995 
 Ethanol Industry 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................996 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................996 
 Financial Support for Education 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................998 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................998 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................999 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................999 
 Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security Management) Amendment Act, 2003 (No. 2)/Loi corrective 
 (gestion de la sécurité) de 2003 (no 2) 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................999 
 Bill No. 34 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2003 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1000 
 Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1000 
 Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1000 
 Bill No. 40 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1000 
 Bill No. 41 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1000 
 



 

 

MOTIONS 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1000 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1000 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1000 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1000 
 Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1001 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1003 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1003 
 Bill No. 9 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1003 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1003 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
 Bill No. 9 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Labour — Vote 20 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1009 
 
 
 


