















































Hansard: March 31, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 251 
 March 31, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition again on behalf of producers and 
Crown grazing leaseholders in the constituency of Cypress 
Hills. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers and citizens of 
the communities of Maple Creek, Tompkins, Richmond, and 
Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition today signed by people that are very concerned about 
the condition of Highway 47 south of Estevan. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks from Estevan 
and Lampman. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition of citizens concerned with the closure of the Major 
School. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be influenced to stay the closure of Major 
School until the departments of Rural Revitalization and 
Education can put together a plan on a uniformed front for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good people of Major and Unity, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
improve Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life, to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Tugaske, Brownlee, Central 
Butte. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens asking for fairness for Crown leaseholders. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly again today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Rabbit 
Lake, Glaslyn, and North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning the annual deductible amount for 
prescription drugs in Saskatchewan; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 5, 12, and 4. 

 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 15 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Government Relations: how many 
municipalities including cities, northern municipalities, 
rural municipalities, resort villages, towns, and villages 
applied to have projects approved under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program in the fiscal 
year 2001-2002; please provide the names of the 
communities that applied for CSIP projects in the fiscal 
year 2001-2002; and please provide the types of projects 
these communities applied for in the fiscal year 2001-2002; 
please provide the names of the communities who had their 
CSIP projects approved in the fiscal year 2001-2002? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have a similar or the same question that 
applies to the year, the fiscal year rather, 2002-2003. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Social Services: how much funding did 
the Early Childhood Intervention Program receive in the 
fiscal year 1998-99? 

 
Also I have similar questions for the fiscal years ’99-2000, 
2000-2001, 2001-2002, and 2002-2003. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 15 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Social Services: how much funding did 
the Head Start program receive in the fiscal year 1998 to 
1999? 
 

And I have similar questions for the years ’99 through to 2003. 
 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the rest 
of this legislature, Dennis Apedale, who is assistant 
vice-president of government affairs for Canadian Pacific 
Railway. 
 
Dennis has been here discussing the work of the railroads, some 
of the future that we have in relationship, and has contributed 
very often to the forums on rail and the economic development 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’d like you to join in welcoming Dennis to this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all the members of the Assembly, 

Shelley Johnson, who is sitting up in the west gallery, a 
long-time friend of mine and a representative of the 
Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union. 
 
And I’d like all members to welcome Shelley. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Junior Curlers Win 
World Championships 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Team 
Canada’s men’s and women’s junior curling teams, who swept 
the world curling championships over the weekend. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we are especially proud that both of these teams come 
from Saskatchewan and curl out of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the women’s team of Marliese Miller, Teejay 
Surik, Janelle Lemon, Chelsey Bell, and Tammy Schneider 
went unbeaten through the entire competition and then defeated 
the United States with an angle raise, double takeout with their 
last rock in the 10th end to win. An angle raise double takeout 
for the world championships, Mr. Speaker — talk about 
performance under pressure. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the men’s team of Steve Laycock, Chris 
Haichert, Michael Jantzen, Kyler Broad, and Ben Hebert went 
into an extra end to defeat Sweden to win their world title. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, that this was Canada’s sixth 
consecutive Junior Men’s World Championship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating all of these fine, young Saskatchewan 
curlers who have worked hard and dreamed big, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Friday was budget day and all eyes and ears were on the 
Finance minister as he delivered his budget speech. And there 
was little good news and uplifting to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Saturday was a different case, a different 
scene. All eyes and ears were glued to the TV watching the 
curling finals. A member from the Shellbrook area, Marliese 
Miller, captured the Women’s World Junior Curling 
Championship in Flims, Switzerland. 
 
The win capped a 11-0 run at the world championship for 
Miller. It was the first time that any team had won the world 
championship without suffering a loss since the event started in 
1988. Miller’s team swept the first team all-star awards, a feat 
that was also accomplished while winning the Canadian Junior 
Women’s Championship in Ottawa. Miller was also the winner 
of another award, the Women’s Sportsmanship Award. 
 
For those who watched the game, it brought many memories of 
the late Sandra Schmirler. The final shot in the 10th end, an 
angle raise double takeout, cinched the win for Team Canada. 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

 

Members of the Miller rink were Teejay Surik, Janelle Lemon, 
Chelsey Bell, and alternate, Tammy Schneider. 
 
I would ask all members of the Assembly to help me 
congratulate the team from Team Canada on this win. Great job 
done. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Decision 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, in the world of 
politics, like any game, there are winners and losers, fair play 
and foul. This weekend all of Saskatchewan was watching the 
Saskatchewan Party to see if they believed in fair play or foul 
play, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Sask Party — the defender 
of democracy, the cultivator of grassroots — once again has 
failed to defend the basic principles of fair play and democratic 
rule. I believe that makes his record 0 and 2, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, 60 faceless members of the Sask 
Party huddled this weekend in a backroom with the aid of a 
conference call and overturned the publicly counted votes of 
1,100 of their bona fide party members. 
 
It is worth pointing out that this group fronted by the leader is 
so rock solidly opposed to democracy that after an hour of 
argument Grant Schmidt could convince only one member of 
the executive council to change his vote. I wonder what they 
will do to this member now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It has been noted before in hockey, curling, and other games, 
the team with the most points win — a basic rule of fair play 
which obviously is completely foreign to the Sask Party. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Junior Men’s Curling Championship 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to join with the member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood and 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana in congratulating the 
Steven Laycock rink on winning the World Junior Men’s 
Curling Championship. 
 
The team consists of Steven, who comes from a farm near 
Saltcoats; third, Chris Haichert; second, Mike Jantzen; lead, 
Kyler Broad; and alternate, Ben Hebert. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, 
that those who watched the finals will agree that these young 
men will show up in Saskatchewan men’s curling as a team to 
be reckoned with in the near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Steven’s mom and dad, Gary and Diane Laycock, 
travelled to Switzerland to watch their son and his team make 
us all proud of them in representing Canada at the Worlds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Saltcoats area we’ve been very fortunate to 

have two world champions. Joan Inglis McCusker was a 
member of the Sandra Schmirler rink, world and Olympic 
champions. And this year, Joan was a member of the Jan Betker 
rink who represented Saskatchewan at the Scott Tournament of 
Hearts. Mr. Speaker, the Laycock family and the Inglis family 
live about two miles apart. Mr. Speaker, it’s got to be 
something in the water, whether that water is frozen or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the success of Steven’s rink and the girls Miller 
rink certainly bodes well for the future of curling in 
Saskatchewan. I ask everyone to join with me in congratulating 
them once again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Additional Funding for Child Care 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week, along 
with the Premier and the minister responsible for community 
services and employment, my seatmate, and several other 
colleagues, I had the pleasure of attending this government’s 
announcement on the largest expansion of child care services in 
the history of this province — 1,200 new licensed child care 
spaces over the next four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the components of child care 
Saskatchewan are: $1.8 million to fund new or previously 
unfunded spaces and provide the capital for building 
development, renovations, and fire safety requirements 
associated with those spaces; $1 million to increase child care 
subsidies an average of $20 per child per month effective June 
1; and $200,000 increase in early childhood services grant 
funding to address wage and human resource requirements in 
licensed child care facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes that all Saskatchewan 
people must have opportunities to contribute to the economic 
and social life of this province. And that means, Mr. Speaker, 
that quality, affordable daycare is essential for parents who are 
working or going to school. 
 
(13:45) 
 
This government does dare to care and this commitment from 
our government is yet another signal that the future is wide 
open to anyone and everyone in this province prepared to dream 
big, plan well, and work hard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Criminal Justice Act 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow, 
April 1, is the first day that the federal Youth Criminal Justice 
Act comes into effect across Canada. 
 
This new Act, Mr. Speaker, replaces the 20-year-old and much 
maligned Young Offenders Act, legislation that was often seen 
as being ineffective or inappropriate for crimes committed by 
youth. 
 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

The Youth Criminal Justice Act was passed last year in the 
House of Commons but proclamation was delayed to give all 
sectors of provincial judicial systems enough time to become 
familiar with the Act and to make the necessary changes to 
programs and services. In fact nearly 30 million has already 
been spent on training police, judges, social workers, and 
community agencies to help prepare them for implementation 
of an Act that is double the length of the original Young 
Offenders Act and is apparently much more complicated. 
 
Of course members on both sides of the House should bear in 
mind this is the same federal Liberal government that has also 
seen fit to force a useless, billion dollar gun registry on 
Canadians. 
 
Some specifics regarding the Youth Criminal Justice Act, Mr. 
Speaker. There will be less jail time for less serious offences 
such as property crimes, more onus on police to consider 
extrajudicial measures such as written warnings instead of 
laying charges and for judges to impose the least restrictive 
sentence. 
 
Saskatchewan has one of the highest rates of youth crime in the 
country, Mr. Speaker, as well as one of the highest rates of 
youth incarceration. Members on this side of the House will be 
carefully monitoring the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) 
development of programs and policies as it moves to implement 
the new Youth Criminal Justice Act here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Building for the Future 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a plan for 
this province and the plan is about building for the future. It’s 
about growth and opportunity and building momentum and 
providing programs and support for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week this government delivered its 10th 
consecutive balanced budget, but more importantly we 
delivered a budget that continues our tradition of strategically 
investing to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people while at the 
same time managing the province’s finances in a responsible 
and prudent manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe building for the future means healthy 
and self-reliant families and have therefore allocated a record 
2.5 billion to health. 
 
We believe building for a future means providing opportunities 
for youth and have allocated a record $1.2 billion for education. 
We believe building for the future means the province has a 
modern and competitive infrastructure, a prosperous and 
competitive economy, and strong and vibrant communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can have all the slogans 
they want, but clear vision and this plan are going to be what 
builds the future of this province and according to recent 
reports, Mr. Speaker, the future is already here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

2003-04 Budget 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the dust hadn’t even settled . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I guess the members opposite don’t want 
me to ask them a question. That’s because the dust hadn’t 
settled on Friday’s budget and it was ruled, it was judged to be 
a huge flop. Just listen to the reviews that the budget is getting. 
 
It seems that nobody has anything good to say about that 
budget. Just look at the headlines. “Mayors ready for fight.” 
“Police money short.” “U of S fears cuts.” Too little tax relief.” 
“Agriculture neglected.” 
 
The Minister of Finance hasn’t had that kind of a response since 
he was the leader of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, how did the NDP get the 
budget so wrong? How did they manage to come up with a 
budget that everybody thinks is a disaster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 
response to the budget, I know that myself and my colleagues 
on the government side have been out all over Saskatchewan on 
the weekend talking to the people, talking to the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we’re hearing are very positive reviews with regard 
to the budget, Mr. Speaker. What we’re hearing is that a record 
expenditure of 2.5 billion in health is seen as being exactly what 
we should be doing. Mr. Speaker. Our priorities on education 
are exactly what we should be doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we talk about the response in terms of the negativism 
of the members opposite, the people of Saskatchewan are very 
positive about the future of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the facts 
and see what really happened. 
 
Just moments after the budget is presented, the Premier is out in 
the rotunda angrily attacking every mayor in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier lashed out at SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), he lashed out at the mayors, 
and he said that the definition of being a mayor in this province 
is that there’s never enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mayors were simply stating their concerns 
over the Finance minister’s budget on behalf of the people who 
elected them. And in return they were attacked by an unelected 
Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier get so angry and give 
Saskatchewan mayors such an ugly tongue-lashing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I will defer to other questions about the 
budget to the Minister of Finance today but I want to say this. 
 
I did . . . I was a little intemperate, if I may say, during my 
comments about the mayors because, Mr. Speaker, it’s not all of 
the mayors of Saskatchewan who take that point of view. But 
obviously some do. Obviously for some of our mayors it is 
never enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition stands today . . . I cannot 
believe he would stand today and talk about elected or 
unelected — unelected — when he and his party just put their 
thumb in the eye of democracy like it’s never been done before 
in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess the Premier is 
right. I think there was one mayor there that was hiding 
somewhere in the legislature and didn’t come out and speak 
against the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is probably hoping . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the Premier was 
hoping that not too many people saw that ugly attack on 
Saskatchewan mayors. 
 
Well what he might not know is that SUMA videotaped his rant 
against mayors and they have now posted it to their Web site. 
And now they are encouraging all the mayors . . . Maybe even 
the mayor of P.A. (Prince Albert) will get a chance to look at 
this Web site. And I hear that they are getting an unusually 
large number of hits. So, Mr. Speaker, if the people of 
Saskatchewan or mayors or councillors want to have a look at 
the Premier’s rant, they can just go to www.suma.org. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is: why did he get so 
angry at Saskatchewan’s mayors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 
budget which was tabled here in the Legislative Assembly on 
Friday, and we look at the dollars we’re putting into health care 
and the dollars we’re putting into education and the dollars 
we’re putting into municipalities, well the reality of the day is, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we gave $10 million to municipal revenue 
sharing last year. We took that 10, we added another 10 this 
year for $20 million, and we’re adding another 10 on the 10 on 
the 10 — that’s $60 million to municipalities. 
 
And I know there are groups in Saskatchewan that did not get 
any additional dollars in this budget and they call it an insult. 
Some of them do, not all of them. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Moose Jaw just yesterday, and 
reported in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald here today, says: 
 

“The comments made by Mike Badham after the budget, in 
no way reflect the opinion of the council of the City of 
Moose Jaw,” said Schwinghamer, expressing 
embarrassment over those comments. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we are doing lots of good things for this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that all across 
Saskatchewan now mayors are going to www.suma.org and 
they will be joining with Mike Badham in condemning the 
Premier for his comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — But it wasn’t just the mayors that were 
angry, Mr. Speaker. Farm groups and farmers said that the NDP 
ignored agriculture. Terry Hildebrandt of APAS (Agricultural 
Producers Association of Saskatchewan) said, if you would 
have blinked, you would have missed the agriculture section of 
the budget. 
 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
President Neal Hardy said there’s $40 million missing any way 
you cut it. Mr. Speaker, he said there’s nothing built in there to 
allow for a disaster year. SARM also says that it was led to 
believe that there would be some action on education tax — not 
just another study. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of years ago the NDP promised to 
revitalize rural Saskatchewan. Now the NDP are rejecting rural 
Saskatchewan. Why did this budget ignore agriculture and rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, tonight, tonight, Mr. 
Speaker, at midnight, the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program) program in Saskatchewan ends. No more CFIP 
program. And in our budget, Mr. Speaker, we don’t show any 
money for CFIP. Why? Because there’s no more program, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, you need to stop 
embarrassing yourself and you need to stop embarrassing . . . 
the member from Watrous needs to stop embarrassing herself 
because every time they get up to talk about agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, they have no idea. 
 
Do Canadian farmers and Saskatchewan farmers a favour and 
stay out of the ag file because every time you’re in, you cost 
them money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the agriculture says 
that CFIP is over with, a program that was a disaster for 
Saskatchewan, and now there’s even less money than there was 
under the disastrous CFIP. How disgusting, Mr. Speaker. 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget was given a thumbs-down by the 
mayors, a thumb-down by agriculture, and the list goes on and 
on. The nurses’ union said that the budget failed to address the 
nursing shortage. The Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business said it was too little and too late. The Canadian 
Taxpayers Federation said that the NDP is living in fantasyland. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, most importantly, the people of 
Saskatchewan that we spoke with over the weekend said that 
this budget has no plan and it has no credibility. It’s a clear sign 
of a government on its last legs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier, how did he let his people come 
up with such a budget, a budget that nobody in Saskatchewan 
likes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, when we 
talk about the reaction to the budget . . . and the reaction to the 
budget will keep coming in over the next week or two. And the 
initial reaction from the public of Saskatchewan is extremely 
positive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ve complimented this government on having its 10th 
consecutive balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. The public of 
Saskatchewan has complimented this government on the fact 
that it has had 10 credit rating upgrades, Mr. Speaker. The 
public of Saskatchewan has complimented this government on 
the fact that we are investing $2.5 billion in health care — the 
biggest investment they’ve ever had, Mr. Speaker. And the 
public of Saskatchewan that says, you have got your priorities 
right, Mr. Speaker, in health care and education and highways. 
 
And they’re asking, what are the priorities of the members 
opposite, because we don’t know, Mr. Speaker. What do those 
people stand for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, the biggest problem with this budget is it’s 
just not credible. Let’s look at the economic forecast. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Conference Board of Canada says Saskatchewan’s 
economy will grow by 2.7 per cent this year — that’s The 
Conference Board of Canada. Other private sector forecasters 
are predicting a growth of around 3 per cent. But apparently the 
new Minister of Finance knows more than the leading 
economists in Canada. His entire budget is based on an 
economic growth of 6.8 per cent; that’s more than double all the 
private forecasts, more than double the expected growth in 
every other industrialized country in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How does the Finance minister expect anyone to believe this 
forecast when it is so out of touch with reality? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I won’t 
apologize for being optimistic about the future of this province. 

And I won’t apologize for looking at the future of 
Saskatchewan and saying it’s wide open, Mr. Speaker. And I 
won’t apologize that not only myself but other forecasters are 
saying the same thing, and let me quote, Mr. Speaker. For 
example, CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) World 
Markets notes, and I quote: 
 

. . . the associated level of real output falls within the band 
foreseen by economic forecasters . . . 

 
CIBC World Markets “Provincial Budget Briefs,” March 28, 
2003. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what does the Bank of Montreal say? They 
simply note it’s based on a return to normal crop levels after 
two years of severe drought — BMO Nesbitt Burns Economic 
Research, Saskatchewan highlights, March 28, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s more and more and more. Our numbers are 
realistic. Our forecasts are realistic. And we’re very positive 
about the fortunes of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, most Finance ministers try to 
make cautious projections about economic growth, and if they 
exceed them, the government will then have additional revenue 
at the end of the year. But not this Finance minister. He’s 
throwing caution to the wind. He doesn’t care what the private 
forecasters say. He doesn’t care what The Conference Board of 
Canada says. He knows better. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if you 
added up the expected rate for Australia and Canada, both 
combined, you won’t even arrive at the minister’s projection for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t so funny it would be 
ridiculous. But this is quite serious. This one number 
undermines the credibility of the entire budget. How can the 
Minister of Finance expect anyone to believe his budget when 
his economic growth forecast is so out of line with reality? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the officials in the 
Department of Finance, myself, and this government stand by 
our numbers. But we’re not the only ones, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re very positive about the outlooks for the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I know that the members 
opposite don’t like to hear that because they are the sultans of 
doom and gloom. But the reality of the day, Mr. Speaker, is that 
. . . And the member opposite made reference to The 
Conference Board of Canada and I’ll quote from The 
Conference Board of Canada. And here they go. 
 

I don’t think (6.8 per cent economic growth) is overly 
optimistic. It’s just based on the assumption of a normal 
crop. 

 
David Madani, Conference Board of Canada, Regina 
Leader-Post, March 29, 2003, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, all the revenue forecasts in this 
budget are based on the NDP’s prediction of 6.8 per cent 
economic growth. And that’s the problem. Because if the 
province doesn’t achieve 6.8 per cent growth, the deficit will 
even be bigger than it is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — In other words, the minister is taking a huge 
gamble based on a forecast that is not supported by any other 
economist in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the province does not achieve 6.8 per cent 
growth this year, if the economy only grows by 3 per cent like 
the Canadian average, how much will this affect provincial 
revenues? How much more debt will the NDP rack up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, you know, I don’t 
doubt the fact that the member opposite is quite sincere in his 
comments but he’s very wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality of the day is that we have CIBC World Markets. 
We’ve got the Bank of Montreal, The Conference Board of 
Canada. And here’s another one for you — Scotia Economics. 
An economist said on the weekend and I quote: 
 

The government’s forecast is entirely possible, especially in 
the agriculture sector. 

 
In fact, he says: 
 

History has shown that when you have a sharp decline as 
you have had, particularly over the past two years with the 
drought, there often is a bounce back that is major (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
CJME radio, March 28, 2003, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
referred to a number of comments made by economists right 
across Canada that are predicting 2.7 to about 3.7. I’ve 
indicated that The Economist is predicting that Canadian growth 
rate will 3.3 per cent. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I also want to quote from a CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) TV interview on Friday, 
March 28, and these are the words of John Allen, the institute of 
public policy, who’s an economist with that firm. And he says 
this: 
 

The fundamental role of budgeting is, if in doubt err on the 
side of conservatism. And using a 6.8 per cent growth in 
real GDP is certainly not erring on the side of 
conservatism. 

 
That’s the message from the institute of public policy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. And I would ask 
the member to put his question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I do believe that I 
have a voice that travels quite well in this Assembly, but I 
couldn’t even hear myself on that last one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the words of the institute of public 
policy saying if you’re going to be wrong, be careful. 
 
The question again to the minister is: how much more will the 
debt grow if indeed we only achieve a 3 per cent growth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, from the line of 
questioning it’s obvious to me that to err is conservative, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — When we talk about bounce, we talk 
about bounce back in terms of the recovery of the economy in 
the province of Saskatchewan. I might note that in 1993, 
coming off a bad crop year in 1992, there was a 6.6 per cent 
increase in our real GDP (gross domestic product), Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And when we talk about the forecasts and how our numbers 
jibe, Mr. Speaker, I think Mr. Paul Martin said it the best. And 
he goes, and I’m quoting Paul Martin CKOM/ CJME radio, 
March 31, 2003, and he quotes: 
 

Is this estimate too rosy? Well normally I would say yes, 
but there’s one nagging problem. Saskatchewan Finance 
ministry has always gotten it right. 

 
The department has been remarkably accurate and not in its 
economic forecast, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I have one final question for the 
Minister of Finance this afternoon. If he believes that producing 
accurate numbers that reflect reality are conservative, I want 
him to answer the question as to whether or not producing a 
document that requires large barrels of whiteout ink is a Liberal 
document. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it seems . . . 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I see that the member opposite has got 
quite animated because he hasn’t got his facts right. And that 
happens every now and then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when it comes to CIBC World Markets, Bank of Montreal, 
Conference Board of Canada, Scotia Economics, and our very 
own Paul Martin are all saying the same things — we’re going 
to have a rebound in our economy and guess what? It’s going to 
be 6.8 per cent with a normal crop year. 
 
I don’t know why they don’t like that news, Mr. Speaker; it’s 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

good news. It’s good news for the province of Saskatchewan. 
Our economy is growing and our future is wide open, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Prince Albert Officials 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) over there. 
 
Last Friday, Don Cody, mayor of Prince Albert, quite suddenly 
tendered his resignation as chairman of the Saskatchewan 
government agency, SGI. This occurred the same day that the 
Prince Albert Police Commission announced that Mr. Cody had 
been suspended from the commission pending an internal 
investigation involving the mayor, the chief of police, and two 
other senior officers in the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of rumours and speculation 
surrounding the commission’s suspension and the sudden 
resignation of Mr. Cody from SGI. Will the minister explain to 
this Assembly why Don Cody suddenly tendered his 
resignation; was it voluntary or was it requested by the 
minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this is a 
matter that is under investigation by the Regina city police. And 
it will be, it will be the position of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, first of all, that one of the important tenets of 
administration of justice is equality under the law. And the 
police and anyone else involved in this incident will be 
investigated duly by the Regina city police, headed I believe by 
the chief of the Regina city police. The matter will then be 
referred to senior law officers of the Crown for review. 
 
And as the matter is investigated, we will not be commenting 
publicly on the matter. We will let the police and the 
prosecutors do their job and not speculate as to what may or 
may not have occurred. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s amazing how 
often this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, has to hide behind 
that particular answer and you wonder why that is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my next question is for the Minister of Justice. It 
is for the Minister of Justice. It has been announced that the 
Regina city police have been called . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please, members. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — . . . as you said, to conduct an internal 
investigation regarding an incident involving Mayor Don Cody, 
the Prince Albert police chief, and two senior officers. 
Presumably the result of that internal investigation would be 
forwarded to the provincial Justice department for review and 
possible further action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don Cody has considerable ties to the NDP 
government. As a former NDP minister in Saskatchewan, he sat 

in those very front rows, Mr. Speaker, and now as the former 
chairman of SGI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to avoid any perception that those socialist ties 
influence this NDP government in this case, will the Minister of 
Justice commit today to hiring an independent prosecutor to 
review the results of this investigation and make 
recommendations for any action deemed appropriate in this 
case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, one of the most important 
principles of a parliamentary system is the independence of the 
police and the prosecutors from the government of the day. And 
this government and this minister have confidence in the police 
in this province and the prosecutors to review matters, whoever 
may be involved, Mr. Speaker, and to give advice to the 
government, Mr. Speaker, as to whether there should be charges 
laid and if so what those charges are. 
 
And I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, as he should 
well know, that the decision as to whether to lay charges will 
not be made by the Minister of Justice. It will not be made by 
anyone sitting in the government seats. That decision, Mr. 
Speaker, will be made by the law officers of the Crown. 
 
And if that member is suggesting that the law officers of the 
Crown are influenced by politics, he can go outside the House 
and say it, Mr. Speaker. But that has not been the case and it is 
not the case and it will not be the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government and table responses to 
written questions no. 5 and 6. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 5 and 6 have been 
tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to continue with my remarks that I began with 
last Friday. I initially made some comments about the budget. 
And we’ve had an opportunity over the weekend to see public 
reaction, to see the reaction of people right across this province 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

 

as they’ve had a chance . . . representing the various third party 
groups that they do represent. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member in 
Saskatoon . . . from Saskatoon Southeast on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And with 
greatest apologies to the member from Canora-Pelly. I was 
trying to catch the eye of the Speaker before you started. I 
apologize for introducing . . . or for interrupting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce two very esteemed 
Saskatchewan citizens who are sitting in your gallery: Mr. 
Grant Scharfstein and . . . Jim Scharfstein, I’m sorry, a lawyer 
par excellence in Saskatoon, and Ms. Carol Teichrob, one of the 
newly elected RM (rural municipality) of Corman Park 
councillors and a former member of this legislature, and a great 
personal friend of mine. 
 
I would ask that all members of this Assembly make both of 
them welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saltcoats for introductions. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with all members in the House to recognize and 
welcome one of my old foes from that side of the House. If I 
remember right, it was one ringydingy, two ringydingy. We had 
a lot of fun in the past, Mr. Speaker. There was some very hot 
times but all throughout that, I had . . . I should rephrase that, 
Mr. Speaker, but I won’t. I’ll get in deeper. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate seeing Ms. Teichrob again 
here and I hope that life is treating her well in her life now. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a tough act to follow. But we welcome the 
guests to your gallery this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as I was indicating before the introductions, we’ve 
had a chance to look at the reactions of many different people as 
far as their comments about the budget. 
 
And I want to begin by commenting about an article that was in 
today’s StarPhoenix. It’s an editorial and I want to quote. The 
last sentence of this editorial is this, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, 
because I will be using a proper name. It says: 
 

Now if only Melenchuk can be convinced to fix his 
penniless “fiscal stabilization account” that adds to the debt 
each time he dips into this rainy . . . fund . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is, I think, the reaction of probably every one 
in Saskatchewan except for the members opposite. 
 
When they recognize that when you access a line of credit and 
create a situation where you borrow from that line of credit, you 
are actually creating a debt, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen that 
debt grow substantially over the last number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the debt is now growing and each and every one 
of Saskatchewan residents will be responsible for that debt. 
This is not somehow magically going to get taken over by 
another province or another country. It’s our debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another comment made by a person in 
Saskatchewan is this, and his name was referred to earlier on in 
question period. This is from an interview with CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) Radio on March 28 and it is the 
president of SUMA, Mike Badham and he says this in reference 
to the budget, and I quote: 
 

And two words come to mind. One I think it is insulting 
and the other one is unfair. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the reaction of urban municipal government 
and I’m sure that if you listened carefully you saw the reaction 
of SARM and Mr. Hardy as its president. We heard from the 
. . . we heard of the reaction by John Nikolejsin, the president of 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. 
 
These are people that represent all of the municipalities and 
school boards in this province. I want to repeat that, Mr. 
Speaker. They represent all of the municipalities and school 
boards in this province. 
 
Those leaders of those various associations are saying this 
budget just didn’t cut it. It’s made up of fictitious numbers; it 
doesn’t add up and as a result we’re very, very disappointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has I think rightfully recognized the 
need for additional spending in Health. And we’ve said that all 
along that Health is a priority. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a long-term plan. There isn’t a 
long-term plan to deal with the lack of professionals. And so as 
a result . . . and I want to quote from again a CBC Radio 
broadcast of Friday, March 28, where Rosalee Longmoore, the 
president of SUN, is quoted as saying this: 
 

We did not see anything though that is going to deal with 
the fundamental nursing shortage. 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

We didn’t hear anything to increase nursing seats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are reactions of a number of people who 
represent various groups in the province, where indeed they’ve 
looked at this budget and they’ve said it doesn’t meet the 
objectives of moving Saskatchewan forward. 
 
How are the health districts, or the health authorities as they’re 
called now, how are they going to deal with the situation that 
they need to have more professional people? More people are 
needed, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we meet the requirements 
of lowering our waiting lists and thus making sure that that 
takes place. 
 
That broadcast of March 28 also had an interesting comment by 
the announcer. The announcer was Candace Holstrom, and I 
quote: 
 

John Nilson says there is no advantage to training more 
nurses if other provinces can hire them when they graduate. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an interesting comment. The Minister of 
Health for the province of Saskatchewan says we’re not going 
to . . . there is no advantage to increasing the number of training 
seats — for instance like the province of Manitoba which is 
well over 400 now — there is no advantage to doing this 
because those graduates are just going to get gobbled up by the 
other provinces, or I guess other countries is what he’s referring 
to. No strategy at all to change the picture that has been before 
us for years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve heard about professional shortages in the health 
profession for years — the lack of X-ray technicians, the lack of 
lab technicians, the nursing shortage, the doctor shortage. This 
is not a new problem. This has been around for a while. We still 
haven’t moved to make sure that the training positions in fact 
adequately meet that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, many of us are part of the 
baby-boomer era, including yourself I think — maybe not — 
and as a result we’re going to see tremendous numbers of 
retirements in all of those professions. The statistics that the 
Health department revealed is that the number of graduates in 
many of these professional areas will not even meet the number 
of retirees. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, how are we going to keep up with the need to 
address the waiting lists if we’re not even going to have the 
professional people in place? So that is of tremendous concern 
to many people in the province of Saskatchewan as they look at 
this past budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is based, the deficit that is there is 
negated — if I can use that word — the deficit is negated by the 
fact that this government is going to rely on three sources of 
revenue that are basically outside the General Revenue Fund 
revenues that are taken in. 
 
One, they’re going to rely on an additional $200 million transfer 
from CIC, Crown Investments Corporation, after this budget or 
this fiscal year, that ends today at midnight, is supposedly going 
to have to require a $300 million transfer to indeed offset that 
deficit that occurred last year. So we’ve got a third consecutive 

deficit budget. 
 
The other thing that they are going to require, Mr. Speaker, is 
they’re going to dip into their line of credit and create a 
borrowing of $393 million. That’s a huge amount of money, 
Mr. Speaker, to put us further and further into debt. 
 
And the third thing, Mr. Speaker, and the reason I raise this 
third issue because a lot of people have been responding to 
comments about summary financial budgeting and the need for 
Saskatchewan to change, is that this government has introduced 
for a number of years now one of the Crown corporations. Not 
all of them, but just one of them. They have used the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority and indicated that 
we’re going to be expecting $346 million worth of profit from 
that corporation — the only corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have indicated as opposition that we have 
supported the auditor for a number of years, that says we should 
move to summary financial statements where all, all of the 
Crown corporations will be included. The government has 
decided to just look at those few, Mr. Speaker. So when you 
add those numbers up, we’re talking almost a billion dollars 
worth of revenue that is outside of the General Revenue Fund, 
outside of the taxes, and outside of the non-renewable resource 
revenue, outside of the transfers from the federal government. 
 
This is money now that comes from some imaginary bank 
account that doesn’t exist. It comes from transfer of dividends 
that we’re not even sure that Crowns will be able to make those 
kinds of transfers. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, it definitely in my mind further 
reinforces what the Provincial Auditor has been asking for for a 
long time, and that’s to move to something called summary 
financial statements. Mr. Speaker, the auditor has stated that it 
is time for Saskatchewan to change. It is time to move forward 
because we need to catch up. And in his report of 2002, the Fall 
Report Volume 1, he stated and I quote: 
 

It is time for Saskatchewan to change. The government 
should focus its overall financial planning information on 
the entire government. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that announcement that indeed probably in the 
year 2004-2005 or by 2005 we will be moving to that, I think 
indicates that the pressure that is being put on by the auditors of 
the country and the accounting profession is finally going to 
mean that the province of Saskatchewan will have before this 
Assembly the entire financial plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we have that entire financial plan before us as 
was suggested by the auditor, and I want to . . . These are not 
my words. These are his words. I want to show just how 
important he feels this is. And he has presented a model in this 
book about how this might be done, and he says, quote: 
 

First, the model shows the revenues and expenditures as set 
out currently in the Budget for the General Revenue Fund. 
Legislators vote on expenditures as part of the Budget 
approval process. Second, the model shows the net income 
of the Government’s enterprise Crown corporations in a 
similar way to that of the Government’s summary financial 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

 

statements. Finally, the model shows the remaining 
revenues available to the Government that are included in 
the various Government service organizations that are not 
included in the Budget for the General Revenue Fund . . . 

 
So this method will now bring before us the areas that are 
currently outside. And if there’s one thing I think the people of 
Saskatchewan need is that there be a complete transparency, 
there be an openness of that budget so that people can recognize 
exactly what the true financial picture of the province is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult for the people of Saskatchewan 
to understand that there isn’t enough money to add another 150 
training seats for nursing positions when, at the same time, the 
government relies on the Crown corporations to produce a 
dividend of 200 or 300 million and allows the corporations 
within that CIC sector to spend $80 million in Australia, to 
spend money on an insurance company in Ontario that loses 
$11 million, to spend money on dot-com companies around the 
world that lose money. That’s the difficult part that people are 
unable to comprehend, that this government does not put the 
two together and bring them into the Legislative Assembly, and 
show the people of Saskatchewan what that plan is. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Because if that plan was before the people of Saskatchewan, 
there would be clearly stated objectives. They would be 
measurable. And at the end of a fiscal year, those objectives, 
those objectives would be able to be looked at to determine 
whether or not they were met. If there . . . for some 
circumstance a particular expenditure was higher or revenue 
lower of all the Crowns, there obviously would be an 
explanation in this Assembly that said something tragic 
happened in the world, you know. And I refer to something like 
September 11 — 9/11— where, you know, a disaster occurred 
that might affect the budget. 
 
I’m sure if we had that transparency and that type of 
information presented to the people of Saskatchewan, there 
would be an understanding. People would know what the true 
financial picture is. 
 
This budget is not representative of what I see as reality. It does 
not talk about all of the Crowns. It only refers to a small amount 
of Crowns. In fact only one, SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority) is listed as having to produce revenue to 
balance the . . . or to negate the deficit if I might use that word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that this document reveals, 
which is even more frightening, is that the debt — the overall 
debt of the people of Saskatchewan — is going to grow. 
 
On March 31, 2001, the Provincial Auditor revealed that the 
debt of the province, the combined debt of the General Revenue 
Fund and the Crown corporations, was about $11.1 billion. Mr. 
Speaker, the projected debt for March 31, a year from today, 
will be $12.2 billion. 
 
Now that’s a difference of 1.1 billion. Now if you say it fast 
enough, 1.1 billion doesn’t sound like a whole lot. But let’s take 
a look at that period of time of three years since this Premier 
took over. Three years is approximately 1,100 days, a little less 

than that. If you look at 1,100 days, Mr. Speaker, and a $1.1 
billion debt over that same period of time, we’re talking about 
$1 million a day. 
 
The debt of this province is going to grow . . . has grown and 
will continue to grow to March 31 of next year, based on this 
document, at $1 million a day — unsustainable, Mr. Speaker. 
Unsustainable when we have, last week, documents that were 
produced by Statistics Canada that show for the 17th 
consecutive quarter this province has lost population. This 
province has lost population. We are growing the debt by $1 
million a day. Mr. Speaker, you and I are going to have to pick 
up a far greater share of that debt as population declines and 
debt grows. 
 
That’s a given. That’s a given, Mr. Speaker. And people of the 
province of Saskatchewan understand that. They understand 
that there is a need to look at priority spending. There’s a need 
to address whether or not we spend $80 million in Australia or 
$20 million in Chile. We need to look at the full financial 
picture and be able to compare that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated already, earlier on this day, the 
growth projections that are being used by the Minister of 
Finance are 6.8 per cent economic growth. Okay, 6.8 per cent. 
Now let’s look at The Economist magazine printed . . . The 
issue by the way is March 22, 2003. It lists 16 of recognizable 
countries as far as industrialized countries. Starts with 
Australia, Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this chart the Australian GDP 3.4, British GDP 
2.7, Canada 3.3. I’ll jump all the way down to the highest 
number — United States, 3.5. Mr. Speaker, nowhere, nowhere 
in the industrialized nations of this world is there a 6.8 per cent 
figure. In fact, if you added up Australia and Canada, two 
countries, if you added those sums, you would not even get to 
6.8 per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is why people are so, so skeptical about 
this budget. The numbers that the Finance minister’s produced 
are based on numbers that are just not reality. They are based on 
numbers that are so far from reality according to the economists 
of the world, Mr. Speaker. So that causes a lot of problems. 
 
The question that people are asking is, well if 6.8 per cent was 
used as the number to build the revenues in this document to 
arrive at the sum total of $6.2 billion, if they used a 6.8 per cent 
figure . . . And let’s just suppose we’re average. We’re usually 
not average but we’re going to be average this next year and 
move to a 3.3 per cent growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to indicate that our . . . you know, I 
believe one of the members in the House last week said that it 
was, you know, we were second to Alberta in growth rate and 
that was such a fine thing. Alberta has used 4.1 per cent for its 
GDP for this . . . for its planning — 4.1. In Saskatchewan, 
we’ve used 6.8. Canada’s average is 3.3. 
 
So let’s suppose we’re average. Can you imagine what the 
revenues, the projections for revenue, will . . . how they will be 
affected by now changing them from 6.8 to only 3 per cent or 
something like that? 
 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s scary for all of the people in Saskatchewan 
because the only way that you’re going to balance that or offset 
that — as government has shown that it is, it’s growing the size 
of government — they will have to balance that by increasing 
the debt. 
 
So no longer will we even see probably a $12.2 billion debt by 
the same time next year; we may see even a higher number than 
that — in other words more than $1 million worth of debt per 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to a few things in the budget that 
are specific to the various departments. My colleagues who 
serve as critics of the various departments will have a lot more 
to say on each of these, but I just want to, I want to note a few 
things that were announced in this budget. 
 
Let’s take a look at business tax cuts. For the fiscal year 
2003-2004, there are no business tax cuts. That’s what has to be 
understood. 
 
The business tax cut that is proposed to be reduced from six to 
five and a half, and that five and a half down to five, is for the 
year 2004 and 2005. So there is no change to the current tax 
situation. 
 
So if a incorporated farm business or another business, any 
business in the province of Saskatchewan was looking at some 
significant change for them, there just isn’t any, okay. They 
have to recognize that — that those business tax cuts are not for 
the current year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that I’ve indicated is health care 
and we saw massive spending in health care, but it still has not 
addressed the need for professional people. 
 
And I won’t repeat myself, Mr. Speaker, by indicating that, you 
know, we’ve seen provinces who followed a very similar 
pattern as Saskatchewan and lowered the number of nursing 
training positions over the years, have recognized that two and 
three years ago and have changed the number of people that 
they’re admitting into those programs. And now we’re seeing 
graduating classes of well over 400 in other provinces, whereas 
Saskatchewan is finally moving off that 240 mark, but very, 
very slowly. So we’re still going to be short a tremendous 
amount of professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fear in Saskatchewan is that as shortages 
occur, usually it is the health authority that has additional 
dollars, or it is maybe the attraction of a larger regional centre 
or a city setting, that will attract the people. And the end result 
will be, as was discovered in the community of Foam Lake in 
my constituency this last November when there were not 
enough nurses to meet the acute care needs because of 
retirements, and as a result, for a period of time the Foam Lake 
hospital was closed as far as its acute care and emergency 
services. That’s what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, if we 
don’t meet the professional needs. 
 
The other thing that was announced, Mr. Speaker, was 
additional dollars for capital construction. And I know a 
number of communities in this province are waiting, or were 
waiting with great anticipation to see what that announcement 

would be on Friday regarding capital construction. We saw a 
few things mentioned, but then it said that they’re . . . stay 
tuned, basically it said stay tuned over the next few weeks for 
additional announcements. Mr. Speaker, that’s not the way to 
treat people. 
 
And I want to mention a community in my constituency —
community of Preeceville. Preeceville has put forward a plan of 
hospital acute care facility expansion where it would 
incorporate an integrated health services building where they 
would meet the needs of the people of a large area. 
 
That whole area around Preeceville, Mr. Speaker, has 
tremendous support from all of the RMs, from the smaller 
communities that are smaller than Preeceville, like Sturgis and 
Stenen and Endeavour, and all of those individual communities. 
They’ve all come forward and they said, we need this to 
happen. And they’ve been working on it for years. 
 
I know the Minister of Health was in Preeceville last fall where 
he was there for a presentation of a $10,000 cheque from one 
individual. And they’re awaiting that announcement, Mr. 
Speaker. Their money is in place. They were asked to put in 
place well over $1 million. I believe it was 1.6 million. That 
money is already ready to go, it’s been there ready to go for 
over a year. Yet no announcement as to whether or not they can 
proceed. 
 
So there’s tremendous uncertainty with this budget as to 
whether or not it actually meets the needs of many different 
communities. And I’m sure the member from Swift Current and 
the member from Moosomin will have a lot of things to say 
about communities in their constituencies that require capital 
expenditures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we looked at was funding 
for education. Last year for the first time the government did 
some creative, creative bookkeeping, creative work, where they 
moved expenditures off balance sheet. If you recall, Mr. 
Speaker, there was a creation of a Crown corporation called the 
Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation — EIFC. EIFC 
was going to spend about $89 million on construction of capital 
structures in the kindergarten to grade 12 area and 
post-secondary education area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m looking at the budget document that indicates 
that last year only $54.3 million of actual construction took 
place. And there was some uncertainty from school divisions, 
from the universities, from the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology) campuses as to how this 
corporation was really working and whether or not it was in the 
best interests of the people of Saskatchewan to put debt into a 
10-year or 20-year or 30-year amortization period. 
 
So what we’ve seen is a little bit of change, Mr. Speaker, in this 
budget. And it’s been pointed out, of course, that we see that the 
EIFC I believe is going to be wound down. But there still is 
$32.4 million worth of anticipated expenditure off balance 
sheet. 
 
So we look at that, Mr. Speaker, and we know now then of 
course that if that expenditure took . . . takes place, there will be 
a further debt, because it’s not accounted for in the actual 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

 

estimates document. There is some move to return to balance 
sheet expenditures, and if I look at the Department of Learning 
under the two categories, K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) 
capital and post-secondary capital, you will note that there is a 
move now for $23 million worth of post-secondary capital in 
post . . . in the area of post-secondary, and in K to 12 
expenditures we will see an expenditure of 18.6. 
 
Now that includes a amount of money being designated for 
principal and interest for the EIFC portion of last year. So there 
is a repayment plan to actually make up what was borrowed last 
year. But they’re putting those two small amounts back into 
estimates but still allowing for $32 million of off-balance-sheet 
expenditure. The debt of the province will grow if this number 
is . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the Agriculture critic is going to have 
a lot to say because we heard from the agricultural minister over 
the last week and a half about the need for Sask Crop Insurance 
claims to be paid. And I believe the number of $1 billion has 
been used as the amount of dollars necessary to meet the 
obligations of the claims that were filed for the crop year that 
just ended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this document I look at agricultural spending 
and I see that the estimate for last year was 240 . . . sorry, $291 
million. This year’s budget, 241 million . . . I’m sorry, 251 — a 
drop of $40 million in agricultural spending. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, also I was interested to find out if there’s going to 
be a billion dollars worth of payout. And we’ve heard from the 
minister and the members opposite pointing fingers at us and 
saying, wouldn’t you pay the 500 million, I mean that’s why 
we’re going into the debt. Mr. Speaker, it’s nowhere to be 
found in here. 
 
We looked at the debt of Crown corporations, and I looked 
specifically at the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, 
where last year it indicated that there was zero debt estimated 
from the beginning of the year. But due to payments during the 
course of the year, $110 million shows up as the gross debt for 
Crown corps on page 17. For next year, that 110 million in fact 
is going to decline to 102 million. So for the fiscal year that 
starts tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, there is no additional 
expenditures for the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. 
 
So we’ve heard the minister say that there’s going to be a 
billion dollar payout. Where are the expenditures and how are 
they being met? I think that those are the questions that the 
Minister of Agriculture is going to have to explain to the people 
of Saskatchewan; that indeed claims are being met — there’s no 
question about that — but you also have to remember that for 
this coming year, this coming crop year, farmers on average, if 
they purchase crop insurance, their premiums will increase by 
52 per cent. 
 
So there’s been a move to increase the crop insurance 
payments. So I thought well, let’s take a look at Sask Ag and 
Food and just see what the government’s share of premiums 
will be. Because when the farmers, as producers, are going to 
be asked to increase their percentages by 52 per cent, what 

would the provincial government’s share increase as well? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I turned to page 29 and the crop insurance 
(AG10) portion of Sask Ag and Food, and that crop insurance 
portion has increased from 84 to 90 million — just $6 million. 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers of the province, the producers of this 
province, usually pay anywhere between 70 and $75 million in 
premiums for purchasing crop insurance — 70 to 75 million. If 
their premiums are going to increase by 52 per cent, you’re 
going to expect that farmers are going to contribute another $35 
million, and I’m just rounding those numbers off — 35 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the government is now saying we’re not 
increasing that number of 84 million by 52 per cent. We’re 
increasing it by $6 million. Okay? Not even 8 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So how does the government look at the premiums for crop 
insurance, the debt that was supposedly realized last year as 
claims came in, when in fact it does not show up in the 
estimates for Sask Ag and Food? Forty million dollars less this 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other comments that I want to make 
before I conclude my remarks is the area of the environment. I 
recall a . . . I believe it was three years ago when the minister 
for the . . . responsible for the protection of the province, 
through ensuring that forest firefighting services were . . . was 
provided, instituted in this Legislative Assembly something 
called the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
And in that first year I understand that there was some mix-up 
and in fact the legislation that was supposed to be passed was 
not passed. And indeed that fund sort of disappeared after its 
one-year creation and the next year it reappeared — instead of a 
$50 million Forest Fire Contingency Fund, it was 40 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, well it’s not only gone down from 50 to 40, it’s 
completely disappeared. It no longer exists. So we don’t have a 
Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
And I went to the Supplementary Estimates, Mr. Speaker, that 
were part of our budget package this year and I noted that my 
colleague from Swift Current asks what did it contain? Well I 
want to tell you that for this current budget we will be voting on 
supplementary estimates and those for Environment, for forest 
fire operations, total an additional $41 million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, last year the budget said it spent 35 million 
plus supplementary estimates of 41. Does the government know 
something about the weather for this next year? For two years 
in a row we’ve had to have additional resources that this 
government said was going to be dealt with by the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund. Now after having to vote on 41 million 
additional, the government leaves the Estimates page to be 
exactly the same as last year, $35 million, and now suddenly the 
41 for this summer isn’t in the fund. The $40 million has 
completely disappeared. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Minister of Environment is 
going to have to respond to those questions as we move 
forward. 
 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I found as I talked and 
listened to people on Saturday and Sunday about the budget 
was explained by a good friend of mine back in my hometown, 
gentleman by the name of Frank Rioch. Frank owns a road 
construction company. He has, with his sons, formed a 
company that does road building. And we were talking about 
this word, deficit, and balanced. And here’s how his 
explanation of what he believes this government really has done 
over the last, well, three years. 
 
He operates, as I said, a large line of credit. He goes to the 
financial institution that he works . . . that he deals with and he 
sets up a line of credit probably right now in the beginning of 
spring before he begins all of his work because he’s not sure 
when the RMs are going to pay him for the roads that are built, 
the farmers are going to pay him for the custom work that he 
does. Usually by the end of the year, of course, he will achieve 
all of that revenue, but he doesn’t know when it comes in. So he 
needs a line of credit, a significant line of credit. 
 
As he accesses that through the year, by the end of the year, all 
of the revenue is in and, of course, he pays off the line of credit. 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, what he said was this: if at the end 
of the year, if he still has not reduced that line of credit back 
down to zero by paying it all off, he has had a deficit for the 
year. It’s not balanced. There is no fund. It’s a line of credit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for three years now, this government has put 
before the people this imaginary bank account that doesn’t exist 
of 775 million. And up to the end of the fiscal year that they’ve 
now presented, they will have accessed that line of credit to the 
tune of about $675 million. What it really meant? The debt of 
this province has grown. And as I’ve indicated, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the debt is now going to be forecasted to be $12.2 
billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not . . . Or, Mr. Deputy Speaker — my 
apologies — this is not a budget that is believable; it is not 
reality. It is, in fact, something that people are calling fictitious. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those comments, I would like to move the 
following motion, seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 
expresses its non-confidence in the current government’s 
2003-2004 provincial budget which is based on absurd 
economic growth predictions and revenue transfers from 
empty bank accounts and further increases the provincial 
debt by nearly half a billion dollars; and, that this Assembly 
calls for the resignation of the Minister of Finance for the 
deliberate leak of specific budget items to the media prior 
to the presentation of this budget to this Assembly. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I stand today in this 
Assembly to speak in support of the amendment to the original 
motion that was just now put forward by the member from 

Canora-Pelly. 
 
And I would like to reread that motion one more time because I 
think it’s important that the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan clearly understand the importance of the 
amendment to the motion. And it reads: expresses . . . The 
member: 
 

expresses its non-confidence in the current government’s 
2003-2004 provincial budget which is based on absurd 
economic growth predictions and revenue transfers from 
empty bank accounts and further increases the provincial debt 
by nearly half a billion dollars; and that this Assembly calls 
for the resignation of the Minister of Finance for the 
deliberate (the deliberate) leak of specific budget items to the 
media prior to the presentation of the budget to this 
Assembly. 

 
The Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who was duly elected by 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting to note that there wasn’t the 
usual fervour in this building last Friday when the new Liberal 
— or is he an independent, no one’s quite sure — Minister of 
Finance rose to give his budget address. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year I noticed that there were 
three overflow viewing rooms set up for all of those that were 
expected to come to watch the budget address this year. The 
reason for the staff of the Assembly setting up those overflow 
viewing rooms is because it’s usually expected that all of the 
galleries in this Chamber, as well as seating on the floor of the 
Chamber, is more than occupied. 
 
But this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of those rooms — those 
viewing rooms — were empty; the galleries too. In the 
galleries, we couldn’t say that they were jam packed. There 
were people in them but they were certainly not jam-packed as 
in years gone by. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps this was a 
sign that this . . . the people of Saskatchewan are tired of 
hearing bad news from the Minister of Finance from this NDP 
government. Or perhaps it’s because they heard it five days 
before in the minister’s own budget leak to the media. 
 
Whatever the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very clear that the 
public just isn’t interested in what this NDP government has to 
say any more. 
 
And speaking of what the Finance minister did say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, let’s take a bit of a closer look at that. 
 
In the past this new Finance minister’s predecessors presented 
some fairly cautious growth estimates when it came to budget 
time. This year, however, this liberal, independent, Finance 
minister pegs Saskatchewan’s growth at almost 7 per cent — 7 
per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker — this when the rest of the 
industrialized world is expecting growth rates of over half that, 
between 3 and 3.5 per cent. This growth figure that the Finance 
minister has put forward to us and to the people of the province 
is ludicrous. 
 
Last Friday in this Assembly the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast had the audacity to lecture to the members on this 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

 

side of the House about how we should trust, and I quote: 
 

(We should trust the banks of Canada), rock-solid 
institutions of fiscal caution and financial (prudence). 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House do 
trust those esteemed institutions and their predictions regarding 
Saskatchewan’s growth. The Conference Board of Canada, one 
of the institutions that the member from Saskatoon Southeast 
mentioned in her statement, has pegged Saskatchewan’s growth 
at 2.7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is 4 per cent lower than the 
NDP-Liberal government’s wild and erroneous prediction of 
6.8 per cent; 6.8 per cent is not a sound number to base 
Saskatchewan’s budget on, and it is not a number that is going 
to be swallowed by the public of this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are a number of other factors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the success of this budget also hinges on — that Saskatchewan, 
for instance, will have an average crop year; that oil and gas 
prices will stay the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many ifs for this budget to even come 
close to being sustainable. So to start, Mr. Speaker, the very 
fundamentals that underpin this budget are questionable and 
flawed. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Is it prudent, I ask the government of the day, is it prudent as 
the Finance minister would have us believe, to base a budget on 
numbers that are extremely suspicious and fictitious? What 
happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if all of these ifs are simply only 
that — ifs? Where does it leave the citizens of this province? 
 
Well I can tell you the answer to that question, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This government, through the Finance minister, has 
already admitted that this budget will leave the province of 
Saskatchewan with a debt totalling some $12.2 billion — $12.2 
billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s a greater debt than this 
NDP government inherited in 1991. 
 
And based solely on the Finance minister’s questionable 
predictions for growth, Saskatchewan residents can expect the 
provincial debt to increase even further. And since the unelected 
Premier took over from his predecessors approximately three 
years ago, he has added $1 million a day to the debt of this 
province. That is a figure that I’m sure the people of this 
province are really interested in — $1 million a day. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the million-dollar man across the 
way and his sidekick, the over-estimation man, are left to their 
whims, they’ll drive this province into the ground even further 
than it is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another point I’d like to bring to your 
attention is the fact that the Finance minister is trying to make 
us believe that this budget is balanced. 
 
This minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can’t pull the wool over the 
eyes of his predecessor, Janice MacKinnon, and neither can he 
pull the wool over the eyes of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, Ms. MacKinnon tells us in her latest book that she quit 
politics partially because, and I quote: 
 

The new government was going to increase spending by . . . 
eight per cent when revenues were declining, which meant 
that balancing the budget would require a major drawdown 
of reserves. So I would have to support a deficit budget (a 
deficit budget) after all the years I . . . spent fighting 
deficits. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is exactly what this new Finance 
minister proposes to do in the upcoming year. A budget is not 
balanced when one has to rely on what is essentially a credit 
card to balance it. 
 
When you borrow money, you are in debt. It’s as simple as that. 
Perhaps it’s time the members from across the way got some 
lessons from the credit bureau of Canada on the definition of 
debt. 
 
In the end, Mr. Speaker, irregardless of what kind of a budget 
this NDP government brings down, the fortunes of the province 
of Saskatchewan will never improve under an NDP government 
— never — because their underpinning philosophies adversely 
affect and depress the province’s economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government does not understand, will 
never understand, and have demonstrated clearly that they have 
not the capability to understand, that government interference in 
business — Crown corporations competing against private 
business and investing many . . . million dollar losing ventures 
around the globe — will never ever be the way to increase the 
province’s fortunes. 
 
One must, Mr. Deputy Speaker, without a doubt adopt 
Saskatchewan Party policies. People of the province have been 
telling us for years now that what they want and what they can 
see to increase the economy of the province, to increase our 
fortunes, is to ensure that private enterprise and private ventures 
have a chance to thrive in this province. What they have told us 
is they’re tired, they’re very, very tired of this NDP government 
using the Crowns to compete with business and to waste 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars trying to do business. 
 
Even Janice MacKinnon, the former NDP Finance minister, 
argues against the types of policies that her own NDP 
government were using. In her latest book she discusses this. 
This is yet another reason that she had for quitting this 
government under this elected Premier . . . this particular 
unelected Premier. And I quote her again: 
 

My goal as Finance minister was to move out some of the 
wheeler-dealers who have lost their sense of accountability 
to cabinet and caucus. 

 
And certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have lost their sense of 
accountability to the people of this province. And I know that 
Ms. MacKinnon was certainly concerned about that. 
 
And it is for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that this province, as 
I’ve just mentioned, needs a Saskatchewan Party government 
— a government that would foster an environment for growth 
through targeted tax cuts; a government that would create a 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

climate that would allow people to move back to Saskatchewan, 
increasing the tax base and allowing more money to flow into 
the provincial coffers. 
 
Targeted tax cuts do work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to produce 
additional revenues. And I think the NDP would have to 
concede to that because after the Saskatchewan Party constantly 
putting it before them to cut taxes in one way or the other, at 
least to start, they did make a move to cut personal income tax. 
And it was a small move, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no doubt about 
it. 
 
But this year’s budget document does reveal that that strategy 
does work. The Saskatchewan Party plan for reducing taxation 
works. It does work. Targeted tax cuts will generate direly 
needed funds to not only keep up with the status quo —which 
this budget doesn’t even come close to, in terms of health and 
education — but funds that will actually make a huge difference 
in these two important areas. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the theme of this year’s budget should not 
be building for the future but rather, off-loading on the future. 
This budget does do a great deal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a great 
deal of off-loading. 
 
The budget off-loads increased costs onto students as the 
University of Saskatchewan is predicting an increase in tuition 
after this budget came down. 
 
It off-loads onto property owners and taxpayers as many rural 
and urban municipalities and many school boards are predicting 
the need to increase their mill rates just to make ends meet in 
this coming year. 
 
And this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, off-loads onto the health 
districts, who will now be forced to make some very difficult 
decisions regarding health services in their areas. The budget 
does provide for more equipment, but what happens when we 
don’t have the people in place to operate that equipment? How 
are the health districts going to come up with the money to find 
those people to operate that equipment? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are tired. They are 
very, very tired of having costs off-loaded onto them. And it is 
time for a change. 
 
Some good news that did come out of the budget was the fact 
that this NDP government will finally be moving to using 
summary financial statements in the year 2004-2005, something 
that the opposition on this side of the House and the Provincial 
Auditor have been calling for for years. However it is 
interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this NDP 
government is moving in this direction only because they are 
forced to because the accounting professional bodies will soon 
require it. 
 
As in many other cases such as SPUDCO, (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company) GMO (genetically 
modified organisms) potatoes, etc., this NDP government will 
only tell us the truth when it is required of them. They will only 
do the right thing when it is required of them. It’s very typical, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I will say that I will definitely be voting for the 
amendment and not for the original motion put forward by the 
government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and . . . or, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess would be more appropriate, but 
you look so distinguished sitting there. 
 
At any rate I want to set the stage for my comments. By just 
going back for a minute and reflecting on the platform that was 
set in the Throne Speech: “A Vision. A Plan. A Future Wide 
Open.” Now there was basically five pillars to that plan, Mr. 
Speaker — expansion of the economy; protecting medicare; 
opening doors to the future in education and training; a 
sustainable future, which speaks to environmental protection; 
secure families and vibrant communities, which speaks to 
innovation and creativity. And my own pillar that underlies all 
of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is credibility. And I’m going to 
address the issue of credibility several times in my comments 
today. 
 
You know, one of the unfortunate reasons why we tend to 
repeat history is because often people who are involved in 
decision making have not been around when the original history 
was created. And for the young people who may be listening 
today, I do want to just lay out one small bit of figures because 
we have the members of the opposition creating a great fuss 
over some fairly small additions to debt this year related to the 
Crop Insurance Fund and forest fires. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that on the 15 billion debt that 
was left behind by that government when they were in power, 
we are still paying 650 million a year in interest payments on 
the debt — 650 million a year. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, that would be enough to make tuition 
free at the universities over and over and over and over . . . and 
possibly one more over again. And so I just want to say if 
people have any doubt about what history can do, we still have 
a burden of 650 million every year that our budget starts with, 
that we have absolutely no choice about. It’s interest on the 
debt. 
 
And I just want to as well say, Mr. Speaker, that I want to give 
some kudos to the former minister of Finance, the member from 
Saskatoon Mount Royal. And I noticed Bruce Johnstone has 
some very complimentary things to say. It says: 
 

Previous budgets by the former minister were logical, 
measured . . . built on conservative assumptions. 
 
His four-year plan to reduce personal income taxes was 
carefully laid out, with offsetting increases in other taxes. 
 
(And the) . . . goal was to get most Saskatchewan taxpayers 
within spitting distance of Alberta’s personal income tax 
rates, without bankrupting the personal treasury (of the 
province, the provincial treasury.) 

 
And this year of course is the culmination of that grand plan, 
with the last step in the income tax cut but also the inflation 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

 

indexing of tax brackets so that people won’t be subject to 
income tax bracket creep which they were before. And certainly 
we have the past minister of Finance who helped lead us 
through that fairly substantial tax reform. 
 
But I just want to as well mention some quotes because, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the things that’s so important is that plans are 
sustainable. And for the record I just want to mention some of 
the quotes of how people feel we’ve managed the finances. 
 
And this is speaking to the credibility issue again of whether the 
members opposite in the Sask Party or ourselves are more 
credible when it comes to financial planning or any kind of 
planning from that point of view. 
 
Here’s just a few quotes: 
 

Saskatchewan has done a great job over the last few years 
in getting its fiscal house in order. 

 
That’s David Rubinoff from Moody’s Investors. 
 

. . . the government’s financial condition has been 
improving considerably over the last many years. 

 
That was last year’s report by auditor, Fred Wendel. 
 

Saskatchewan . . . (ranks) second on debt and deficit, third 
in taxation (in the whole of the country). 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was the Regina Leader-Post. 
 

We have to recognize that we have . . . a very good 
foundation . . . We’ve lowered our taxes . . . lowered . . . 
debt . . . These are . . . good foundations . . . 

 
This is Nola Joorisity, the Saskatchewan Institute of Chartered 
Accountants. 

 
(And) Over the long term, the NDP has performed well 
since taking over the reins from Grant Devine’s Progressive 
Conservatives in 1991. It has managed to reduce . . . public 
debt . . . (reduce) debt-to-GDP ratio . . . (and as well has 
done much increased spending in badly needed areas.) 

 
So I just cite those examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they 
speak to the strong base of planning, the strong base of acting 
on the plans, and then the very strong results emerging from 
those plans. And I think that’s important, to understand that we 
always work systematically on the base of a prudent and 
sustainable plan. 
 
Now I have to kind of wonder where the members opposite 
would be if they had control of the purse strings. 
 
Two years ago they howled because we weren’t taking the 
budgeted dividend from CIC. When we do take the dividend, 
they howl. Two years ago they howled because they thought we 
were sitting on a fortune in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And 
they howl when we spend it. They howled when there was no 
money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, and then they howl 
when we use it. And when the credit rating was improved and 
the debt went down, they accused us of bragging about it. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very hard group to satisfy. I think when 
you really get right down to it they’re upset because we’ve 
improved our credit rating, lowered debt, grown a record 
number of jobs in a very difficult period of time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
You know, based on where we were just a few months ago, I 
would have never thought that the budget that we announced 
recently was possible. We had such dire circumstances with the 
drought, with the forest fires, with the huge drawdown on the 
crop insurance fund by farmers — 500 million more than 
predicted. But the fact of the matter was the economy is 
fundamentally strong underneath those temporary and cyclical 
problems. 
 
And I couldn’t have been more pleased when I opened the 
Leader-Post and saw the headline coverage for this budget: 
“No-pain budget sets stage for election.” You know, I thought 
five months ago that we were going to have to deliver a lot of 
pain in this budget but because there was a lot of recovery in the 
economy certainly we were able to make a plan and we were 
able to deliver on that plan. 
 
And I’ll just mention that I think one would have to say that no 
shoe dropped when people heard what we were planning to 
spend. We had large increases in health care: 184 million in 
new spending including the 80 million from the federal 
government that we more than matched; 19 million for medical 
equipment; 27 million to fix up medical facilities; 74 million to 
support collective agreements. We all know how important 
competitive wages are in this area. 
 
In education: 76 million in capital improvements for schools 
and post-secondary institutions; 12 million for on-line learning; 
student loan exemptions increased. 
 
In infrastructure: 296 million to fix roads and build new 
highways; 10 million increase to revenue sharing, building on 
the 10 from last year and 10 coming next year. 
 
No new taxes, no health care premiums, continuing the income 
tax reform. 
 
And in addition to that, small-business corporation income tax 
lowered to 5.5 and going down to 5 per cent next year. I 
remember when it was 9 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the corporate capital tax exemption to grow to 20 million 
from 15 million. And this is important, Mr. Speaker, because 
we very much believe that it’s necessary to keep having large 
enterprises invest in Saskatchewan, locate in Saskatchewan. 
And we have found through the varied, measured approach the 
effect it has on the business community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when we take this approach is they say, well there’s a group of 
people who know what we need. They may not in fact be able 
to do it all in one year but we understand that. The important 
thing for us is that they’re moving in the right direction. And I 
have to say that every year we’ve had an endorsement from 
these large enterprises that we in fact are moving in the right 
direction. 
 
But the part I want to focus on right now, Mr. Speaker, this is 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

the other headline I really liked in the paper: “The government 
dares to care.” And I know you care . . . Oh I can’t involve you 
in debate. I apologize, Mr. Speaker. But he does care, I know he 
does. And certainly the increase in child care spaces was I think 
— in the midst of all the important announcements — I think it 
was one of the very best announcements in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And you know, Mr. Speaker, if you had 
been with us at the daycare opening and seen the daycare 
workers, the children, it was just so clear that this was an 
important announcement. 
 
You may know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that my daughter died a 
few years ago and one of the things she used to pester me about 
all the time is the daycare subsidies. Well I was so pleased 
yesterday — it was yesterday or the day before, it was a couple 
of days ago now; Thursday, boy it’s been a busy time — 
anyway, I was so pleased when this happened because it was 
like the fulfillment of something that she had asked for again 
and again, to raise the child care subsidies. 
 
And I think this is a real milestone for this government. And I 
also want to give credit, Mr. Speaker, to the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana because she’s also, as well as all the other 
members here, been a very strong advocate in this area. 
 
I’m not going to say much more in that area. We’ve got the 
Kids First program, the housing, considerable more in social 
housing which we all know how important that is to families — 
another 400 units this year. 
 
But I want to mention the North. You may know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I spent several years — about 12 years of my life 
— living in northern Saskatchewan and that was a good thing to 
do. I urge any young people here to spend some time working 
in different parts of the province. It’s good to work in northern 
Saskatchewan and find out that there’s a part of Saskatchewan 
where there’s a whole different world. It’s culturally different, 
it’s physically different, environmentally different, and it’s just 
a very exciting place still to be because it’s still a bit of a 
frontier, which is not always an easy thing to find these days 
with such a developed world. 
 
But I understand that the Leader of the Opposition was critical 
of our spending in the North. Now I find that hard to believe 
given that some of the poorest people live there in the midst of 
some of the richest resource development. 
 
But I have a good memory, Mr. Deputy Speaker — these folks 
have never wanted development in the North. They figure, out 
of sight, out of mind. And there’s no principle that drives them 
to feel that people who have a great deal of resource 
development happening in their backyard should get a share of 
the benefits from that wealth that’s created there. 
 
And I’m very pleased this year when we announced 27.1 
million in new initiatives for the North, especially that 
long-awaited hospital in Ile-a-la-Crosse, because there’s no 
question that the member for Athabasca has . . . I don’t think 
there’s a year I can remember since he was elected that he 
hasn’t talked about the need to have a good base of hospitals in 

place in the North. And I think with the Ile-a-la-Crosse hospital, 
that’ll complete the four-hospital plan for northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As well, the huge importance there of vibrant communities and 
healthy and self-reliant families. I know there’s an increase in 
northern nursing spaces and I’ll just have to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the North is half the land mass of the province and 
it is the area where we’ve got the fastest growing population. So 
it’s very important that we pay attention to that area even 
though a lot of us don’t see it very often. 
 
I want to briefly mention as well the effect of government on 
women and girls. You know, I was asked to speak by the 
university the other day about whether women have an impact 
when they’re in politics. And they had a number of questions 
they gave us. So I thought about, well what difference has it 
made that I’m elected? I mean I know it improves my ability to 
participate in a discussion, but what difference has it made? 
And I got thinking about that. 
 
Well, over time, myself and other women in this caucus and 
women in our party and women in the community, there’s been 
the pay equity that’s been implemented right across the public 
sector. This has been millions of dollars in equalizing wages for 
women, but for other workers as well, because we took a 
gender-neutral approach to pay equity. And so people’s jobs 
were re-evaluated and I think 80 per cent of people received pay 
adjustments as a result of that. 
 
Women in leadership roles, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We had many 
of the firsts in Canada of women ministers in Finance, in 
Highways, in health care, in Education, in Municipal 
Government. We had many, many in Aboriginal Affairs. I 
might have been the first woman minister of Aboriginal Affairs, 
I think. But at any rate, we did a great deal to increase the 
representation of women at the management levels of 
government and to create policies that are sensitive to women. 
 
I think about the income supplement that the department of 
human resources and employment has. It helps to bridge people 
from dependency into work by an income supplement, making 
sure people have their health care benefits, support for child 
care. These programs are very important to women because a 
lot of people who end up being the sole support of their families 
are women. And there’s a percentage of men who are single 
parents as well and those would certainly benefit them as well. 
 
When it comes to the issue of student loans, the recognition of 
child care not as an education expense but as a family expense, 
that was very important. 
 
Women in politics . . . I know that when I was minister 
responsible for the Women’s Secretariat, I actually travelled 
around the province and talked to treaty women’s and 
Aboriginal women’s groups about the role of women in politics. 
And based on that they actually established a women’s 
secretariat in the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations so 
they could advocate for policies within their own organization. 
 
So these are all important impacts. And certainly the income tax 
changes, I think we have the strongest family tax benefit for 
families with children of anywhere in Canada. And because 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

 

women typically are lower income earners, the fact of the 
matter is, is that the steps we took to take 55,000 low-income 
families off the tax rolls has no doubt benefited a lot of women 
as well. 
 
So I just wanted to get those things on the record, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, just to confirm that it is important for women to be 
elected and that in the decision making, program design, and 
policies in government we do make a difference in making sure 
that policies are sensitive to all the people in the province, male 
and female. And certainly it’s possible to build on that concept 
of diversity. 
 
I just want to read an affirmation because of course in the 
women’s area it’s important to families, but it’s also a lot of the 
women in leadership and child care are women. And I just want 
to read a quote that came from Lois Grylls, the Co-Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Early Child Care Directors Association. It’s just 
a brief e-mail to the minister, reading: 
 

On behalf of all the early childcare directors in Sask. I 
would personally like to thank you for addressing childcare 
in the budget that is being released . . . I have received a 
copy of the news release . . . and I’m celebrating what your 
gov’t is doing for the children of Sask. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, she affirms: 
 

Your gov’t has dared to care. 
 

And I think that is very important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I want to mention as well, Mr. Speaker, 
that the budget was positive for working families. This is a 
press release from the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour: 
 

. . . substantial increases . . . in health care, education, and 
municipal governments. 
 

The SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) praised the 
emphasis on youth and women, and as well noted that the new 
money in health will reduce waiting lists for surgery, provide 
more daycare spaces, maintain school classes at a reasonable 
size, keep property taxes down, which are all important to wage 
earners and their family. And I think it was very important to 
see that they support the economic blueprint of the province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I see that I will not have much time left and 
I’ve got all these good things left to say. I may have to pass 
some of them along to someone else. 
 
I’m just going to mention that for the Department of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, Mr. Speaker, $20 million over the next 
three years added for four purposes. One is to create more 
physical fitness opportunities for young people and their 
families in Saskatchewan. Another one is to increase the 
participation of Aboriginal people and other diversity groups in 
the cultural and recreation offerings of the province. There will 
be money to support centennial infrastructure improvements. 
And I think that we just have a very good package there that is 
going to be very beneficial to the 12,000 community groups that 

are out there working on this kind of stuff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the volunteer sector, as is pointed out, is a very 
important part of our community. And our goal is to make sure 
that as all us older people move out of that area, that a lot of 
young people come in and take over that work. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have time for this, but what I 
have here is six pages of tax cuts that have taken place since 
1995. Every single one of these represents an initiative that 
helped to grow this economy. So when the members opposite 
talk about growing the economy and tax cuts, well you’d think 
they invented the idea. But here’s six pages of tax cuts that 
happened since we were government. 
 
And because of those tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, for a single male 
adult — I’ll give you these examples — making 25,000, for a 
family earning 50,000, or for a family earning 75,000, we have 
the lowest overall combined taxes and charges for all 10 cities 
in all categories in Canada. So that’s very good. 
 
And you’ve heard about the budget reform, that we will be 
going to summary financial statements. Hardly a year has gone 
by, Mr. Speaker, when we haven’t improved the accountability 
of the province’s finances in a steady and progressive way with 
working with the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And you know, I’ll just sort of close on this comment, Mr. 
Speaker. What I find particularly passing strange in the 
opposition’s criticism of this budget is, what did they object to 
most? They objected to the fact that we predicted the economy 
would grow by 6.5 per cent. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Now I could swear that this is the same party that’s been out all 
over Saskatchewan speaking to overflow crowds of 12 at each 
occasion about their Grow Saskatchewan plan. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, how can you be arguing you have a Grow 
Saskatchewan plan when in fact you’re upset that we’re saying 
the economy is going to grow. Which is it? Do they believe the 
economy is going to grow or do they believe it’s not going to 
grow? 
 
Well I tell you, if they want to grow the economy, they’re going 
to have to bring it to a halt first because the economy is cooking 
right along on all cylinders here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And so I don’t think we have to worry 
about that. What we have, Mr. Speaker, is many examples of 
articles, people coming back to Saskatchewan, ex-pats being 
lured back to the province. 
 
I’m going to close, Mr. Speaker, by just reviewing the planks in 
the budget: healthy and self-reliant families, opportunities for 
youth, a modern and competitive infrastructure, a prosperous 
and competitive economy, strong and vibrant communities. 
 
I’m pleased to support this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 
although I will be speaking against the amendment and voting 
against the amendment. But the fact is if you’re willing to 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

dream big, plan well, and work hard, it’s all here for you in 
Saskatchewan — a plan, a vision, and a future wide open. 
 
And with that, I indicate my support for the speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to enter into the debate of the 2003-2004 budget. Once 
again . . . this will be the fourth time that I’ve entered into the 
debate on a budget speech and it’s amazing each time how 
quickly a year goes by. 
 
And we keep expecting so much every year. It’s kind of like 
Christmas. You’re expecting and expecting and you can’t 
hardly wait for that budget speech, and it’s like getting the gift 
that you never wanted because it’s really not there. You unwrap 
it and once you look through the document, there just isn’t a 
whole lot there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m going to talk an awful lot about the different 
organizations that have spoke out regarding the budget, the 
different organizations such as SUMA and SARM and the 
school trustees and APAS and SUN and I can go on and on. 
And I’ll just mention right into the record what a number of 
these organizations have said about the budget. 
 
It’s always interesting when people talk of the budget and you 
hear the members on that side of the House just talk about the 
wonderful things that they’re doing in the budget, all the 
wonderful spending that they’re putting forward. 
 
And then you talk to the people that should be so happy about 
it, and you talk to them and not . . . I haven’t found any of them 
so far, although the Minister of Finance, I think, was talking 
about he found one mayor in the province so far that has said it 
might be all right. And they’re taking that and they’re using that 
as evidence that they’ve had a very successful budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I’ll be talking about the organization SUMA and different 
mayors such as the mayor of Saskatoon, the mayor of Regina, 
and what they feel this budget brings to their city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the critic, when the member from 
Canora-Pelly talked about the budget he really . . . On Friday he 
talked about whether it was a fiction or fact. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, since the budget on Friday . . . and I’ve been 
around my constituency. I was able to go to a fundraising event 
in Edenwold on Friday night, or Saturday night, and I had the 
opportunity to attend a dinner theatre in Milestone last night. 
And not that I talked to every person at the fundraiser, every 
person at the dinner theatre, but the people that I did talk to 
were unanimous in the fact that . . . They’d say what did you 
think of the budget? And I said well what do you think of 6.8 
per cent growth rate in this province? Is it doable? Is it realize 
. . . Will we realize that? And to a person they said no, we were 
negative growth last year. 
 
And you know when you listen to the members on that side of 
the House, the government members talk about . . . We’ve 
talked about growing the province by 100,000 people over the 

next 10 years. And I believe it was the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains said that those numbers are just . . . you just 
cannot reach those numbers, they’re unattainable. Well if 1 per 
cent per year is unattainable, how in the world are you going to 
get to 6.8 per cent in one year, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And it was interesting when the last person speaking was 
talking about how the growth rate is . . . There’s no problem 
reaching 6.4 per cent, I think she said — or I’ll have to check 
Hansard — I think she said there’s no problem reaching 6.5 per 
cent. The only problem is, is in the budget they’re saying 6.8 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. They can’t even get the numbers right on 
that side of the House. 
 
So definitely there are some problems. There are some 
concerns. When you look at the minister from . . . or the 
member from Riversdale, Saskatoon Riversdale, the Premier 
that hasn’t run as Premier in this province, and you look at his 
record over the last three years or so and you look at how much 
he has spent in this province, he’s a million dollar man. A 
million dollar man working out so that he is spending $1 
million a day in the length of time that he has been Premier. 
 
And is that sustainable? Is that sustainable in this province? It’s 
not sustainable in this province. It’s $1 million in the hall . . . in 
the hole every day that this man is in the chair of the Premier’s, 
the member from Riversdale. 
 
And I think maybe that’s one reason why, when I go out and I 
am talking to constituents around Indian Head-Milestone, over 
and over and over again they say, when is the next election? We 
can no longer afford the member from Riversdale running the 
province, so we have to get to a provincial election. 
 
And unfortunately once again, when we are looking at this 
budget, a lot of people think, will this be the set-up budget for 
the next coming election? People thought that they may be 
calling the election on Monday — today. It may be on 
Thursday. A lot of people are anticipating that. 
 
But I really don’t feel that they’re going to be able to run on a 
budget when you go through organization after organization 
that has panned this budget. The budget that is fiction. But still, 
when you talk to as many organizations as we’ve talked to — 
that have talked to in the rotunda after the release of the budget 
— I can’t believe as many organizations could be that 
disappointed over the same document. 
 
So what I’d like to do is just talk a little bit about what some of 
the different organizations, third-party organizations, have said 
about the budget. 
 
Mike Badham, the president of SUMA, talks about the budget 
and he says: 
 

And two words come to mind. One I think it is insulting 
and the other . . . is unfair. 

 
SUMA is calling this budget insulting and unfair. Insulting to 
property tax payers, that they have been taking the hit over the 
last 10 years or 15 years. Every year we see our property taxes 
go up and a large portion . . . I can speak as a landowner not 
only in the city of Regina but also in the RM of Lajord where 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

 

my property tax bill is increasing yearly. 
 
The mayor of Regina has done a very good job in holding the 
line. He’s held the line and held the line and held the line, 
expecting this provincial government to step up to the plate 
after cutting and hacking and slashing 10 years ago. And most 
city mayors will say, that’s what needed to be done back then. 
But we took the hit 10 years ago; it’s about time now that we 
start getting paid back. 
 
And certainly the mayors — SUMA, that organization that 
represents all urban municipalities — some of the large city 
mayors don’t feel that this budget even comes close to 
impacting what they need to hold the tax line. 
 
As I said, from my perspective between whether it’s urban 
municipality and property tax on my property on the house in 
Regina here or property tax on the farm land that I have in the 
RM of Lajord, it keeps increasing and increasing. And it’s the 
education portion of that property tax that we’re talking about. 
 
Over and over again a number of years ago we went through the 
whole issue of tax revolts in the area that I represent and I’d be 
certainly suggesting that you may be seeing some of those 
again, because people cannot stand the education portion that 
they’re having to pay on property tax. When you look at it, it 
has no relationship to productivity. 
 
We’re very fortunate in the Southeast, the constituency that I 
represent — Indian Head-Milestone — and on further down in 
the Southeast, that we had enough moisture, that we had a 
pretty darn good crop, the prices haven’t been too bad, and so 
the property tax isn’t as big of an issue because we’ve been able 
to make some money. We’ve been able to make some money 
on the farm and so you can put that into the property tax. It’s 
not near the hit. 
 
But can you imagine on the west side, on the northwest side of 
the province where they’ve been through drought over two 
years at least, and in some cases three and four years, and at the 
same time their property tax portion — the education portion of 
their property tax — keeps increasing. That’s what I talk about 
property tax and the education portion has no bearing 
whatsoever on the ability to pay. And as income keeps diving, 
property tax and education portion keeps going up. 
 
I guess the nice part for the government is that part of the 
province, in our area, we were able to come off with a decent 
crop, and even though our education portion keeps increasing, 
we’ve been able to cover that; we’ve been able to keep enough 
of a margin and cover that increase because our crops were 
sufficient. But that’s . . . the whole point is that property tax and 
the education portion of property tax has no bearing whatsoever 
on your ability to pay. And that is a very, very antiquated 
system. 
 
It was interesting being at the SARM convention, SUMA 
convention and . . . the SARM convention where I think if you 
talk to the delegates and what’s one of the most important 
issues? It’s the property tax, the education portion of property 
tax issue. It comes up over and over and over again. 
 
And I know at the most recent SUMA convention, delegates left 

there saying, I think we’re going to see this government actually 
do something in this next budget. I found most members that I 
talked to were expecting something to happen on the education 
portion of the property tax, that this government was going to 
act on it. 
 
Now I guess acting on it for this NDP government means 
setting up another review commission such as the Fyke or 
whatever else, and we’ll go out and we’ll study it for another 
three years or four years and then we’ll report back. This is 
exactly what this government does over and over and over 
again. When they know there’s a huge problem they say, well 
let’s hire a person. He’ll go out and study it, and hopefully in 
two or three years the pain will pass and we won’t have really 
acted on it. I guess their action is a study, but that’s how they 
act on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another person that talks about the budget and talked about the 
budget on Friday was Rosalee Longmoore, the president of 
SUN, and this is what she had to say about it. She said: 
 

We did not see anything though that is going to deal with 
the fundamental nursing shortage. 
 

And I think that’s extremely important, the fundamental nursing 
shortage. 
 
And those things are the working environment where people 
have excruciating workloads; they’re working with equipment 
that is unsafe and not adequate equipment. We are hearing . . . 
we didn’t hear anything to increase nursing seats, and we didn’t 
hear anything promoting new graduate full-time jobs in this 
province. That’s what the head of SUN, Rosalee Longmoore 
had to say about this past provincial budget. 
 
It’s certainly not new to us. We’ve been hearing our Health 
critic talk for the last two or three years, the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale talking about the absolute importance of 
increasing nursing seats throughout the province through the 
universities so we increase . . . so we can address the nursing 
shortage throughout the province. 
 
I can certainly relate to what Ms. Longmoore is saying about 
the nursing shortage and the absolutely excruciating workload 
that some of the RN’s (registered nurse) are facing, in our city 
hospitals especially. And the reason I can say I can relate to that 
is because Cindy, my wife, is a registered nurse in the operating 
room here at the Regina General Hospital. And it is continual 
. . . continually a problem finding enough staff to keep the 
operating rooms functioning to full efficiency. 
 
So when we see nursing or we see operating waiting lists 
increasing, it’s a direct relationship, I believe, to the nursing 
shortage that we have in this province. We’ve talked about it on 
this side of the House. The president of SUN, Rosalee 
Longmoore, has mentioned it that we need to increase the . . . 
The fundamental problem in health care is the shortage of 
nurses and we need to address that. Unfortunately, this budget, 
which isn’t balanced, didn’t quite get there. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about what the school trustees had to 
say and John Nikolejsin, who is the president of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. His whole concern 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

was, is that the increase in education — and there was an 
increase in education — will go to addressing the teachers’ 
contract but that’s about it. It doesn’t address many, many other 
issues around the education problem, I guess if I could say such 
as capital funding and so many other things. 
 
It talks about addressing the teachers’ contract and that’s about 
it. So if the schools want to implement SchoolPLUS or anything 
else, you’re going to see education portions increasing, Mr. 
Speaker. And I will bet — the Minister of Learning is hollering 
from her seat — I would bet that school divisions throughout 
this province are going to have to increase their mill rate and 
that is going to go directly on the property taxpayers of this 
province because that minister hasn’t fought hard enough to get 
enough funding in this budget to cover the cost of education in 
this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — There is a number of other people that have 
talked about, talked about different areas of the budget that 
they’re affected by. They’re affected . . . You know, when I 
think of Terry Hildebrandt from APAS (Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan) and what Terry Hildebrandt had 
to say, here it . . . Terry Hildebrandt had to say, and I have to 
watch how I pronounce this: 
 

I’m past mad and frustrated. I was expecting at least to 
bring . . . (this) budget (to bring us) back to where we were 
last year, not to lose. (We are very) . . . very concerned.  
 

That’s what the head of APAS had to say — he’s past mad. 
And I can believe it. We see a $40 million reduction in 
agriculture after two terrible years. 
 
We know that the minister, usually after each question when he 
answers in the House, he says there is only one party that knows 
how to speak for agriculture, there’s only one party that 
understands agriculture. The only problem is he’s probably 
right, but he’s looking at himself and that’s where he goes 
wrong. 
 
I would like to know how many seats that this NDP government 
have that represent a fully . . . a constituency that is fully 
dependent on agriculture. The Minister of Agriculture says, 
well I’m from rural Saskatchewan. He’s from Yorkton. It has a 
rural component, which is getting less and less under 
redistribution. We have the member from Meadow Lake, who 
has some agriculture in his constituency. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Agriculture seriously 
stands in this House and says it’s only that side of the House 
that understand agriculture when there are 25 MLAs (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly) currently, soon to be 26, when . . . 
after Carrot River Valley is . . . goes through the by-election 
eventually, there’ll be 26 MLAs that represent constituencies 
that are fully impacted by agriculture. 
 
So when the Minister of Agriculture says there’s only one side 
of the House that understands agriculture, I’d sorely disagree 
with him because certainly he’s quite off base. 

There are many other organizations — SARM talked about the 
budget — many other organizations that have talked about the 
budget and have been very, very disappointed in what has been 
put forward. 
 
The one thing that I can say that I would agree with on the 
budget . . . And every time in the four years that I’ve stood up 
and spoke towards the budget, I have always found some things 
that I can agree with. They may be small, but I’m going to come 
up with a couple of more issues that I can agree with. Pretty 
small. 
 
I like what the last . . . the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation had mentioned about putting more emphasis on 
physical fitness. I think that’s a great idea. I mean it really does 
in the long term help the health of the province which, to coin a 
phrase that started many, many years ago, the wellness model, 
but that was the whole point of it is to have healthier citizens in 
our province so they’re not so reliant on the health care system. 
I would say that would be a good move. 
 
They talked about the small-business tax and they really made a 
gigantic leap in the small-business tax. They went from 6 per 
cent to 5.5 per cent. They dropped the small-business tax by 
point five per cent — point five per cent. Now we talk about tax 
cuts because we’re talking about growing the province and 
increasing the population, attracting more business and more 
people into the province. But believe me, a point five per cent 
cut in the small-business tax isn’t going to draw too much 
attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they wanted to really do something in this 
budget, they could have instead of just taking something from 
our campaign about a small-business tax and then dropping it 
point five per cent, to doing what we are talking about doing 
and eliminating the small-business tax because that’s what 
businesses will look at and that’s why small business will 
increase in this province. Not point five per cent. And the 
member from Regina South realizes that a tax cut will increase 
revenue in the long run. But a tax cut of point five per cent is so 
minimal that will it really draw small business, saying, oh now, 
they’ve dropped it point five per cent, I think we better establish 
in Saskatchewan? I don’t think so. 
 
The one issue that I do want to talk about real briefly here, 
because I believe my time is up, is that they talk about the 
summary financial statements. They talk about financial 
summary statements. And for years and years and years, as long 
as I have been in this House, our member from Canora-Pelly, 
our critic of . . . our Finance critic has talked about over and 
over and over again that we need to go to summary financial 
statements. The auditor has talked about that. We’ve talked 
about it. But I guess what it takes is four years of hammering 
this government for it to finally sink in. But they’re thinking 
maybe we’ll do it next year; we’ll do it next year. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee that there will be summary 
financial statements brought into Saskatchewan next year, but it 
won’t be by a NDP government because between now and then 
there’ll be a provincial election and people will tell this 
government that we are sick . . . you’re tired, you’re out of ideas 
and it’s time to bring in a new government, a Saskatchewan 
Party government, that will bring in, among a whole lot of other 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

 

things, summary financial statements so people in this province 
can get a true picture of where we stand in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment to the motion. 
I won’t be supporting the motion. I will be supporting the 
amendment to the budget, and particularly supporting the part 
of the amendment that talks about a resignation of this Finance 
minister for the leaks of the budget and for a budget that is pure 
fiction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to enter into this debate today and I am very 
pleased to have an opportunity to speak after the member for 
. . . the previous member, the Deputy House Leader for the 
opposition. 
 
I want to start my comments by saying this. Having listened to 
the speech that the member opposite gave, listening to the, I 
think, rather unfortunate motion moved by the Finance critic, I 
think that it is fair for us to say that these folks on the benches 
opposite are certainly not very far from where their predecessor 
party left off. That party left this province fiscally bankrupt, and 
I dare say that the members opposite are as intellectually 
bankrupt in terms of ideas, in terms of new vision, in terms of a 
plan on how to move this province forward. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan deserve better than the Sask Party, 
the sanctimony of the Sask Party opposite. They deserve much 
better than that and fortunately there’s a New Democratic Party 
government here that has new ideas and new direction, and a 
plan that’s going to help Saskatchewan grow. 
 
As I’ve been listening to the debate over the last couple of days, 
listening to the questions that have been raised by members in 
this House, I think it’s very interesting as we think about who 
this Assembly is here to serve, who the government is here to 
serve, and who we are here to represent. 
 
This argument put forward about supposedly leaks in the 
budget, let’s remember here that this budget and this legislature 
is not a country club. This is not the private domain of the 58 of 
us. It’s our duty to make sure that we are presenting the plans 
that speak to our constituents. It is that relationship between us 
and our constituents that needs to be honoured; it’s not some 
great, sacred relationship that we hold to each other. This is a 
relationship we need to maintain with the public and that’s why 
I think it’s very selfish and short-sighted of the opposition to 
say, oh heaven forbid that the public would find something out 
before we find it out as legislators. And I think it’s time that we 
start thinking about that. 
 
This whole issue I think speaks a great deal to the relationship 
that we need to fix in this Assembly and that we’ll be talking 
about over the next several days in terms of how we are going 
to move forward with opening this Assembly up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that as we listen to the criticisms that are 
launched by the members opposite, it too speaks to where the 
different parties come from. If you listen to what the members 
opposite do, they run through the list and I would say that it’s 

definitely a selective reading of what comments have been 
made by stakeholder groups and lobbyists on this budget. But I 
notice there’s one thing that they don’t comment on and that is 
what real people are thinking about this budget. 
 
They don’t talk about the things that people were saying over 
the weekend that I had an opportunity to visit with and who had 
heard about the budget for the most part on TV or radio — 
some saw a comment in the paper — but weren’t paid to worry 
about these, these special interests. And you know what they 
said is that on balance this was a pretty good budget. 
 
There were no tax, no tax increases. In fact we continued with 
our plan of tax cuts. There was new money, federal and 
provincial, for health care. There was new support programs in 
the area of daycare. There was support for students. 
 
This was a budget that on balance spoke to the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. It may not have appeased every 
stakeholder group. It may not have appeased every lobbyist in 
this province. But I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, for the folks 
that I represent — ordinary constituents, ordinary Saskatchewan 
taxpayers — this was a good budget. 
 
I think it’s important that as we take a look at this and certainly 
the debate that’s going to happen over the next few days about 
the money for municipalities, I do find it passing strange that 
we have municipalities coming together to complain that 
money, they are receiving new money to help subsidize their 
operations, that money we had to find in order to move to there 
from other places. 
 
Members opposite like to cherry-pick. And I think what they 
need to understand is that these are tough choices. We made 
municipal financing a priority. We helped move it up — $60 
million over three years in new money is a lot of new money, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think about that as to, and the choice comes down to, 
where money goes — whether it should just go to 
municipalities or whether it should go to urban municipalities or 
the cities only, should it work on the existing revenue-sharing 
formula — we need to understand that that’s very much what 
the debate is. 
 
This debate is not about new monies going to municipalities. 
This debate is about some of the city representatives — I 
represent a city riding — some of the city representatives 
saying that they thought the money should have gone solely to 
them. 
 
Now how does that get justified to the president of SARM? 
How does that get justified to the president of SARM? That’s 
not the way the system works. And I think that this is what we 
need to understand. 
 
It’s all fine and fair for the members opposite to now pretend 
they’re the friends of the city, but are they saying that they 
support SUMA’s position that the revenue-sharing formula 
should be changed to benefit the cities? Because I don’t think 
they’ll change the dynamic in their ridings. I don’t think that 
that’s in fact what people are saying in their constituencies. 
 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

We’re certainly willing to put more money in and we’ve done 
that — 60 million over three years is a significant impact. But 
this budget speaks not only to the mayors of Saskatchewan, this 
speaks to the mothers of this province who are seeking more 
daycare spaces. 
 
And when we go forward to try and balance out those priorities, 
that’s what we look at. Yes, the municipalities have a big role to 
play but, you know, it’s just as important that we make sure 
we’ve got the child care spaces in place, and that money’s got 
to come from somewhere too. 
 
I think for too long budgets get built in the federal government 
— and dare I say across the country in the provinces — that are 
simply designed to appease stakeholders and lobbyists who 
come to the budget and get in front of the TV cameras, and we 
forget to talk directly to the people who elect us. 
 
Those people are asking for us to put more money into daycare. 
They’re asking for us to put more money into health care. 
They’re asking for us to put more money into education. 
They’re asking for support in terms of job creation. They’re 
asking for us to make sure we keep the gas tax going towards 
the roads. They’re asking for a large number of things that I 
didn’t necessarily hear reflected on Friday by the lobbyists and 
the stakeholders. 
 
That’s not to say that they don’t have an argument. That’s not to 
say that we should exclude funding to them simply because 
they have a different set of issues. 
 
I’m saying that this is a budget that has to be balanced in more 
than something on the bottom line. This budget has to reflect 
balanced priorities of the government and of the people in this 
province. And that is what I think this particular budget does. 
 
We can’t simply continue to invest in municipal infrastructure. 
We can’t simply continue to invest in the physical infrastructure 
of the highways at the expense of the social infrastructure of 
this province. And I think we need to understand that. 
 
This government has a proud record of innovation and support 
for communities that go beyond the geographic boundaries. We 
have a strong record of support in terms of the SchoolPLUS 
program, in terms of the community schools program, in terms 
of rebuilding our communities. And that is something that I 
think, Mr. Speaker, all members should find some ability to 
unite around. 
 
We can argue whether the municipalities need more money or 
not, but in my view we can’t do that at the exclusion of making 
sure that the money that comes from taxpayers goes back to 
support the social fabric of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I worry a great deal as I listen to the members 
opposite speak in this Assembly about what would happen if 
they were ever to take control of the treasury. 
 
I worry about the divisions that would come in as they split 
between urban and rural, as they deal with splitting between the 
rich and the poor, as they split between business and labour. 
Those are the members opposite tugging at the social fabric. If 
they ever came back on to the treasury benches my fear is that 

they would tear it once and for all. This would be a terrible 
thing. They almost did it in 1991; it was very close to having 
divided the province between these areas. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Our budgets have tried to find balance. We’ve tried to balance 
the issues in rural and urban Saskatchewan, between 
generations. We’ve tried to balance them between competing 
interests, and I think we’ve been fairly successful. 
 
I’ve been particularly pleased, Mr. Speaker, that in the seven 
years — almost eight years now — that I’ve served in this 
legislature that as a result of the sound financial management of 
our government that we have in each of those years been able to 
reduce taxes. There has not been a single budget introduced in 
this House while I have been here that has required me to vote 
for increased taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We have consistently lowered it. And 
as a result, Mr. Speaker, I think we should all take great pride in 
the fact that today income tax rates in this province are at their 
lowest rate since 1976. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think that we should take great pride 
in the fact that taxes for an average, for an ordinary working 
family are 37 per cent lower than they were a decade ago. I 
think we should be pleased to be able to report to our 
constituents that we have worked in order to reduce the taxes 
paid by an average Saskatchewan family by over $1,000 in this 
term of government alone. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, did not happen because of some mystical 
arrangement that the member for Canora may think is how we 
do our budgeting. That happened because we had sound 
financial management, we invested appropriately in the 
economy, we had good planning, and we acted in a balanced 
and reasonable approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the benefit of that has been lower taxes, the 
benefit of that has been better health care, the benefit of that has 
been a reinvestment in our communities in education, and, Mr. 
Speaker, it has meant more jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This government has had 10 
consecutive balanced budgets. We have seen 10 credit rating 
upgrades and we have seen now 10 consecutive months of job 
growth. 
 
It is also worth noting that we have seen record employment 
levels in this province over the past year — we should note that 
— and record numbers of young people working. As we think 
about the employment force, I think all of us know that the way 
to grow the economy, the way to grow the population is to 
make sure we’ve got an economy that works, that creates jobs, 
that attracts people here. 
 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

 

The members opposite have a great slogan. It’s about as thin as 
a piece of paper, the single page that it is written on. And I 
think it’s unfortunate that they have not come forward with a 
more comprehensive plan. 
 
As I take a look at a budget here that supports the proposals that 
we put forward in the Partnership for Prosperity, that helps 
target sectoral growth in our economy, that has helped create 
jobs through a sound and reasonable tax structure . . . not just 
on personal income taxes but in every single year since 1992 we 
have been able to reduce the tax load on business. And I think 
the members opposite do a disservice to their constituents, they 
do a disservice to the business community of this province 
when they neglect that. I don’t know how they think jobs get 
created. I don’t know how they think that the economy moves 
forward. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this. We believe on this side 
that tax policy must be fair, it must be balanced, that everyone 
should benefit as we get the rewards of a stronger economy. 
And we should see that in each of the areas from personal 
income tax, corporate income tax. We’ve reduced sales tax. 
We’ve reduced the corporate capital tax. We have seen 
reductions in the corporate capital resource surcharge tax. I 
think it’s . . . If nothing else it’s just a . . . we’re shortening up 
what the names are. We have seen a tremendous approach to 
reducing the tax burden in this province. 
 
And I think back to the situation in 1995 when I first took my 
seat in this Assembly and the budget had just become balanced. 
And what we were able to see as a result of that work done by 
that government from ’91 to ’95 — that we have been able to 
build upon now as we reinvest in the economy, we reinvest in 
our social infrastructure, we reinvest in our communities — 
what we have been able to see, Mr. Speaker, is a balanced 
approach that has seen money being able to go towards tax 
reduction, money going to new, increased program spending. 
 
Now the members opposite are critical of the fact the debt will 
have increased some this year. I didn’t hear them being critical 
of the fact that we were paying out crop insurance payments. I 
didn’t hear any of the members suggest that, so we didn’t have 
to increase the debt, maybe we shouldn’t pay the farmers what 
was due to them. I didn’t hear them say, oh let the forests burn 
because we wouldn’t want to pay to . . . we wouldn’t want to 
pay off the forest fires. We wouldn’t want to hear the members 
opposite say we shouldn’t have given money to municipalities 
in disaster relief and assistance. We didn’t hear them say any of 
that. 
 
It’s very interesting that there was no suggestion on that side 
that any of these things that contributed to this increase in the 
debt, these extraordinary expenditures . . . And they really are 
extraordinary expenditures. It’s hard to budget for them. They 
have had an impact on the debt and certainly as we see the debt 
increase, that’s where it comes from. In good years we pay 
down the debt; in extraordinarily difficult years, as we had last 
year, the debt’s going to go up. 
 
I thought it was interesting to note that on crop insurance, up to 
last year, the single biggest payout in crop insurance was just 
over $400 million. Last year there was at one point a risk we 
were going to pay $1.2 billion out to farmers as a result of the 

bad crop. That was mitigated somewhat and came down to just 
over $1 billion. 
 
That money comes from somewhere, Mr. Speaker. It has to 
come from somewhere. Part of that money comes out of the 
provincial treasury. And I think the members opposite should 
recognize that there’s going to be an impact on debt as a result 
of that. To argue otherwise is, I think, is to be wilfully blind to 
the financial situation in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a budget that I think will be well 
received by ordinary Saskatchewan people. It’s one that — over 
the weekend I had an opportunity to talk to a number of 
constituents — that was well received by them. They appreciate 
the fact that we have been able to reduce taxes despite obvious 
increased demands on the provincial treasury. 
 
We understand . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear the 
member for North Battleford say the folks that he talks to aren’t 
cheering. Perhaps he needs to talk to somebody other than the 
Karwacki brothers once in a while, and that we would see a 
more positive outlook. 
 
I notice also that the member opposite wasn’t saying that 
perhaps we shouldn’t be making new investments in water 
infrastructure. There was no suggestion of that, and no 
suggestion that maybe we don’t need to invest as much in the 
highways, especially in bridges. I don’t hear that. 
 
It seems that the member opposite is suggesting, as members 
opposite tend to . . . the Sask Party and the Liberals equally 
spend willy-nilly on whatever the latest lobbyist has come to 
your door on and don’t worry about making sure all the bills 
add up in the end. 
 
That’s not how . . . That is not how we on this side manage the 
books of this province. That is why we have seen balanced 
budgets. That is why we have had the foresense of putting 
together the Fiscal Stabilization Fund so that we understand as 
we get sometimes windfall profits in our treasury, that we can 
set that aside for days when it’s not quite as, not quite as rosy. 
And that is what we ended up with last year. 
 
Any of us who travelled the province I think understand the 
impact of the debt . . . of the drought on the province. Certainly 
as we saw, it had a double whammy of not only hurting the 
agricultural sector but then obviously also impacting on the 
forest fire fighting season. 
 
And we have been able to mitigate that with the revenues that 
are available to us through things like the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, through being able to have a good credit rating, one that’s 
increased 10 times over the last 10 consecutive upgrades, that 
we have now ability to borrow. 
 
When our party took over government in 1991, this province 
was not just almost bankrupt; it pretty much was bankrupt. It 
had virtually no room left to borrow. It had an inability to pay 
its bills. And the result was that members on this side had to fix 
that issue. 
 
I can only imagine what would have happened if the 
government of the day had to face an opposition like they do 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

today. I can only imagine what would have happened if we’d 
had to go through the laundry list of demands that had to be 
satisfied immediately. We would not have been able to do it. 
Because in fact that was what got us in the trouble to start with 
was their predecessor party sitting in this legislature, spending 
$1.25 for every dollar they took in —$1.25 for every dollar they 
took in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting to read what the 
members opposite are saying. Now the member, one member 
opposite who just spoke before me, they say what they need to 
do is we needed to cut the small-business tax, eliminate it 
completely, $60 million a year — not one-time funding — $60 
million a year in reduction. Now he argues that you’ll get that 
back through increases in what? Increases in what? They say, 
well you’ll get more businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that the members opposite don’t have a 
plan, that they have a plan that does not add up. They do not 
have a plan that makes financial sense. And I fear that what 
they have done as they prepare for this next election is to tear a 
page out of Grant Devine’s fiscal cookbook and say that that is 
how they’re going to move forward — say one thing here in the 
Assembly, say another thing out there to the public. 
 
And all I can say to you, Mr. Speaker, is that we know what that 
recipe is. That is a recipe for disaster; it is a recipe for near 
bankruptcy. And we are not interested in that. That is not what 
this government believes in. We are going to continue on a path 
of tax reduction, of investment in health care, of investment in 
education, and investment in our communities. That’s what we 
believe in. 
 
Why? Because we’ve got a vision. We’ve got a plan. And we 
know that Saskatchewan’s future is not only wide open, but it’s 
well financed. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why I am supporting this budget and will 
vote against the motion proposed by the Finance critic opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a 
privilege to be able to rise and make a few comments on this 
budget that was presented. And I’m going to want to relate that 
to my constituency of Rosthern/Martensville constituency, as 
well as just some general comments as how they relate to 
different parts of the economy. 
 
The person that just spoke before me talked about a rural-urban 
split. Well let’s just do a little check on that. All we have to do 
is look over there and see what those people have created. 
They’ve created a situation where they find it almost 
impossible, impossible to elect anyone from rural 
Saskatchewan. They have done that purposely. 
 
You recall, Mr. Speaker . . . you recall, Mr. Speaker, two or 
three years ago they said they had built the economy of the 
province to an extent that what happened in agriculture didn’t 
matter any more — what happened in agriculture didn’t matter. 
Agriculture could go up, it could go down, it could fall on its 
face; the NDP could just run along and run this government in 
Saskatchewan without them. Well, Mr. Speaker, they found out 

in the last two years how totally wrong they are — how totally 
wrong they are. 
 
The previous speaker just stood up and begged forgiveness for 
the provincial debt going up because it’s the farm fault. That’s 
the same individual that stood up two years ago and said, we’ve 
diversified the economy to such an extent that what happens in 
rural Saskatchewan doesn’t matter. 
 
How bizarre that they can just switch from one side to the other. 
And now we’re supposed to believe them — and now we’re 
supposed to believe them. They’ve created the urban-rural split. 
For the previous years from the last election on until we had the 
drought, those people, the NDP on that side, are the ones that 
said, we don’t need the farm community; we can survive 
without them. They said it time and again — time and again. 
And the people in rural Saskatchewan heard them. They’ve 
created that split in rural Saskatchewan that does exist, and that 
will be healed. 
 
We had a previous speaker from that side make some offhanded 
comment about our leader speaking to something like seven 
people. Well I challenge them to try and get their leader to hold 
a meeting with more than 100 people. We just had one in 
Saskatoon of just under 800 — just under 800. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many could you get in Rosthern? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We could probably get as many as the NDP 
get in the province, in my community of Rosthern. They’d be 
glad to come and hear us — glad to come and hear us. 
 
You notice, Mr. Speaker, they don’t really have anything like 
leader’s . . . leader’s get-togethers any more. They’ll call the 
unions and get a few people in. They’ll get their MLAs, and 
their wives and their kids, and other offspring, and that’s it — 
that’s it. Oh, it has to be free — it has to be free because a 
socialist likes things that are free. They don’t want to pay for 
anything. 
 
Anyways, back on that budget. We had that leak, and the 
previous speaker again got up and said, well that’s quite okay. 
Well our parliamentary tradition has always said that a budget 
is something that shouldn’t be leaked because there are people 
who can take advantage of it. There are people who can take 
advantage of it. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Now who are they trying to emulate? Ontario. They’re trying to 
emulate Ontario. So what does it happen? This erstwhile 
Liberal they’ve got sitting over there who’s the Finance 
minister now — Liberal, gone independent, gone NDP, 
whatever he is — he creates this budget and he kind of likes 
Paul Martin because that’s the liberal coming out in his blood 
veins, so he makes a little call to one of our media people and 
says, here’s how the budget is going to run. 
 
So we had that leak that came right from that particular chair 
over there. And then just the day before the budget, the day 
before the budget, Social Services minister gets up and does 
another major leak; right in public, in front of the cameras. How 
unabashedly can they go ahead and make a mockery of a 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

 

parliamentary system, Mr. Speaker? They should be ashamed of 
themselves, every one of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people out in Saskatchewan know that was a 
leak. They know it was a leak that was created by this 
government. And the interesting thing is how they thought this 
was going to be such a fine budget. Well they should realize 
that their budgets don’t fly. It’s like a kite with sticks and no 
paper. You know, you can run as fast as you want and the silly 
thing won’t take off from the ground; it’ll just drag along 
through the brush. That’s where this particular budget has gone, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s terrible. 
 
Then we had the member from Saskatoon Sutherland get up, 
speaking on this budget, and this was bizarre, Mr. Speaker. Of 
all the people on that side who would try to take refuge behind 
the banks, she stood up and she quoted one bank after another 
one, making some sort of a statement. When an NDP has to 
hide behind what a bank says, you know they’re bankrupt. 
They’re bankrupt — no ideas, no concept of how to do this. 
Anyways, 6.8 per cent growth, the most ridiculous thing that 
we’ve heard in anything of the industrialized world — 6.8 per 
cent growth. 
 
Not a single province in Canada has achieved that; not a single 
industrialized country has achieved it. But we’re going to have 
our socialist Premier, the unelected one — maybe that’s how he 
thinks he can do it — he’s going to go ahead and try and take 
this province to a 6.8 per cent growth. 
 
But what does he rely on? Remember what I just said, Mr. 
Speaker, about how they used to go ahead and make a lot of 
noise about how they don’t need agriculture. Now they say, oh 
but agriculture’s going to do this for us. Well if they read the 
reports, if they read the reports, there were areas of the province 
that had good crops last year, Mr. Speaker, and there were areas 
that had a disastrous crop. So you can’t just say we’re going to 
move from a zero crop situation to some bumper crop at great 
prices. 
 
Number one, Mr. Speaker, agriculture prices are in the tank. No 
matter how much those farmers grow next year, the value is 
going to be way down — way down. That attacks their 6.8 per 
cent right there. The fact that a good part of the province did 
have some good crops means that when the part that was poor 
this last year does what it could do, it still isn’t going to 
multiply it by 10 or anything else. It is totally fictitious. 
 
What this Finance minister did, Mr. Speaker, is listen to all of 
his cabinet as they said, well what do you want? And he’d put 
some numbers down. And when he had . . . he was finished 
putting all the numbers down he went to his bureaucrat and he 
said, now what has to happen? Well, the bureaucrats told him, 
you’ll get in only so much from taxes and you’ve decided to 
spend so much, there’s only one variable left and that’s the 
growth of the economy. So grab the growth-of-the-economy 
button and crank it till it balances. So they cranked it. 
Ludicrous, but they cranked it — 6.8, 6.8. 
 
However, what they did forget is that in spite of all that, they’re 
still running a half a billion dollar debt — a half a billion dollar 
debt. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a fair bit of comment from 
that side about the provincial debt. So I think it’s time that we 

do a little bit of tracing on where this debt comes from just so 
that we get this on the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When Mr. Blakeney thankfully had his time in government 
ended and the NDP were reduced to less than half a rump, at 
that particular time, Mr. Speaker, there was $6.8 billion in red 
debt — $6.8 billion. Now you can’t just take a piece of paper, 
write down 6.8 billion NDP debt, and say okay that’s the first, 
that’s the first figure in this whole discussion. 
 
Because what we have to recall is what happened throughout 
the world during the ’80s. We had interest rates across North 
America — 20 to 22 per cent. And I’m going to challenge the 
people that are out there just watching this on television to take 
out their handy dandy little calculators. Take those out and 
multiply 6.8 billion by about 20 per cent and see what that 
Allan Blakeney debt costs on a yearly basis. They’ll find that it 
costs about $1 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — About $1 billion a year in interest in Allan 
Blakeney debt. So then you know why we ended up with a debt 
after the ’80s of . . . in the very low 12 billions. 
 
But here’s the surprising part, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been in this 
legislature some time and we know that the NDP did make 
some effort to turn the province around and stop the debt from 
growing. I’ll give them credit for that. Ms. McKinnon, Ms. 
McKinnon deserves credit for that. That’s where the credit 
needs to go. 
 
However, in order to do that they cut back programs all across 
the province. That’s a fact. And maybe they had to do some of 
that but they did cut that back. 
 
Now suddenly we have an unelected Premier who feels he 
doesn’t have to go back to the people of this province. He’s 
already here, having won fewer votes than the Sask Party did in 
the last election. So he sits here unelected, and he has run up the 
debt every single year that he’s been in charge. 
 
At the end of this year, according to the NDP plans — that after 
having turned that GDP button to 6.8; after they’ve cranked that 
up to 6.8 — they will have a debt larger than at the end of the 
1980s. Those people over there are bringing this province to its 
financial knees, Mr. Speaker. And they should be ashamed of 
that. They should be ashamed of that. 
 
How much actually does that amount to? A billion dollars is 
probably out of most of our reach of imagination. But let’s just 
put it into perspective on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No not a whole year, just one little 
day. This unelected Premier is bringing up the debt of this 
province by $1 million every single day he gets out of bed. 
 
I think we should pay him to stay home, Mr. Speaker. I think 
we should pay him to stay home. We can’t afford him any 
longer. 
 
One million dollars a day — their numbers out of their 
particular budget. It’s a disgrace, Mr. Speaker. 
 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

I want to just take one section out of the document we were 
given, just to show what happens in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I have a lot of farmers in my area. I have a lot of people 
working in the cities. And we’ll talk about those people 
working in the cities in a minute, but we’re going to start off 
with the heading under Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization. 
 
I would have thought that the Finance minister would have 
taken some of his liberal whiteout and taken out Rural 
Revitalization because those are the people that said that first of 
all they didn’t need them. And then they had the disaster that 
we had last year. So let’s see what happens. 
 
We look through the headings. We come to the very first one. 
They used to spend 2.2 million; they’ve cut that down to 2.1. 
 
Then we look to policy and planning — if anything needs 
planning, it’s agriculture because there’s so many variances in 
that whole system that you have to do some planning — down 
from 6.5 million down to an even 6. Spending less in 
agriculture every time they turn around. 
 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, we had one or two of the 
previous speakers saying the kind of response they had. Well I 
think they must have had a family reunion or something of that 
sort, or had those phone book NDP meetings. 
 
I met this weekend — for whatever reason, I’m not sure — but 
had a lot of people come around and was at a few suppers that 
had quite a number of people at them. And there were ordinary 
people: plumbers, electricians, school teachers, farmers — and 
I’m just listing a few that I specifically talked to — people 
involved in livestock, truckers, a lot of non-political people. 
And without exception, Mr. Speaker, without exception, not 
one person said anything good about this budget. 
 
Now there were a few people who said something very negative 
about it, and the rest of them just laughed — just laughed. 
Because sometimes when things get really ridiculous and really 
sad, it’s all you can do is laugh. Other than that, you will just 
weep endlessly from the sorrow of it all. 
 
Okay, bad to the agriculture food page. Then we get to research 
and technology, Mr. Speaker, research and technology. Very 
important because farming is changing rapidly. Research and 
technology is critical. 
 
And by the way to read from their own literature, it talks about 
new agricultural technology facilitates diversification and 
value-added opportunities. All very good stuff; not a single 
person in Saskatchewan would object to that. 
 
Their spending went down from 15.8 down to 13.8. They cut $2 
million out of that very critical part of agriculture — $2 million, 
$2 million. That wouldn’t even keep the Wheat Pool alive, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Next heading: development and technology transfer. What does 
this do? It provides agri-food quality assurance. But then again 
why should we be surprised when they spend less in this one; 
why should we be surprised? Because this is the group that tries 

to have black fries and sell GMO potatoes — genetically 
modified potatoes. They’ve been selling them since, I believe it 
was, 1999. 
 
In the last century they started selling these and they didn’t tell 
anyone. And they’re the ones that think they’re environmentally 
friendly. There’s nothing environmentally friendly about an 
NDP-CCF (New Democratic Party-Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) person. 
 
Just think of that, Mr. Speaker, think of that. Who else in this 
province has sold genetically modified product without telling 
anyone. It’s a disgrace. It’s a shame to this province. 
 
What about farm stability and adaptation? Down from 125 
million to 78 — to 78. Last two years they’ve said how critical 
agriculture is to this province and what do they do? They cut 
and they cut and they slash and they slash. And then they 
wonder why the farm community doesn’t have any trust in 
them. Then they wonder why they won’t get a single vote from 
the farm community — not a single seat are they going to get 
from that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is so much to say, and I’m just trying to 
decide what I have to put in here in the correct . . . in the correct 
locations. 
 
Municipalities, Mr. Speaker; municipalities. I mentioned earlier 
on that when the NDP took over in about ’91, they made a 
valiant effort to try and get the provincial finances under 
control. But they did it by cutting and slashing programs to 
schools, to hospitals, to towns, to cities, to RMs. They turn out 
this budget and when you take everything into consideration, 
I’ve only heard of one person, one — and they used it today— 
from any of those three bodies that has said anything positive 
about this budget. It does not supply the support that’s needed. 
 
The previous speaker mocked the fact that spending on 
infrastructure wasn’t important. Then why should we spend on 
infrastructure? We got other things to spend it on. If you don’t 
spend it on infrastructure, you’re going to have water that’s 
going to hurt people. You won’t have sewage disposal systems 
and you’ll hurt the environment. You won’t have roads to 
transport our goods and services on. The whole system grinds to 
a halt if you don’t have infrastructure. And that NDP member 
stood up over there and said infrastructure . . . from Regina 
South, said that’s no big deal, that doesn’t matter. 
 
Then they go on to say but look what a bad year we had, look 
what a bad year we had, we had this big cost for firefighting. 
Well I very definitely recall at the last budget that we voted on, 
those people tried to mock us because we wouldn’t support that 
budget because they said they had this big amount of money 
they were setting aside to take care of firefighting. Where did it 
go? It went up in smoke somewheres, it went up in smoke. 
 
Last year they hung their hat on creating this fund to fight fires 
up North. You got the member from Cumberland right now 
chirping from his seat. He should be thankful. He should be 
thankful that the fires were fought. But they weren’t fought with 
the money that the NDP set aside because that was nothing but 
smoke and mirrors. Absolutely not 1 cent put into that. 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

 

(16:30) 
 
It’s the same thing like their Stabilization Fund they say they’re 
using now. It’s like having a loan at the bank; you go with your 
credit card, you limit out your credit card, you pay off your 
loan, and you go home and you say, what a good boy am I, 
we’re now out of debt as a family. 
 
There are people who believe that, Mr. Speaker, and they’re all 
sitting over there. They’re sitting over there. Those are the 
people who think you can pay off a debt at the bank with a 
credit card and come home debt free. It is a total shame the way 
they run this province. Unfortunately they have run it and 
they’ve run it down seriously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other things that relate to my 
constituency that these people haven’t dealt with. The tax load 
for schools in my constituency; they’re going to have to raise an 
extra one and a half million dollars on property taxes — one 
and a half million dollars on property taxes. Where are they 
going to get that from? They have already been raising taxes 
year after year from farms and businesses that have had to work 
in rural Saskatchewan through some very seriously bad times. 
 
We talk about Highway 11. Highway 11 is infamous for all the 
accidents that have occurred there. Was any further twinning 
announced? No. The least they could have done is go ahead and 
put in just a few basic turning lanes because almost every single 
death that occurred there occurred because there wasn’t a 
turning lane. A turning lane would have saved those lives. 
 
The Minister of Highways says, well about 10 years from now 
we’ll close your entrances to your towns; you don’t have to 
worry about a turning lane. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the NDP 
version of rural revitalization — shut off all the roads, all the 
access lanes to all the towns, and then you’ve got rural 
revitalization. That’s what they plan on doing. I can give them a 
whole list of towns where they’ve said exactly that. It was a 
shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a disaster. The public has either 
wept or laughed over it. Nobody compliments them on it. They 
leaked it because they thought it was so good that the media 
would slurp it up, write all kinds of articles in the papers and 
say this is a fantastic budget. It has all backfired on them. 
 
How long could I go on this, Mr. Speaker? The problems with 
this budget are endless — the problems with this budget are 
endless. But we do have a limited number of people that want to 
speak on this and therefore we’ll have to give them some 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is without doubt that I will support the 
amendment and definitely not vote in favour of this budget. 
 
I have, Mr. Speaker, voted in favour of budgets when they were 
worthwhile voting for — I’ve done that. This one isn’t even 
going to get my consideration, and in the next election it won’t 
get the consideration from any of the people in this province 
either. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with a great deal of pleasure that I rise to address the budget 
that was presented by our Minister of Finance a couple of days 
ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we need to clarify, 
especially for the members opposite, is that over this past 
decade our government has followed a balanced approach. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about this over and over and over 
again, not only in balancing the issues that this government 
deals with in our . . . throughout the province but also in our 
financial management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our style has been not to overreact when 
one-quarter or one-half of a fiscal year shows a negative result. 
And as we’ve seen over this past year and over a past number of 
years, and particularly in 2002-2003, it’s best to hold a steady 
course and not to overreact, but to hold firm to your planned 
course of action. And this applies to both financial shortfalls 
and surpluses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look back over this past year, it 
was a year of some real challenges. We had a drought, which 
the members opposite and the members on this side have 
spoken about quite frequently; two years in some areas, longer 
in others. It has been one of the most severe weather conditions 
faced by our producers — worse than the ’30s in many areas of 
the province. 
 
And there was requirements, requirements on the government to 
help address the livestock needs that were . . . throughout the 
province. Mr. Speaker, extra money was put into that to help 
provide feed to maintain our livestock herds within the 
province. 
 
And also it was a record year for forest fires. As you well know, 
Mr. Speaker, in your constituency, the severity of the fire 
season that was throughout the North of the province. 
Forty-seven million dollars over and above what was budgeted 
for was put towards fighting forest fires throughout the 
province. And it’s an important resource, Mr. Speaker, one that 
we needed to protect, and we made every effort to do so. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just when we thought we had addressed 
some of these unusual circumstance throughout the province, 
some of the unnatural challenges came upon us with the federal 
government looking to claw back $300 million in equalization. 
Now after some very good negotiations between our then 
minister of Finance and the Premier of this province, the feds 
have addressed that and it helped a great deal in our budgeting 
for this year. 
 
But during those tough times, Mr. Speaker, we also had some 
good turnarounds in revenues from commodities, particularly 
oil which rose dramatically throughout the year. And I think 
thanks to our minister of the time and the adjustments that were 
made to royalties, we’ve seen a great deal of increase in that 
area which has helped a great deal. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, also individual income revenue was much 
higher than was expected at the budget when it was put together 
last year. So a number of things actually made our budget look 
a little healthier than what we had first worried. 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s that balanced approach. We don’t get in 
to a real panic when things start to take a few dips and dives. 
We’ve held steady with the course that we have laid out. Our 
plan is there and, Mr. Speaker, we will stick to it. 
 
So when we got to the first part of 2003, Mr. Speaker, we began 
to see some indicators that . . . just how strongly our economy 
was doing. The diversification that we’ve worked on over a 
number of years is finally starting to pay some dividends for our 
province. 
 
And February, Mr. Speaker, marked the 10th straight month of 
job growth in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — And, Mr. Speaker, our unemployment 
rate is the third lowest anywhere in Canada. 
 
Retail sales are up sharply. Building permits are up. Employers 
are expressing confidence in the economy and major economic 
forecasters, including The Conference Board of Canada, are 
forecasting good things for Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 
budget and how our year ended March 31, we end up with a 
surplus of just over $2 million. Now does it sound like a lot 
compared to our whole budget and the amount of money that is 
spent throughout the province in a year? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is some very important points that we 
have to remember here. We didn’t draw any funds from the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund and no equalization payments from 
the federal government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this was the budget that the opposition 
across the way there called a fudge-it budget. Now how many 
times were they hopping up and down in their seats last year 
during question period, during all kinds of things — fudge-it 
budget. Fudge-it budget we heard over and over again and the 
member across the way there is starting to howl again. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we ended up with a surplus, no equalization, and no 
drawdown on our Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — And, Mr. Speaker, that just lays out why 
this government over the past number of years, we have our 
plan in place and we have stuck to our plan. And it’s paid off, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this budget . . . it’s with a great deal 
of pride that I stand up and speak on the budget. And for one 
thing, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud that this government put 
down its 10th consecutive balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — And, Mr. Speaker, the big part of that is 
that we have done so while maintaining jobs in our province, 
while maintaining services and programs to the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve also done so while 
diversifying our economy, promoting business and industry, 

and supporting the agricultural industry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the 2003-2004 budget, 
Building for the Future, Mr. Speaker, this is something that’s 
been our plan. It’s something that we have looked towards, our 
vision for the future of this province, and, Mr. Speaker, the 
wheels are turning. 
 
This budget addresses three of the cornerstones that we feel are 
very important: our prosperity, the quality of life, and the 
building blocks for the future of our province — health, 
education, and strong communities. And, Mr. Speaker, because 
we had a very strong finish in 2002-2003, we’re in very good 
shape to continue the priority funding for health care and 
education, and to help out the municipalities for the second year 
in a row. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — And, Mr. Speaker, we’re still 
maintaining promises and commitments that were made three 
years ago, and this year will be the third year in our $900 
million commitment to the highways and infrastructure here in 
our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our government is forecasting a 6.8 per cent 
jump in the real GDP based on Saskatchewan producers 
realizing a normal harvest. Now the members opposite were up 
and down howling about this. But, Mr. Speaker, a normal 
harvest, that’s what we are basing this on is a return to a normal 
harvest. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this year we’re making a number of 
multi-year funding commitments in the budget to help our 
stakeholders plan and so the public has a clear idea of the 
direction that we’re headed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the largest commitments has been to 
the agricultural producers in our province. And we know the 
effects of drought and the international subsidies has had on our 
producers and we work to support our producers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our government has signed on to the federal 
agricultural policy framework and through the APF 
(agricultural policy framework) program framework we will 
commit approximately $1 billion over the next five years to 
Saskatchewan’s producers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — And we’ve also maintained the funding 
into the farm families opportunity initiatives and we’re also 
continuing with the Conservation Cover Program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I remember standing in this House when the 
Minister of Agriculture stood and first talked about the 
Conservation Cover Program. And the members opposite got up 
and hooted and hollered about the lawn program. And we could 
dig through Hansard and we could find their quotes and what 
particular members it was, but they laughed and thought it was 
a big joke — the lawn program they called it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell the members opposite, this is 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

 

one of the most successful programs. Many producers have 
taken advantage of it to convert marginal land to perennial 
cover — 300,000 acres have been converted. For the members 
opposite, 300,000 acres have been converted under this 
program back to cover. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they hooted and hollered but they were wrong. 
Just one more example of the way they were mistaken. And the 
Minister of Agriculture is right in not taking their advice when 
it comes to agricultural programs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government is still maintaining $240 
million per year in tax exemptions and rebates on a variety of 
farm inputs, machinery, rebates for livestock, horticultural 
facilities, and fuel exemptions for farm activities. Those are 
very important to our producers, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 
maintaining those. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of things that are important 
to the people of Saskatchewan. And no matter what community 
you live in, whether you live in rural or urban Saskatchewan, 
health care is important and probably the number one issue that 
many people talk about. 
 
And this government and this budget has increased health 
spending by 8 per cent and, Mr. Speaker, that’s over $184 
million. 
 
(16:45) 
 
And it covers a variety of areas — a 6 per cent increase for 
regional health authority operations; a 9 per cent increase for 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency; it sets aside money to 
support collective agreements and help maintain our staff of 
health professionals and encourage others to train in these 
professions, and we’re looking at establishing satellite renal 
dialysis units in other places in Saskatchewan, and also puts 
money into an issue that really came to the surface last year, 
Mr. Speaker, West Nile mosquito control programs. Not a huge 
issue in Saskatchewan but one that we’re looking to address 
before it does become a huge issue — something that’s 
important to all of us. 
 
Also $19 million will be spent on health equipment — new 
diagnostic equipment, CT (computerized tomography) scans . . . 
Yorkton and in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, which were very 
pleased to get that news. And also I’m sure the members, 
member opposite will be happy that they’re looking . . . 
Department of Health and this new funding will put a 
permanent CT scanner in Swift Current. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s many good announcements in this 
budget. It just goes on and on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, education. I don’t think there’s anyone in 
this House that would disagree, that would disagree with the 
importance of education. We talk about lifelong learning, we 
talk about good beginnings and the importance of our children 
getting good educations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this budget increased the spending by 5.2 per 
cent to education and it will bring the total education and 
learning budget to $1.2 billion. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members across have got up and 
criticized and they’ve read comments where this one’s not 
happy and that’s not happy. But, Mr. Speaker, in their last 
platform in the 1999 election, their promise in their platform 
was zero. Zero funding, frozen for education. So we know 
where their priorities or lack of priorities are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that I’m very pleased about 
and said a few words the other day, was the announcement that 
the Premier and the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment made on child care and child care spaces and the 
subsidies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is so important for families across this 
province no matter where they are, for young families, for 
working women, single-parent families, and also for the 
children. Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing more important than be 
able to know that your children are being well cared for in a 
licensed facility and cared for with the best of care. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased with that announcement, and 
it’s very important to many across the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know I’m running out of time here. We 
like to keep it short. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing that I 
know of. I’ve been sitting here this afternoon listening to the 
various speakers get up and talk about their impression of the 
budget. And I guess one of my biggest surprises was the new 
critic for the Department of Labour, the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone got up and talked about all the people that 
didn’t like the budget. 
 
But he was being very selective in his comments and his . . . He 
failed to mention labour, the area that he’s a critic for. Now I 
guess the critic for Labour may forget to mention labour but I 
find it hard to imagine how he could totally forget labour when 
it is . . . And I would consider when you look at the province of 
Saskatchewan and 400,000 . . . just . . . half a million working 
people in this province in one area or another, and the minister 
. . . or the critic of Labour, oops, forgets them — oops. Well I 
guess that’s the way it goes. 
 
Now maybe he’s new, he’s new to being the critic of Labour so 
he forgot about it and didn’t realize this is something he should 
address. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there was a news release put out by the 
Federation of Labour and I quote: 
 

“We have an economic blueprint here that seems to address 
the problems and concerns that the majority of people have, 
and that is what governments should be doing.” 

 
And that came from Larry Hubich, the president of the 
Federation of Labour. 
 
Their feel and the working . . . the feel of working people 
throughout this province is that health, education, and 
communities are a priority. That’s what governments . . . It’s 
what governments should be doing. And that’s where we are, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s where our plan has been put forward for 
many years. It’s where our plan is taking us, and we will 
maintain that path, Mr. Speaker, because it’s important. 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2003 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat and listened through the Throne 
Speech debate, the beginnings now of the debate on the budget, 
and I’ve listened to the comments of the Saskatchewan Party of 
how negative they are, how divisive they are, how critical they 
are of everything. 
 
And I realize, Mr. Speaker, that it’s the job of the opposition to 
oppose. And it’s the job of the opposition to hold the 
government accountable. But, Mr. Speaker, when I hear their 
bizarre comments, their exaggerated claims, I wonder when do 
they feel obliged to be credible and accountable to their own 
constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party says one thing to the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and then goes to SARM and says 
something different. 
 
Now I’ve heard this cute little phrase they say, twist and shout. 
They twist the facts and they jump up and down and shout 
about it, Mr. Speaker, and it happens time and time again; twist 
and shout. 
 
Same thing with the conservation cover crop. They thought it 
was a lawn program. Well that was cute and they might have all 
thought it was funny, but it’s been very successful. Twist the 
facts and jump up and shout about it, and that’s the reaction to 
everything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are people in this world who always see the 
glass as half empty. They complain when the sun comes up in 
the morning because now it’s in their eyes. They wake up 
complaining and they never stop. 
 
The members opposite, the members of the Saskatchewan Party 
complain when taxes are high, but then vote against them when 
we put in tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. They complain that the 
government bragged about its credit rating and 10 credit 
upgrades, Mr. Speaker. And when . . . They complained about 
its credit rating when debt was coming down. Now they’re 
complaining when debt goes up because of matters beyond our 
control. They don’t like it when our economy has a difficult 
year, but now they complain when the forecasts are for a solid 
year. 
 
Now after a while, Mr. Speaker, people just stop listening to 
those who are constantly negative, people who have nothing 
good to say about this province and its future. They may not 
believe in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but this government 
does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — We believe in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and we think most Saskatchewan people do and we’ll 
prove it on the next provincial election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — And, Mr. Speaker, I won’t be supporting 
the amendment but I will be supporting the budget. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a pleasure to enter into this budget debate, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a budget that we on the opposition side will 
take great pleasure in debating since there is lack of substance, 
lack of planning, and lack of vision in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you look at the budget documents that were provided on 
budget day and the little card that summarizes some of the 
highlights of the budget, Mr. Speaker, you have to look long 
and hard to find any mention of agriculture. In fact you have to 
turn it over and look near the bottom of the back page, Mr. 
Speaker, to see the word “farmer” mentioned. And yet this 
government is pinning its hopes on the agricultural industry and 
the farmers of this province to pull them out of their financial 
difficulty with a 6.8 per cent projection, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province are 
hoping beyond hope that perhaps these people on that side of 
the House know something that everyone else doesn’t know, 
including all the leading Ag economists and economists that 
forecast economic growth. They’re hoping that we will have a 
6.8 per cent growth, primarily due to agriculture. 
 
But it hasn’t happened in the past, Mr. Speaker, and the odds of 
it happening this year are slim to none, Mr. Speaker. And I 
don’t know of one producer that’s taking that kind of hope and 
banking on it and going to his banker and buying the high-cost 
fertilizers and making arrangements for the high-cost fuels to 
grow that to beyond normal. We would need more than a 
normal crop, Mr. Speaker; we would need a bumper crop of 
unheard of proportions to make this projection come true, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, is I’d like to make a few 
comments on the budgeting process. And the budgeting process 
— whether it be a provincial budget, whether it be a budget for 
a business, whether it be a household budget — there are 
certain fundamentals that are common to all of those processes, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You look at . . . normally what you do, and I have had some 
experience in this area, Mr. Speaker. In fact for a number of 
years during the winter when we first started our farming 
career, I spent a number of winters conducting farm 
management courses and budgeting was the main item that we 
discussed in those courses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I had the good fortune to have a number of farm 
management specialists and leading people in their fields take 
me through the process and build on the experience I received 
in my working career and in my education, Mr. Speaker. So I 
think I know a little bit, at least, of the budgeting process. 
 
And so what you do, Mr. Speaker, is you look at what happened 
in the past and look at previous years’ records. You make some 
assumptions about the upcoming year, Mr. Speaker, and then 
you go on to project your income. You determine what 
expenditures you need to make. And then of course when you 
look at the bottom line at that point, then you look at 
discretionary spending, Mr. Speaker. So it’s not really that 
difficult in talking in general terms, Mr. Speaker. But where the 



March 31, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

 

difficulty comes in is in the accuracy of some of the 
assumptions you make and the analysis of previous years’ 
records, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now if we look at some of the assumptions that this 
government has made for this upcoming year, I would like to 
point a few — at least in the areas that I feel I have some 
expertise in and that being primarily the ag sector — some of 
the inconsistencies and some of the errors that these people are 
basing their hopes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You look at the budget document on page 20 where they give 
. . . where the commodity price outlook is listed, Mr. Speaker. 
And you look at the projections for this coming year, 2003. And 
you look under . . . you look for the price projection for wheat. 
Well they have, they’re using a price projection of 
approximately $170 a tonne, Mr. Speaker. Well if you go and 
look at what the industry is projecting, it’s more in the 
neighbourhood of $150 a tonne — about a 13 per cent 
difference. In other words, their . . . this government’s 
projection is about 13 per cent too high. 
 
If you look at canola, this government is using about $368 per 
metric tonne as their projection for the year 2003. Well to put it 
in terms that most farmers identify with, that’s about $8.35 a 
bushel. 
 
Well we had those prices or those prices were there as a 
projection temporarily back in December. The commodity 
market spiked up, there was a short period of time when new 
crop prices reached that price. But since that time, there’s been 
a dramatic erosion of those prices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact I’ve been following those prices quite closely and 
probably a more realistic price would be about $325 a tonne, or 
again about a 13 per cent variance, Mr. Speaker — 13 per cent 
too high. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. It now being the hour of 5 
o’clock, this House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................251 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................251 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................251 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................251 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................251 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................251 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................251 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................252 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................252 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................252 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................252 
  Lorjé...........................................................................................................................................................................................259 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................259 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Junior Curlers Win World Championships 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................252 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................252 
 Saskatchewan Party Decision 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................253 
 World Junior Men’s Curling Championship 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................253 
 Additional Funding for Child Care 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................253 
 Youth Criminal Justice Act 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................253 
 Building for the Future 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................254 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 2003-04 Budget 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................254 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................254 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................255 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................255 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................256 
 Investigation of Prince Albert Officials 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................258 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................258 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................258 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................258 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................258 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................264 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................266 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................270 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................273 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................276 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................279 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................282 
 


