















































Hansard: May 22, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1155 
 May 22, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of people who are really concerned 
about the high cost of education tax. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 

And the people who have signed this petition are from 
Wynyard, Kuroki, and Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw who continue to 
be concerned about the lack of dialysis services in their district. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Again this afternoon the signatures on this petition, Mr. 
Speaker, are from the community of Moose Jaw and I’m 
pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
stand again today to present a petition on behalf of constituents 
of Cypress Hills. The petition concerns the renewal of Crown 
grazing leases. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers and 
constituents from the communities of Abbey and Lancer. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
unjustifiable lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose 
Jaw. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people all from the city 
of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens very 
concerned about the condition of Highway 47. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Estevan and 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise again with a petition from the citizens of 
southern Saskatchewan who are very concerned about having a 
limited or no access to adequate health care. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Rockglen and Lisieux. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people from the west central 
region of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the state of 
health care. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure a continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current speciality services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley, Eston, and Plenty. 
 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about the high cost of prescription 
drugs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by all the residents from the town of 
Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
present a petition on concern of Highway 14. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair this highway in order to address 
safety concerns and to facilitate economic development in 
rural Saskatchewan. 

 
As duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petition is signed by people from the community of Wilkie and 
Landis. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of citizens who are concerned with the 
condition of one of our highways. That’s Highway 22, a section 
of that highway. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey, Dysart, and Strasbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 

those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from 
Hafford, Mayfair, and Rabbit Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

A petition regarding the need for repair of Highway 14 
from Biggar to Wilkie; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions nos. 12, 13, 18, 
27, 35, 36, and 98. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Chair of the 
Estimates Committee, it’s my pleasure to move a motion with 
respect to that committee. We met this morning and we 
reviewed the estimates for the Provincial Auditor, Ombudsman 
and Children’s Advocate, Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Conflict of Interest Commissioner, and also the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And it’s my pleasure to move, seconded by the member for 
Watrous: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Estimates be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: during the month of April, 2002, how 
much money did SaskEnergy spend on television ads? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have questions for subsequent months. 
 
I also then have a question that I give notice on day no. 47 I will 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: during the month of April, 2002, how 
much money did SaskEnergy spend on radio ads? 

 
And I have questions for subsequent months. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 47 
ask the government the following question: 
 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

 

To the Minister of CIC: during the month of April, 2002, how 
much money did SaskEnergy spend on print ads? 
 

And again I have questions for subsequent months and I am 
pleased to present these questions. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: will the minister please provide a 
breakdown of the 1.6 billion in income he claims have been 
returned by the Crowns over the past 10 years, by year and by 
Crown corporation? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and all of the members of the 
Assembly, a group of Saskatchewan public servants who are 
touring the legislature and are now seated in your gallery. 
 
The participants are employees from the departments of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization; Health; Industry 
and Resources; Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs; 
Community Resources and Employment; Justice; Saskatchewan 
Environment; and I think I spotted one from Culture, Youth and 
Recreation there as well. 
 
I want to have you thank them for all their good work they do 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. And I look forward to 
meeting with this group after question period and ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming the members of the public 
service today. I hope that you enjoy today’s proceedings and I 
know that the Opposition House Leader and the Opposition 
Whip are looking forward to meeting with you after the 
proceedings. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery we 
have 45 grade 8 students from Lawson Heights School in my 
constituency here to visit. They’re accompanied by teachers, 
Mr. McKen, Mrs. Glauser, and chaperone, Mrs. Newlove. 
 
Lawson Heights School was started in 1980. It’s located in the 
beautiful Saskatoon suburb of Lawson Heights. It has 287 
students, 14 full-time equivalent teaching positions, and five 
paraprofessionals. 
 
I will have an opportunity to meet with the students later this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask all members to 
welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to introduce a former federal colleague of mine, Mr. Allan 
Kerpan, who’s sitting in the east gallery. He served as a 
Member of Parliament for two terms, both for Moose Jaw-Lake 
Centre and for Saskatoon Blackstrap. 
 
Mr. Kerpan of course has a great interest in agriculture and 
actually sat on the floor of this House and made a presentation 
during a debate on the agriculture crisis, upon which the former 
premier, Mr. Romanow, responded that Reform Member of 
Parliament, Mr. Kerpan, who came before the members of this 
House and who so eloquently spoke on this issue and captivated 
the attention of everybody on that side of the House, clearly and 
unequivocally said we should never bargain Canada when it 
comes to our differences, as important as those differences are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kerpan is the Saskatchewan Party candidate 
in the Carrot River Valley constituency. And given his fine 
recommendation by former Premier Romanow perhaps the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) won’t even run anyone against 
him. 
 
And I’m pleased to welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Seated in your gallery are two students, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll 
ask them to give a smile and a little wave here when I introduce 
them, Mr. Speaker — Doug Schmidt from Yorkton and Monica 
Bot from Langenburg. 
 
These two students are spending their day with me today, Mr. 
Speaker, in a job shadow. We started our day this morning at 
6:30, like I’ve said all MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) start their day, Mr. Speaker. And we were in 
Yorkton this morning recognizing an Earth School status. Then 
we’re here for a briefing with the media, Mr. Speaker, as it 
relates to the BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy). Then 
we attended the luncheon where there were some 750 people, 
Mr. Speaker, to hear the Premier speak this afternoon. And then 
we’re meeting with a couple of groups this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker. I know that they’ll enjoy the proceedings in the House. 
 
They’re both students who are going on to political science 
degrees in the future. I expect that they’ll be sitting on the floor 
of the legislature in a couple of years to come. 
 
So I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming them to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, I want to introduce a group of 39 grade 5 
and 6 students from a town called beautiful valley — well in 
short form it’s Beauval. And the school that they’re from is the 
Valley View School. 
 
And they’re being accompanied here today by a number of 
chaperones. They’re in the east gallery. The chaperones that are 
accompanying the students are: Anita Henry; Shirley Martin; 
Jenn Maurice; Richard Gauthier, who is also supposed to be a 
hockey player, Mr. Speaker; Fred Maurice; Mervin Morin; 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

Lydia Gauthier; and a dear friend of mine, Margaret Morin. 
 
And I’ll be meeting with the students after this to take a shot 
and also a photo at the stairs. And following that they’ll be 
coming to my office and I’ll be spending some time with the 
students. 
 
I’d ask all members of the Assembly to welcome a group of 
grade 5 and 6 students that travelled many, many miles to come 
to Regina, and to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure at 
this time to introduce a guest who is seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery and this is a former teacher from the Social Sciences 
Teachers’ Institute that was held here and is being held 
annually, a former participant. Her name is Kim Engel. She sits 
on the steering committee. 
 
Kim has with her today her parents who are also from Regina, 
Warren and Erika Taylor. And as their very special guests, 
Erika’s cousin has come here to visit from Germany and I 
would like to introduce Hans and Erika Becker who are 
residents in Stuttgart, Germany. This is the first time they’ve 
ever been to Canada, the first time they’ve ever been on a plane. 
They have been also very impressed with the wide-open space 
on the drive from Calgary to Regina. So to Kim’s family I say, 
guten Tag and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Third Annual Premier’s Business Luncheon 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 
business and community leaders are optimistic. I have just 
come from a very fulfilling and satisfying lunch with more than 
700 other satisfied community leaders. 
 
I am referring, Mr. Speaker, to the third annual Premier’s 
business luncheon. Every table was full. There was no gloom or 
doom, Mr. Speaker, just optimism. Around every table were 
seated enthusiastic Regina leaders who came to share with the 
Premier his optimism, his enthusiasm for our province, and his 
belief that, as he said, it is our time to shine. 
 
The Premier reminded us that our centennial is coming up and 
he pointed out that a visitor to our province in that year, 
returning for the first time in many years, will find a province 
completely changed, and changed for the better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. There’s just a 
little too much of a rumble here to be able to hear what is being 
spoken. So I would ask the member to continue and I’d ask all 
members to give him their attention. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier reminded 
us that our centennial is coming up and he pointed out that a 
visitor to our province in that year, returning for the first time in 

many years, will find a province completely changed, and 
changed for the better, Mr. Speaker — a province with a new 
attitude, proud of our past but eager for a future, and a province 
with a New Democratic government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — The 21st century belongs to Saskatchewan — to 
borrow and to improve a phrase — a province with a 
completely diversified economy, a province with windmills for 
energy, a province with twinned highways, a province with a 
bright future wide open to all, Mr. Speaker, all the citizens of 
our province. All in all, Mr. Speaker, a very good lunch. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, last evening I had the pleasure, 
along with the member from Rosetown-Biggar and the member 
from Humboldt, of attending the second annual MJBEX 
Awards for Business Excellence in Moose Jaw, put on by the 
Moose Jaw Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Award recipients were: for Community Involvement, Golden 
West Radio, that’s 800 CHAB and FM Country 100; for 
Marketing, Chocolate Moose Fudge Factory; for Young 
Entrepreneur, Sterling Fitness; for Exports, Moose Jaw Sash & 
Door; for Customer Service, Emerald Glass; for New Business 
venture, Independent Medical Rehabilitation; for Business of 
the Year, the Brunswick Hotel; for Job Creation, the Tunnels of 
Moose Jaw; for Centennial Business, Moose Jaw Co-operative 
Association. 
 
All 44 of the nominees, Mr. Speaker, were top-notch, well-run 
businesses, and all very deserving. The choices must have been 
extremely difficult. This impressive array of business nominees 
speaks well for the Moose Jaw business community and says 
great things for the future development of Moose Jaw. 
 
There was also a fine meal featured, put on by the staff of the 
Heritage Inn, featuring a choice of entrees, beef being one of 
those choices. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to inform this Hon. 
Assembly that that’s the one I chose. 
 
Congratulations to the award recipients, nominees, and the 
Moose Jaw Chamber of Commerce for putting on such a classy 
event that is so encouraging to the private business sector in the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
night the member for Moose Jaw North and I were very pleased 
to join the business community in Moose Jaw in celebrating the 
businesses that have truly made our present prosperous and our 
future wide open. 
 
The second annual MJBEX, or Moose Jaw Business Excellence 
Awards banquet was once again sponsored by the Moose Jaw & 
District Chamber of Commerce, and it was a very fine evening 
of good food, fine entertainment, a few speeches, Mr. Speaker, 
and very deserved recognition of the businesses that have 
helped make our city an excellent place to live and work and 
visit, Mr. Speaker. 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

 

There were 27 entries in nine categories, each deserving . . . a 
very deserving nomination. But the award recipients were the 
radio station 800 CHAB for Community Involvement, the 
Chocolate Moose Fudge Factory for Marketing, James Sterling 
of the Sterling Fitness Centre was the Youth Entrepreneur, 
Moose Jaw Sash & Door for exceptional performance in 
Exports, Emerald Glass and Gallery for outstanding Customer 
Service, the Independent Medical Rehabilitation as the New 
Business venture, the Brunswick Hotel as the Business of the 
Year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think a special vote of thanks goes to the 
people responsible for reviving and restoring this historic 
Moose Jaw landmark. 
 
Also the award for Job Creation went to the Tunnels of Moose 
Jaw. And a special award for Centennial Business award went 
to the business of more than 50 years of service, the Moose Jaw 
Co-op Association. Congratulations to all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cadet Corps Ceremonial Review 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday evening, May 21, 2003, I took the opportunity to 
attend the 90th annual ceremonial review and anniversary 
parade of the 390 North Saskatchewan Regiment Cadet Corps. 
This ceremony was held at the Prince Albert armouries and, Mr. 
Speaker, none other than the Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan was the reviewing officer as the cadets strutted 
their stuff to the hundreds in attendance. 
 
Her Honour spoke to the cadets about pride of citizenship we 
should have in our great country and with the honour we should 
aspire to in serving Canadians in spite of calls by those who 
desire to diminish our armed forces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a multitude of cadets were recognized for their 
achievements during the past year — ranging from best of first-, 
second-, and third-year cadets to the most improved and most 
valuable of the non-commissioned officers. There were awards 
for those cadets involved, both inside and outside the cadet 
corps. 
 
But there were two awards, Mr. Speaker, that all cadets most 
aspire to. The first is the Legion Merit of Honour and this year 
the medal went to Master Warrant Officer Pamela Stewart. The 
second medal is the Lord Strathcona Medal awarded to Warrant 
Officer Shawn Rogozinski. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was indeed a pleasure to attend this important 
milestone of the 390 North Saskatchewan Regiment Cadet 
Corps. I ask that all members join me in congratulating these 
young people and the honour they have brought to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Norwegian Constitution Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, last Saturday was Syttende 
Mai, May 17, Norwegian Constitution Day. And it’s my 

pleasure to once again remind Saskatchewan people about this 
great land that’s a part of our province. 
 
Many people across the province sang this song. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.) 
 
And basically it’s the very same theme as our mayor of Regina 
uses, which is I love Regina. This song says: I love Norway, I 
love Saskatchewan, and I’m part of it. 
 
And an added feature for this year’s celebration was the fact 
that on CBC Radio last Friday they had a phone-in show and 
Lindy Thorsen and Coreen Larson hosted a phone-in show 
which talked about how it felt to be a Norwegian in 
Saskatchewan. And the phones were ringing off the hook 
because they had so many people who wanted to celebrate what 
it’s like to live in Saskatchewan. 
 
There were celebrations in the province on Saturday, but 
basically what I want to say here is on behalf of the member 
from Regina Lakeview, the member from Regina Coronation 
Park, the member from Saskatoon Southeast, the member from 
Regina Sherwood, the member from Rosetown-Biggar, the 
member from Saltcoats, the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers, and the member from Lloydminster — that all of us 
wish to have all the people in Saskatchewan remember that 
Norse Saskatchewan is a very good part of the future of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Cancer Society Recognition Award 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker and 
members, every year the Canadian Cancer Society goes through 
a careful process to determine if any organization or individual 
is deserving of national recognition for their contribution to the 
mission to the Canadian Cancer Society. Each unit board office 
submits nomination to their provincial division office. If the 
provincial division office approves the nomination, it is 
forwarded on to the national office. The national office then 
determines if the nomination if worthy of an award. 
 
This year several submissions were made to our Saskatchewan 
division office and one nomination was recognized at the 
national level. 
 
I’m proud to announce that Melfort’s Radio CJVR Ltd. was 
presented with the national recognition service award for their 
constant promotion of the Canadian Cancer Society. The local 
cancer society unit stated CJVR is always supportive of the 
work the society does and for events like daffodil sales, pancake 
breakfasts, and the Relay for Life. 
 
Bill Wood, program director for CJVR-FM, said assisting the 
cancer society in their initiatives is never a hard decision to 
make. Cancer touches every family. 
 
Mr. Speaker and members of the legislature, please join me in 
congratulating Radio CJVR Ltd. for receiving this award, and 
also in thanking them for their contribution to the fight against 
cancer. 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Emergency Medical Services Week 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In recognizing 
Emergency Medical Services Week, I join with my colleagues 
to commend all EMS (emergency medical services) personnel 
for playing a vital role in our health care system and for 
working to improve services that are delivered over a vast 
geographic area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that Saskatchewan people, no matter 
where they live, receive high-quality health care services and 
that is why one of the key goals of the Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care is to ensure a minimum of one 
emergency medical technician on every emergency call so that 
patients can receive a high level of care the moment that that 
help arrives. 
 
To help us achieve the goal we have implemented the 
emergency medical technician training initiative. Fifty-seven 
emergency medical responders are benefiting from this 
initiative to upgrade and improve their emergency skills: 26 
students are training in part-time sessions in the communities of 
Macklin and Watrous; 15 emergency medical responders 
received $2,500 bursaries to attend a full-time training program; 
and arrangements are in place for 16 EMRs (emergency 
medical responder) in the Keewatin Yatthé Regional Health 
Authority to advance their skills to an EMT (emergency 
medical technician) basic level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, EMS providers work to ensure quality care and 
minimize response times for those who are requiring care. It is 
work that reflects the top priority of our government to provide 
the people of this province with the most accessible, best 
quality health care possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Agriculture. The investigation into one case 
of BSE confirmed in a beef cow in Alberta that is well 
underway, and so far all indications are that the Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency is proceeding swiftly. 
 
However the temporary ban on imports of beef cattle and beef 
products from Canada imposed by the United States is of 
concern to Canadian and the Saskatchewan cattle industry. It is 
hoped that this one case of BSE will be isolated and that that 
ban can be lifted quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to the Assembly what 
conditions the United States is indicating must be met by 
Canada in order for the US (United States) to lift this ban and 
how long it may take to meet those conditions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a very important question that the Leader of the Opposition 
asks. 

This morning I had a conversation with Minister Vanclief who 
is in daily contact, he tells me, with Ann Veneman, who is the 
minister responsible for the agriculture in the United States. 
 
What Ms. Veneman has said, and this is third hand or second 
hand to what Mr. Vanclief said to me this morning, is that what 
the United States wants is an assurance that we have completed 
our trace-back fully, that we can assure not only Canadians but 
the international community that we have captured the animal 
that in fact has the BSE, and that we have under control now all 
of the issues related to the BSE within Canada. 
 
The agency responsible that is now overseeing the 
investigation, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, has 
moved swiftly over the last four days. We are still assured that 
we are only dealing now with . . . still with one animal. There 
are parallel fronts that are proceeding with the examination of 
the offspring of the animal, as well as searching for now the 
dam of the cow who in fact had the BSE. So we are expecting 
to know in the next couple of days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank 
the minister for the answer. It’s our understanding from the 
technical briefing this morning that there are now two beef 
herds in Saskatchewan that are under quarantine in relation to 
this case. Now this, of course, also is a concern for these 
individual farms and for the Saskatchewan industry as a whole. 
 
Now that there are Saskatchewan links to the infected animal, I 
am sure that Saskatchewan Agriculture officials are much more 
involved in the investigation than they were at this time 
yesterday. And as the minister explained in his first answer, that 
the trace-back is so important, we would ask the minister to 
explain specifically how our provincial Department of 
Agriculture and its available resources are now participating in 
the investigation into this BSE case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Our 
officials have been engaged in the, not in the direct 
investigation, but have been engaged on a daily basis with 
CFIA (Canada Food Inspection Agency) through a national 
conference call that happens every morning at about 8 o’clock 
our time, Saskatchewan time. And this is a national conference 
call that the CFIA conduct. 
 
We have, in Saskatchewan, now in place, and had it in place 
now for a better part of two days, our own internal team of 
people. We have two people who have Ph.D.s who work within 
the department. They’re specialists in the area of animal 
husbandry. 
 
We have also an industry committee that I established two days 
ago that is meeting, as we speak, today to provide both advice 
and recommendation in terms of how we’ll deal with a number 
of issues as they relate to, I say compensation, as people are 
asking, and how we deal with the expedience in the future on 
issues of this magnitude. 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

 

As well as, Mr. Speaker, I have been ensured from the federal 
government, Mr. Vanclief, this morning, that we’ll have each 
day the regional director from CFIA on our conference calls 
with the media and with Saskatchewan producers to ensure that 
we’re all connected and know what is happening every day, 
minute by minute, as this case develops. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Agriculture mentioned that he had established an industry 
advisory group to advise him during this period on the 
investigation into the BSE case. My understanding is that the 
minister has officially named this group and that the people 
involved may actually have met as early as this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell us what issues he hopes that 
this group will advise him on, how often they will be meeting in 
the upcoming days and weeks, and if they have provided any 
direction to him as a result of their initial meeting this morning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will 
provide a list of the individuals for the Leader of the Opposition 
— I neglected to do that. We’ll provide that for him, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There are nine individuals who are serving on this committee. 
Their job will be two or threefold initially. What we want them 
to do is first of all provide some examination of the process that 
we’re using today because it was the Canadian cattle feeder 
association and the industry that’s really developed the tracking 
system for Canada. And we want to know from them what we 
can do to expedite this process in a more significant fashion into 
the future. So an examination of what we’re doing today will be 
important. 
 
Secondly will be recommendations that we’ll want them to 
make around issues that are raised with Mr. Vanclief this 
morning — for example, on compensation, if we’re going to be 
. . . And the federal minister says there will be compensation. 
To whom should that occur, to what degree should it occur, and 
what should the timing of that be around compensation? 
 
And thirdly, we’ll want to have this committee also involved in 
giving us recommendations on how we fund in the future the 
pillar called food safety. Because as you know, in the 
agricultural policy framework which the federal government is 
now asking us to sign, there is a pillar there that attaches itself 
to food safety. And I want this committee to provide some 
recommendation to me in terms of what level of support needs 
to go . . . to be put into this particular pillar, and at what level 
should there be participation from both provincial and federal 
contributions. 
 
So those are basically the areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are many, 
many angles to this story and it’s certainly consuming a lot of 
interest here in Canada and beyond. And as the minister 

mentioned, public . . . the safety of our food is of paramount 
importance. 
 
There are also some concerns being raised in the media of a link 
between BSE in cattle and chronic wasting disease, which has 
been found in the domestic game farm industry and the wild 
deer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that there is no reason whatsoever to 
suspect that the disease can be transmitted between elk or deer 
and beef cattle; and the minister’s official confirmed that in a 
news conference yesterday. So my question to the minister is: 
what is his official response to those who in the media and 
otherwise would link the issue of BSE to chronic wasting 
disease? Does the government have an official response on that 
issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have been advised by my 
scientific staff that there is no association here or no transmittal 
of association here between BSE and chronic wasting. And my 
officials have said this both publicly and have for some years 
now, given that we had the chronic wasting issue in this 
province for some time and there’s always been a concern that 
there may be a linkage here between the elk industry and the 
beef industry. And we’ve always said now for many years that 
there is no linkage here in terms of the transmittal of the 
disease. And my officials are continuing to say that. 
 
The scientific community that’s reporting on this from CFIA 
have assured us that this is the case. CFIA has been in this 
province for many years now, helping us with the examination 
in the elk industry with chronic wasting and with eradication of 
the disease and also with the putting down of animals in the 
past. 
 
So the official position is that there are no linkages here 
between the beef industry and the elk industry with these two 
different diseases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers 
Application to Labour Relations Board 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskPower. On May 
7, the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers applied 
to the Labour Relations Board for an order to move some 
employees who are currently members of a chemical, electrical 
and paperworkers union into the IBEW (International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers). And in that regard, the 
opposition has no concerns about the application. 
 
However, the IBEW application also calls for the Labour 
Relations Board to force the unionization of about 500 
SaskPower managers, supervisors, consultants, and engineers. 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister and his NDP government 
support the IBEW’s demand for forced unionization of 500 
more SaskPower employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

the member opposite will know and the Saskatchewan Party 
Labour critic will know, the Labour Relations Board is a 
quasi-judicial board that is established arm’s-length from the 
government. It is established under and administers The Trade 
Union Act. The board is neutral. It’s an adjudicator of disputes 
that arise under the Act. 
 
And as there is a case before the LRB (Labour Relations 
Board), Mr. Speaker, it’s really inappropriate that I comment on 
that specifically. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the effect of the IBEW 
application, if the Labour Relations Board approves it, is that 
virtually every single employee at SaskPower would be 
unionized with the exception of the president, vice-president, 
and a handful of senior managers and executive support staff. In 
fact the IBEW’s application calls for the unionization of all but 
48 SaskPower employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower employs 2,350 people across 
Saskatchewan and serves over 400,000 businesses. Families and 
business in Saskatchewan depend on SaskPower keeping the 
power on. Will the minister advise the legislature and the 
people of Saskatchewan on how the government would ensure 
the power would stay on to over 400,000 customers in the event 
that the IBEW calls for a strike when SaskPower has 48 people 
left out of the union? How can you guarantee power to the rest 
of the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this is an application before 
the Labour Relations Board that deals with the definition of 
employee. It is not, it is not an application for certification or 
decertification. And, Mr. Speaker, there is no concern that there 
. . . this may end in an eventual work stoppage of any kind. 
 
So I would say to the Saskatchewan Party, you’re fishing here. 
They’re fishing, Mr. Speaker, because there’s no possibility that 
that will come to pass. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a responsibility of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to ensure that the province has a 
reliable and continuous supply of power, and SaskPower’s 
2,350 employees do an excellent job ensuring that. 
 
But if the IBEW’s application to the Labour Relations Board is 
successful in forcing over 500 more SaskPower employees into 
their union, how can this government guarantee a continuous 
supply of power in the event that the IBEW go on strike? They 
went on strike a couple, three years ago, Mr. Speaker, and the 
management of SaskPower kept power on for the province. 
How can this minister guarantee that would happen again when 
they only leave 48 employees left in SaskPower that aren’t in 
the union? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for the Saskatchewan 
Party’s information, this application has nothing to do with the 
withdrawal of essential services or services of any kind. It’s an 

application that deals with the scope and the definition of 
employee. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here again we have another case — the 
Labour Relations Board which is independent from 
government, and the member opposite wants us to meddle in it. 
Just like the member from Rosthern criticizes the justice 
system, just like the Leader of the Opposition wanted the 
Premier to get involved in a case with the Justice department 
last year. Mr. Speaker, they have no respect for the processes 
that are in place. And, Mr. Speaker, this government does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation) or his designate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP often tells us that we in opposition 
should pay attention to what the bond rating agencies are 
saying. Well here’s what the Dominion Bond Rating agency has 
said yesterday about SaskTel. 
 
According to DBRS (Dominion Bond Rating Service Limited), 
SaskTel’s key challenges are its lack of size and quote, its “. . . 
funding of non-core investments.” That’s what the bond rating 
agency said about SaskTel. 
 
One of those non-core investments is SaskTel’s Max TV which 
we learned last week cost at least $21 million and has garnered 
only 5,000 customers. 
 
Now last week the minister made some assurances that there 
would be no more capital dollars, taxpayers’ dollars, spent in 
developing this system at SaskTel. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 
what the Dominion Bond Rating agency is saying today. The 
Dominion Bond Rating agency is saying that indeed SaskTel 
will be spending more capital dollars on SaskTel Max. 
 
So would somebody over there answer the question: who’s 
telling the truth, the Dominion Bond Rating agency or the 
minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 
CIC, and as Vice-Chair of the Crown Investments Corporation, 
I’m very happy to step into this debate and deal with some of 
the questions that come from that member. 
 
What we’ve learned over many years, the years I was the 
minister, the years that the present minister is the minister, is 
that we have to check the facts. And we are going to go and 
check the facts from that member about these various issues. 
 
But what we do know is that Saskatchewan people want us to 
provide services across this province at the high quality of 
service, the high standards that all of us come to expect. And to 
do that, you end up having to invest money in what we have in 
this province. You also end up having to provide those services 
in a broader way. And we’re going to continue to do that 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

 

because that’s what Saskatchewan people want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can provide the 
minister’s designate some information right here and now about 
what the Dominion Bond Rating agency is saying about 
SaskTel and this rating agency’s concern about their non-core 
investments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s what they’re saying, and I quote: 
 

SaskTel is expected to spend over $280 million in capital 
expenditure in 2003, used primarily to roll out expanded 
data wireless services . . . video services, (Mr. Speaker, 
presumably Max TV, and) increased wireless and 
broadband . . . 

 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, somebody at SaskTel has told the Dominion Bond 
Rating agency that some of the $280 million in capital 
expenditures this year is going to go to the video services or 
SaskTel Max. 
 
Last week the minister left a clear impression that there would 
be no more capital dollars, no more tax dollars spent in 
developing this money-losing cable TV offering. The question 
is simple: who is telling the truth — the person at SaskTel that 
told this to the Dominion Bond Rating agency or the minister of 
the Crown? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has a long record of 
investing dollars in Saskatchewan and outside of Saskatchewan 
that provide a return to the Saskatchewan people. 
 
But the biggest return that SaskTel provides to all of us in 
Saskatchewan is that they provide good service at some of the 
highest quality in the world, and they do it at a rate that’s a 
reasonable price for all of us. 
 
Does that member not want SaskTel to spend money in his 
community of Swift Current? Or the other members, do they 
not want SaskTel to be spending money in this province? 
 
I think that what we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
want a strong SaskTel. They absolutely reject the position of the 
Saskatchewan Party which is to somehow cut off the limbs or 
cut off the strength of that corporation. The people of 
Saskatchewan want a strong corporation that will provide 
service for the long term. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
asks a good rhetorical question. He says, does the member not 
want SaskTel to invest in his community. That is precisely the 

point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members on this side of the House, and more importantly 
customers of SaskTel, people across the province, want SaskTel 
to focus on this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Not, Mr. Speaker, in Australia, not in Georgia, 
and not in Tennessee. That’s what they want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Dominion Bond Rating Service also provided 
a bleak assessment of our economy. They say, after 12 years of 
NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members would allow the question to be put, 
please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The DBRS also says, 
that after 12 years of NDP government we’re left with, quote, 
“negative GDP, negative population growth, and weak per 
capita income.” 
 
And ironically, the DBRS says the NDP’s dismal economic 
record is good for SaskTel because no other business will want 
to come and invest and compete against them, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what the report says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2003 earnings at SaskTel will be down as 
much as $20 million according to this bond rating agency. So 
once again we ask the minister or his designate, how much 
more money is the NDP going to gamble on this money-losing 
SaskTel Max TV venture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we just came 
from a meeting with over 700 business people in downtown 
Regina and what were they saying? They were saying that 
things are positive in Regina, positive in Saskatoon, and 
positive all across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In case the opposition missed it, Mr. 
Speaker, for 12 straight months in a row there’s been job 
growth in Saskatchewan and today we have 12,900 more jobs 
than we did a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan just finished leading the country in 
the growth of retail sales. Jobs are up; sales are up; oil and gas 
drilling up 72 per cent more than last year, Mr. Speaker. And 
there’s only one group that could see doom and gloom in the 
good things happening in Saskatchewan, and they’re sitting 
right over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if things are so 
good for the governing party, if things are so good for the NDP, 
why in the world won’t they screw up their courage and call a 
general election in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, why won’t, why won’t that minister 
whisper in the Premier’s ear and tell him all this good stuff so 
that we can go to the polls? The reason, Mr. Speaker, is clear. 
They know that the people of Saskatchewan are just waiting for 
the chance to kick them out of office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The people of Saskatchewan, they are tired of 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company), Mr. Speaker. They are tired of a $107 million land 
titles fiasco. They are tired of waiting lists in health care, Mr. 
Speaker. They want a general election in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that minister has not come close to the question. 
This SaskTel Max cable offering, another boondoggle of the 
NDP it looks like, has cost $21 million. It’s garnered only 5,000 
more customers. How much more money, how many more 
taxpayers’ dollars will they waste on this project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people in the 
province will have an opportunity to go to the polls, and the 
Saskatchewan Party will have an opportunity to go to the 
people, as will this party over here. But I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I predict that when the people look at the job 
numbers being up 13,000 over a year ago, when they look at 
Saskatchewan having a growing labour force, when they look at 
5,700 more young people working than a year ago, when they 
look at record housing starts, when they look at record retail 
sales, Mr. Speaker, they will conclude that you cannot build a 
future, Mr. Speaker, by trying to tear everything down that is 
good in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You cannot inspire people and have hope and optimists, Mr. 
Speaker, if all you ever do is create negativity and complain. 
You cannot do that, Mr. Speaker. And I would quite confidently 
predict that when the people of Saskatchewan compare the 
record of this government and how the economy is on a roll, 
with the constant negativity and complaining of the people over 
there, Mr. Speaker, they will opt for the positive vision of this 
government and this government will be returned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to 
know what the weather is like in the world that that minister is 
living in, Mr. Speaker, because in the next election what people 
will remember is 16 consecutive quarters of population loss. 
They’ll remember scandal after scandal after scandal. They’ll 
remember $85 million lost in out-of-province investments in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They’ll remember hospital closures 
and waiting lists. And that’s why they won’t call an election, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why they’re desperately hanging on to 
power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Dominion Bond Rating Service report also 
says that SaskTel will run a cash flow deficit of over . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Before we have a 
response we have to hear the question. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Dominion Bond 
Rating agency says the reason for the $100 million cash flow 
deficit at SaskTel is because of the need to fund the NDP’s 
money-losing, non-core investments around the world and an 
$85 million dividend payment from SaskTel to the NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that SaskTel intends to 
run this $100 million cash flow deficit in 2003 and will the 
minister confirm that that cash flow will be covered by debt in 
order for SaskTel to make its dividend payment to the General 
Revenue Fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know it will come as 
a surprise to the opposition to know this, but I want them to 
know that SaskTel is actually one of the telecommunications 
company in Canada that is doing well. Other 
telecommunications are not doing very well. 
 
And I want them to know also, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
this province support and value SaskTel. And the people of the 
province do not want to pursue the agenda of the opposition 
party, which is to privatize SaskTel. They do not want that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I just want to quote Clive Beddoe, who is the president of 
WestJet. And this is what he had to say, Mr. Speaker, about the 
Premier’s Wide Open Future campaign. He said this — and I 
think the opposition should take note — he said: 
 

You do not do those things (that is good things) with the right 
energy or enthusiasm if you do not have the right attitude to 
start off with. If you start off with a defeatist attitude it is not 
going to work. He (the Premier) is absolutely right to focus 
on the positive and not the negative. 

 
And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the opposition, there is a 
song that they should learn. And it says: accentuate the positive, 
eliminate the negative. And if they don’t do that, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re all going to be eliminated in the next election. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 
hard to hear myself speak at the moment, but I am very pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government and table responses to 
written questions numbered 291 through 294 inclusive, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 291, 292, 293, and 294 have been 
submitted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government and convert for debates 
returnable questions 295 and 296, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Converted to orders for return (debatable) 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

 

questions 295 and 296. 
 
Order, please. I wonder . . . Order, please. Order, please. 
There’s a member on each of the front benches here . . . Order, 
please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand today and respond to written questions no. 297 through 
301 inclusive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unlike the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, we believe in answering the 
majority if not all the questions. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 297, 298, 299, 300, 
and 301 have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 23 — The Cities 
Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 
to be able to speak on The Cities Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s plenty of changes to an Act that’s barely a 
year old. And for a government that’s been in office for over a 
decade and has passed hundreds of pieces of legislation one 
would think that this government would be able to get the 
original Act done right the first time. 
 
Obviously once the Act was actually put in place then it became 
clear that there were many errors in the Act and some omissions 
that . . . and some changes that were required. And, Mr. 
Speaker, now that brings us to this year, and an amendment to 
the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments encompass a number of errors 
regarding The Cities Act, so anything that allows the cities 
more autonomy and increased flexibility when it comes to 
running their own affairs is of course a good thing. 
 
These amendments were also requested by the cities themselves 
and that SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipality 
Association) was also involved in the ongoing discussions. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, the overall intent of this piece of legislation 
is to bring it in line with other pieces of municipal legislation. 
 
While some of the amendments being introduced with this Bill 
are strictly of housekeeping nature, there are a few that are a 
cause of concern. Notably these amendments are also included 
in other Acts and we’re not entirely comfortable with the 
members opposite unilaterally making broad, sweeping 
changes. 
 
(14:30) 
 

Amendments that deal with reducing provincial involvement in 
the governance of the cities where there’s no overriding 
provincial interest should be seen as a commitment from this 
government that it will keep its collective nose out of the cities’ 
business, whatever or whenever that may be possible 
 
Anything that provides for a more modern approach to local 
government and takes steps to ensure more accountable 
government are also positive and we are encouraged by the 
direction of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those amendments in the legislation that deal with 
assessment are the ones that concern us most on this side of the 
House. While a simple word change here or there might not 
seem like much to the average person, when it comes to 
legislation this would make a world of difference, especially to 
those who will be on the receiving end of the legislation in 
question. 
 
There is an amendment, Mr. Speaker, that deals with the 
phase-in period for assessment. This is where some clarification 
will be required because, according to the amendments, 
phase-in periods won’t extend beyond a single reassessment 
cycle which is every four years. We know that some 
communities have phase-in periods that are longer than four 
years. 
 
So we’re wondering if the members opposite have even 
considered this or did they simply decide to ignore it. Whatever 
the case, it is an issue that’s being flagged. 
 
The amendments also talk about a sales verification form that is 
supposedly currently being developed by SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency). This form 
will be used to notify assessors and the agency when the 
property is sold. According to the minister, these sales 
verification forms will be helpful in collecting information on 
property sale transactions and will also assist in keeping the 
assessment system up to date. 
 
If the NDP’s assessment system is anything like ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan), the 
computerized land titles system, the people of the province can 
expect more money-losing black hole that won’t work and can’t 
be sold. 
 
Another amendment in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, deals with 
the implementation of a simplified appeals process. This will 
supposedly be an alternate to the current appeals process which 
can be time-consuming and inefficient. There are certain criteria 
that must be met first of course, but the members on this side of 
the House will be very interested to see just how successful this 
will be. 
 
Overall we’re encouraged to see that a significant discussion 
and consultation did occur prior to these changes being brought 
in. And in light of that, Mr. Speaker, we feel that any concerns 
that may come up can be addressed in Committee of the Whole. 
So I’d like to let it go to Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

Bill No. 24 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 24 — The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to make a few comments about Bill No. 24 here. It’s a 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, that directly affects northern municipalities in 
our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Bill at first blush seems to be more of a 
housekeeping nature. There are many changes being brought to 
The Cities Act of a housekeeping nature, and of course the 
member from Redberry Lake has just spoke about that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It seems as though in the past few years that some of the issues 
were overlooked in the readjustment of some Acts that were 
being done by the NDP government, and they missed a few 
things and they’re just trying to play a little catch-up here. And 
certainly it’s time that these things were taken care of. 
 
But we’re just kind of curious on this side why the government, 
Mr. Speaker, could not have spent the appropriate amount of 
time to make sure that these Acts were drawn up appropriately 
rather than waiting till late in the session and always having to 
seem to be in a scramble. 
 
We’re into late May now, Mr. Speaker, and we’re just starting 
to look at a few Bills here. And we understand that they may be 
running out of Bills to bring, but why would you wait until so 
late in the session, Mr. Speaker, to be bringing Bills forward 
that are rather important, especially to municipalities, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province. 
 
Certainly we notice in this Bill, as we’ve noticed in other Bills 
in regards to municipalities, Mr. Speaker, that there’s going to 
be a form developed by SAMA to help them with property sales 
transactions, Mr. Speaker, as they try to become more effective 
and efficient — which we certainly want to applaud because 
we’ve been certainly waiting for some time for SAMA to 
become effective and efficient. 
 
But apparently they need a sales verification form so that they 
have an idea what property is worth and what property is selling 
for in this province. We’re wondering though, Mr. Speaker, 
why — on this side of the House — why this information could 
not be got from ISC. But apparently . . . Of course we know on 
this side of the House the problems that ISC is having. 
 
And so SAMA is having to go out on their own and creating a 
duplication of services. And we’re quite distraught with that, 
because as you know, Mr. Speaker, every time a service is 
duplicated, certainly what happens is that the cost of doing 
business in this province goes up. 
 
One of the things we found quite curious in this Act, and we’re 
finding it in other Acts too, but most curious in this northern 
municipal Act, Mr. Speaker, is that there were some 
unproclaimed amendments brought forward by this NDP 
government dating back, Mr. Speaker, quite some time; back to 

the early part of their mandate in the early ’90s where changes 
were brought to The Northern Municipalities Act and specific 
clauses were not proclaimed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course as we know on this side of the House, this 
government is quite famous for not proclaiming certain Bills. 
And all we have to do is look back to the 1970s when the 
former premier, Allan Blakeney, through that period of 11 years 
had quite an extensive amount of Bills that were passed and a 
multitude of them that were never proclaimed and have not 
been proclaimed, Mr. Speaker, to this date. 
 
And that’s something we’re going to have to talk to the minister 
about, Mr. Speaker, is why these amendments were brought 
forward previously, in previous years; why they decided not to 
proclaim them; why they’re being repealed now. We want to 
have a very serious discussion with the minister in Committee 
of the Whole on these issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I guess one of the ones we’re most curious about is that 
there is a clause in here, Mr. Speaker, in this Bill, Bill No. 24, 
clause no. 10 — it talks about an existing provision from an Act 
that was changed in 1995. The Act was to be changed in 1995, 
was to be repealed, there was a clause that was to be repealed. 
And now the repealed is being repealed. And so then does that 
mean that we are going back to the previous provision prior to 
1995? 
 
And it’s those kinds of questions that we’re going to want to be 
asking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I guess what we’re going to want to need to know from the 
minister, Mr. Speaker, is the consultation process that took 
place. 
 
Certainly the people in northern Saskatchewan have talked to 
the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, loud and clear about the 
consultation that does or does not take place in northern 
Saskatchewan. And we know the Department of Northern 
Affairs is supposed to be leading the charge to ensure that 
consultation appropriately takes place in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But what we often find, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s not so much 
consultation takes place, but simply a meeting is held. The 
attendees are informed of some problems that are dealing with 
the northern municipal legislation and it’s simply left at that. 
And then they’re left in the dark and in the wilderness, so to 
speak, Mr. Speaker, as to what kind of changes this NDP 
government may be hoisting upon them. And it’s this kind of an 
attitude that people of northern Saskatchewan are most alarmed 
about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we know that in the upcoming provincial election . . . And 
we were certainly hoping on this side of the House it would 
have been called last week, Mr. Speaker. And all the members, 
even the member from Swift Current was quite prepared to go 
to the polls and defend his record. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that what is 
happening here is that this government needs to take charge 
rather than just bringing amendments of such a minor . . . They 
need, with an election coming, they needed to set direction for 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

 

this province. We don’t see it happening. It’s time to call an 
election. 
 
And most appropriately, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s time . . . We 
need to have this Bill dealt with between ourselves and the 
minister most appropriately in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 40 — The Rural 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker, giving me the opportunity to speak to Bill No. 40, the 
amendment to the rural municipal Act. It’s always important to 
take a look at the changes that go into . . . of these Acts. 
 
The Acts are very important in the sense of how the 
municipalities can function and the duties they will provide, 
through the services that they need to implement for the 
taxpayers of those municipalities as well. And it becomes very 
essential that the changes to the Act become very transparent in 
the sense of how that service can be provided as well. 
 
And I guess when you see when some of the changes come 
through with the property tax phase-in from a six-year to a 
four-year system, it’s one of the question areas that needs to be 
looked at a little bit closer in the sense of the need of having 
that period of time that’s being proposed. 
 
The rural municipalities — you’re even looking at an expanded 
period of time that should be recognized for their needs in the 
sense of that reassessment period that goes on in there. There’s 
lots of opportunity for the land base to stay pretty neutral over 
that period of time and not a whole lot of change that happens 
in property in that sense as well. So for the shortening up of that 
period of time it sometimes becomes somewhat questionable of 
the need of that. 
 
It does speak to the fact of bringing it into the same time lapse 
between the reassessment periods. But I think that’s that whole 
question of reassessment, if the need of a four-year 
reassessment period is actually needed to that whole process as 
well. So that phasing in of that period of time . . . or is that 
period of time even valuable in the sense of the four-year period 
that’s being asked for in that respect as well? 
 
Also the sales verification amendment that’s being requested 
for SAMA — and I know SAMA’s been a real hot topic and 
issue in that whole reassessment process that’s gone on — and 
sales verification has always been a huge issue in the sense of 
being able to identify the number of sales and adequate sales 
that are needed for that reassessment of property and 
establishing value as such as well. 
 
And I think without knowing how those verification forms are 
going to be put into place, the type of information and data 
that’s required on those actual forms, and how that whole 

process is going to come together, we need to understand that, I 
think, to a greater extent and have a better feel for how that 
whole application form or verification form is going to be 
processed and the information that’s actually required to be 
placed on there. And whose responsibilities are going to be 
upheld there, if it’s going to be the property owners or if it’s 
going to be the municipality themselves that need to deal with 
that verification of sales and the data that flows through there as 
well in that regards. 
 
I think there’s one good amendment that’s proposed in Bill 40, 
is the timing of elections and the timing of putting councils into 
place. Where councils weren’t sworn in till the first of January 
of the upcoming year or the following year, which gave the 
existing council — that really wasn’t the choice of the taxpayer, 
of the voter of the day — still sitting and having authority of 
making some decisions and spending some dollars in the period 
of time until the year was lapsed. 
 
I think this is a good amendment and this will give the councils 
the opportunity to start doing business as soon as they’re 
brought into the authority of sitting as council through the 
swearing-in period that can be held immediately thereafter their 
elections. 
 
Also, I think working with the amendment to giving the 
authority and power to the councils to make some decision in 
the sense of where the road routing is going to take place, where 
the transportation routes are going to go, the weighting of the 
roads as such, it’s just good management to have that ability 
there with those municipalities and those councils to be able to 
set some direction in the sense of where they’re going to want 
to take their municipality and how they can work with adjoining 
municipalities in the sense of traffic flow. 
 
And traffic flow becomes very critical with the change of 
environment and economic development in rural Saskatchewan, 
as well as that whole ag industry — what’s happening with the 
development of inland terminals and with the hog barns and 
with the livestock industry. We’re needing to recognize the 
traffic-flow patterns and how they’re going to be addressed, and 
the municipalities are the ones that understand where that traffic 
flow is going to partake, and also they understand where these 
industries are going to be established within the municipalities 
so it gives them the opportunity to do some planning, and into 
the future as well, as where their road systems are going to be 
implemented. And I . . . we really feel that that’s a benefit for 
the municipalities. 
 
(14:45) 
 
I guess to what authority and what powers the municipalities 
are given, that still needs to be of clarification. And I think we 
need to ask some more questions there and we need to identify 
to the fullest extent where we’re going to be going with that 
authority as well. So it’s a good move in direction, but I think 
we need some better clarification of how that’s going to be 
implemented at the end of the day. 
 
The framework for fire-protection services is very critical. It’s 
an area that needs to be developed; it’s an area that needs to be 
addressed. We need good clarification on how that’s going to 
happen, how we’re going to work with adjoining municipalities, 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

how 911 is going to take effect in the sense of this framework 
of providing the firefighting services as well. We need to 
understand, I guess, how the whole tie-in is going to work there. 
 
It’s a good direction that we’re going with the proposal 
amendment, but again I think there needs to be some work and 
some more questions asked in the sense of what’s going to 
happen with that service and how that whole framework is 
going to be structured to that degree as well in that respect. 
 
At this point I would just like to move this debate to . . . Nope, 
we’re going to adjourn it. We’re going to move to adjourn this 
debate for further discussion that we’re going to have on these 
concerned issues. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 41 — The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
into the debate, second reading debate, on Bill 41 in the 
legislature today. 
 
The amendments that the Bill makes to The Urban Municipality 
Act in the province are for the most part housekeeping, Mr. 
Speaker, and they do underscore however — the changes do — 
they do underscore some interesting developments in the 
province of Saskatchewan of late with respect to the urban 
municipalities Act and urban legislation. 
 
I think it was just last year that The Cities Act was passed in 
this legislature, supported I would point out, Mr. Speaker, by 
the opposition. And as a result of that, cities really now have 
their own legislation and are being administered, and are 
administering themselves perhaps is a better way to characterize 
it, under that new piece of legislation. 
 
It still leaves many other municipalities in the province of 
Saskatchewan who then are governed under the urban 
municipalities Act — smaller towns and villages and the like. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s important then for the language to be 
correct in the new Act in light of the creation of The Cities Act. 
This one seeks to take out references to cities because the cities 
have their own legislation. 
 
And that’s an example of the kind of housekeeping that’s being 
done by this piece of legislation. 
 
There are also some more substantive changes that the Bill 
makes, Mr. Speaker, not the least of which is what is something 
that the minister refers to as municipal restructuring or how 
most people would refer to as voluntary amalgamations. Some 
amendments in the Bill deals with that issue and does afford 
municipalities some flexibility in that regard. 
 
And again, those are probably positive and worthwhile 
constructive changes to be made, and a clear departure from the 
path and the tack that this same government took not more than 

two years ago when it sought to force the amalgamation of 
municipalities rather than encourage or allow for the voluntary 
amalgamation. In that case, municipalities rose up across the 
province in opposition, led by the current member for Saltcoats 
and the future member for Melville-Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, who 
led the charge to ensure that . . . led the charge to ensure that the 
government would change its mind about forced amalgamation. 
 
And to the government’s credit, it changed its mind. Every now 
and then, Mr. Speaker, the blind squirrel finds a nut and it 
changes its mind and it does the right thing. It did it on forced 
amalgamation. It did it then and it also did it, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to the increasing of nursing home fees, if you recall that, 
just last year. 
 
So this particular piece of legislation, Bill No. 41 — and the 
minister, the minister I’m sure will agree, the minister I’m sure 
will agree — seeks to afford municipalities the flexibility to 
pursue a voluntary amalgamation or some sort of restructuring, 
something for the most part that’s accepted both by 
municipalities, by the government, and indeed by the opposition 
here in the Legislative Assembly as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are also some significant amendments to the proposed 
legislation to address and simplify the appeals process as 
regards the property assessment issue. And this too is welcome, 
Mr. Speaker. This too is a positive development here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Bill No. 41 recognizes, I think, the 
fact that the process can be rather tedious. The appeal process 
can be tedious and time consuming and it seeks to streamline 
that appeal process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we also note here that this legislation also 
repealed some previously unproclaimed legislation from 
previous years that has since been ruled as obsolete or no longer 
applicable which also, of course, would be characterized as a 
housekeeping change but important nonetheless. Seemingly 
unnecessary though, you would think, because of the number of 
times we see this particular NDP government have to go back 
and repeal unproclaimed pieces of legislation. 
 
And for those who might be watching and wondering what is an 
unproclaimed piece of legislation, today, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
important that residents and taxpayers of the province know that 
no matter what happens in this legislature, no matter of the 
debate that occurs in this legislature, the laws that are debated 
and the laws that are passed — including Bill 41 — don’t 
become the law of the land, the law of Saskatchewan, until they 
are proclaimed and that proclamation happens at the will of the 
government. 
 
So if you can believe it, Mr. Speaker, what happens too often 
with the NDP government — and it’s happening in this case in 
Bill 41 — is they’ll introduce legislation. They’ll shepherd it 
through the Assembly. They’ll get the legislation passed — 
sometimes with the support of the opposition and sometimes we 
don’t support the legislation, Mr. Speaker, and sometimes some 
members of the opposition support it and some do not — either 
way they get their will because they have the most number of 
seats in here and they pass the legislation. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, if you can believe it, parts of that 
legislation that the NDP worked so hard to get passed kind of 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

 

just sort of hang on the books because they’re not proclaimed. 
They’re not proclaimed. They don’t become the law of the land. 
 
And Bill 41 now has to go back and repeal, repeal those 
unproclaimed pieces of previous legislation because, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP couldn’t get it right the first time. 
 
So we know that the Bill does some important things. It deals 
with issues like the property assessment appeal. It affords 
municipalities the opportunity to look at what the minister 
refers to as municipal restructuring and what most other people 
would call voluntary amalgamation, gives them some flexibility 
in that regard, and then it takes care of some housekeeping 
amendments. 
 
And a number of my colleagues have had a chance to speak to 
this particular piece of legislation and it’s why, Mr. Speaker, we 
are prepared to see this move on to Committee of the Whole 
where the critics and members of this side of the House do have 
some specific questions as to how this will impact municipal 
property taxpayers in the province and how they can expect a 
simplified assessment appeal system. 
 
So I would conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, with an 
indication that at this time the opposition is prepared to see this 
Bill move into committee for further scrutiny. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 39 — The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to get to my feet 
and speak, make a few comments on Bill No. 39, the municipal 
revenue-sharing piece of legislation, which is a very interesting 
piece of legislation. 
 
I kind of reflect back to when the budget was announced, and 
there was quite a bit of dissatisfaction with the mayors and 
councillors and quite a few people that this would affect — the 
towns, villages throughout the province. 
 
I think they were expecting probably more money coming from 
the government on this Bill because I think at the SUMA 
convention they had the feeling that with the feel-good speeches 
that were made by the Premier and the member from Melville, 
Municipal Affairs minister, that there would be more 
revenue-sharing money coming down the pipes and they were 
quite disappointed in it as I know out in Arm River they are, as 
I know up in Regina they are. 
 
A lot of these towns, villages, cities are facing increased costs 
with . . . One of them is water quality as the rules and 
regulations change. And I mean, and we agree in this House, 
that there should be regulations being brought forth on the 
water quality; it’s a very important issue. 
 
But when you bring forth regulations like that, making towns on 

. . . That have to adjust their water systems, water treatment 
plants, comes with a very added cost, a very expensive cost that 
the towns and villages and cities are finding very hard to go 
back to their local taxpayers time and time again. 
 
Now over the years — probably the last ten years if I believe 
right — if you check the figures that this government has been 
cutting . . . has been making cutbacks to revenue sharing 
through the ’90s, and the towns there or villages tightened up 
their belts way back then and thought it would be just for a few 
years. And they always figured that next year the government 
would be giving more money, and more money would be 
coming to help them with their projects that they’d been putting 
off. 
 
I have a number of towns that have been putting water 
treatment plants on hold for a number of years hoping that the 
money would be coming next year. But it’s always next year, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s getting very frustrating for the towns and 
villages out there. They need to make changes, and it’s not only 
to their water system, water treatment plants, it’s the rules and 
regulations on landfills that they have to spend money on. And 
there is only so much money out there with the taxpayers. And 
the mill rates have been going up. 
 
And it shows here in the city of Regina there. I believe the 
council here had a very tough time with their budget. It was a 
very long-drawn-out process on it dealing with the money that 
was coming in, and still trying to provide the services to their 
citizens. And they were looking for some additional help from 
this government and believe they didn’t get it, Mr. Speaker. So 
they’re hoping, they’re hoping, Mr. Speaker, the more time will 
be coming, more money will be coming down the pipes. 
 
I know some of the members are hollering from the other side, 
so I guess that they would agree that next year that the money 
should be cut back. Is that what they’re saying from the other 
side? That they gave them too much money this year? I’m not 
sure. I can hear some hollering but I can’t pick out exactly what 
they’re saying on that. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, this is a pertinent piece of 
legislation that should be dealt with, I think, with more serious 
consideration, with more money coming — the revenue sharing 
that has been taken from the towns, villages, and the cities here, 
as the taxes are going up throughout most of the province of 
Saskatchewan on the share when it comes to their tax revenue 
end of it. The towns first of all look at what’s coming down the 
pipes and they have to do their budgeting, as each town does. 
 
And I know most towns in my constituency had a very tough 
time at budget time this time, just basically trying to maintain 
the services they’ve got. That’s not even updating the roads and 
their water systems and their water quality treatment plants and 
their landfills and all the other programs that they would like to 
initiate. One of them is recreation grants that have been cut back 
over numerous years by this government. 
 
Now they’re also dealt with added costs of some of the towns 
are looking at trying to spray for mosquitoes with the threat of 
West Nile disease. They’ve been looking for more help from 
the government at that end. And I know that government help is 
only coming up to, I think, towns that, if you have 2,000 people 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

or more, which basically I don’t think I have a town in my 
constituency that has more than 2,000 people in it. So they 
basically have no support there when it comes to fighting West 
Nile disease unless they, all my towns in my constituency, all 
go together and apply for one grant. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So it’s very frustrating for them and I think it was vented that 
day, on budget day, if I remember right. There was numerous 
quotes I could bring out from the mayors of Saskatoon and 
Regina and Prince Albert and some of the other smaller cities 
that were quite disappointed in what was given for the revenue 
sharing. They were led to believe, Mr. Speaker, that it would be 
higher, there would be more help and more support from this 
government, which unfortunately has seemed to be ignoring a 
lot of the . . . ignoring the responsibility to towns and villages 
that they look after in this. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would . . . I know we have this 
piece of legislation. We’ve also talked and we’ve met with 
some chamber of commerces, and we’re meeting with some 
more councils and chamber of councils dealing with this Bill. 
And they would like us to — the ones I’ve talked to my 
constituency — would still like us to try and get the government 
to try and put more money into the water treatment plants and 
the grant-sharing grants that are out there to try to help them 
with their water quality plants. I’ve got a town of Kenaston 
that’s applied three times and has been turned down because the 
funding is gone already before it’s already been applied with 
that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that particular piece of legislation, I’d 
like to adjourn debate on it right now. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 28 — The Health 
Information Protection Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
today to rise to speak to Bill No. 28, The Act to amend The 
Health Information Protection Act. 
 
There’s two important pieces of legislation inherent within here 
that deal with two different issues. And essentially these are the 
information compiled for use by persons in the health care 
profession for patients. And that is one of the important aspects 
of this legislation. The other important aspect, obviously, is the 
need to secure privacy on such records. 
 
The records are becoming increasingly important for a number 
of reasons. First of all we have more health care professionals 
in various specialties than ever before in history. And the 
crossing of information is becoming more and more necessary 
so that the . . . both for the research aspect of health care in 
general and secondly to make sure that patients are always 
being given up-to-date treatment and that their treatments are 
not counterproductive. So that the intent of having an electronic 

database on patient care would make sure that medications are 
not crossing, that they would keep up to date with checkups, 
they would keep up to date with specialists. 
 
It is a good idea and it’s well intended so that this . . . that there 
isn’t an overlap of services. It should in the long run provide 
efficiencies for our health care system and also provide patient 
protection so that all physicians and members of the nursing 
community, pharmacists, etc., are being able to be fully aware 
of the needs and history of any individual patient. 
 
At the same time that we look forward to that aspect coming 
into place and providing efficiencies in the health care system 
so that dollars can be used elsewhere to better provide for the 
citizens of Saskatchewan, there is the great concern with 
regards to privacy around these matters. 
 
It has been said that in the last 50 years the greatest concern 
globally was the Cold War and that the concern that is going to 
be first and foremost in a person’s mind relative to Western 
democracies, it’s going to be the nature of privacy. It is a worry 
I think that has long been out there in the philosophical field. Of 
course George Orwell’s book, Nineteen Eighty-Four, spelled 
out early the possibility of state abuse of information and 
control when essentially you can move towards a totalitarian 
regime when all information is controlled by the state. 
 
We recognize that there has to be a balance with regards to 
information that the state is going to compile and for that matter 
that private matters are going to compile — be they insurance 
companies, banks, whoever — and that all this information, at 
the core of it, Mr. Speaker, the individual does have rights. 
They have rights to this privacy and we recognize that this 
legislation is trying to address this and address it in a balanced 
form. 
 
We do have concerns that as Bill 29 in 1999 was passed but 
never proclaimed, that there was ongoing need to iron some of 
this out. This is not going to be an easy matter because the pace 
of technology moves incredibly quickly and unfortunately it 
appears that the pace of government often does not. But as 
legislators, it is incumbent upon us to get it right the first time. 
 
We’ve seen just recently the fickleness of security and it had to 
do with a missing hard drive. In the end we can only pass laws 
and hope that persons obey them and it’s very difficult, if 
people are breaking laws, to ensure security 100 per cent. But I 
was one of the individuals that received a letter from my 
insurance agent saying that some of my personal information 
could have gone awry and it does become very worrisome. 
 
It’s also worrisome that 15 years ago identity theft was 
basically a non-issue and now unfortunately is the reality for a 
number of persons. 
 
When we have the federal government looking into legislation 
concerning the human genome, it becomes increasingly 
important again with regards to our provincial legislation on 
health care and the privacy of individual patients that we have 
the correct checks and balances in place, that the information 
that is compiled can be used for good purposes and that it not 
go astray and be used for purposes which could inadvertently 
through a system result in extreme damage to individuals. 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

 

The next 25 years I think are going to, in large part, be defined 
as we move more into a global economy, more into an 
information age. We’re moving into something called Evernet, 
which is we’re talking about the Internet being present in every 
electronic device on the face of the earth. It is going to be 
incumbent upon us again, as legislators, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have good laws passed which at the essence protect and respect 
the rights of the individual and their privacy. 
 
And that being said, Mr. Speaker, it . . . I believe that this Bill is 
a good first step but there is a great deal of work to be done here 
initially and I think ongoing into the future. 
 
I have concerns with some of the methodologies being 
employed. When we see the results of the land titles through 
ISC and $107 million spent there, it’s still not working properly 
and we see individuals that have had the same name on a piece 
of property mistaken and had caveats put against their lands and 
whatnot. 
 
The seriousness of the issue of making sure that patients’ 
records are not crossed and that the IT aspect of the intent of the 
legislation is met properly is very important. I have very little 
faith in our current government, if they intend to go forth within 
their health care system of building the IT system on their own, 
that the integrity of the data would be protected. As their history 
has demonstrated through ISC, this has not been a good 
forerunner. 
 
And secondly, that the pace on which it would be kept up 
relative to the changing pace of technology, if it’s all going to 
be reinventing the wheel, we may have some fairly serious 
issues ahead of us. 
 
With those things being said and having outlined the parameters 
that I think need to be addressed, I do think there’s more work 
will need to be done with regards to this legislation and, if I 
may say so, Mr. Speaker, on an ongoing basis. So with that I 
would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Personal Care Homes 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Health to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me this afternoon to my far left, Pat Inglis, who’s the 
director of program support for the community care branch and 
to my immediate left, Dawn Skalicky-Souliere, who is the 
provincial coordinator of the personal care homes program, 
community care branch. And then to my right, Leanne Lang, 
who is Crown counsel from the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Minister 
and officials, welcome this afternoon. It’s a pleasure to ask a 
few questions. As I understand the legislation, its intent is to 

provide a framework for protection in the event of disruption of 
service through bankruptcies or things of that nature, personal 
care homes that are over a certain size. 
 
And, Minister, I wonder if you might describe the size 
requirements and the bonding requirements that’ll be there for 
personal care homes — I believe it’s over 21 beds — but could 
you outline that in more detail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m happy to answer that question. You 
are correct in stating that this relates to personal care homes 
over 21-bed capacity. And the whole purpose here is to 
basically protect the public, the patients to make sure that there 
is care there for them in the long term. And if there is some 
problem with the financial arrangements of the particular place, 
that there will be a bond in place to cover that. 
 
I think your question relates to what are the size of the bonds or 
kind of what would be the cost. I’ll give you some examples of 
different sizes. For a 25-bed personal care home, the amount of 
security required would be $62,500, and the estimated annual 
cost of a bond of that amount is about $1,250 a year. If you 
instead got an irrevocable letter of credit, the cost could be, be 
anywhere between $625 and $1,875 per year. 
 
So that’s kind of the range of the costs at that end. If you went 
up to a 100-bed personal care home which would then require a 
security arrangement of $250,000, the annual cost of a bond 
would be about $5,000. The annual cost of an irrevocable letter 
of credit would be probably between $2,500 and $7,500. 
 
So that gives you a range of the cost. It’s not an onerous cost on 
the operators. It is another cost, but we think that that cost is 
clearly justified in the kind of protection it provides for the 
residents who we’re concerned about. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, using 
the examples you’ve outlined, where I believe you said using 
the 100-bed example that the bond requirement would be 
$250,000, would that . . . Is it envisaged that that would then be 
sufficient to provide a continuity of care for some period of 
time? And if that’s the case, what period of time have you used 
in your formula to establish the level of bonding? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The calculation of that amount, whether 
it’s a 25-bed home or 100-bed home, relates to a wind-down of 
about six months. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And the amounts of the bonds then would 
provide for the normal fee structure for a six-month period of 
time? Is that how the math goes? I understand personal care 
home monthly rates vary between 14 and $1,800 a month, 
something of that nature. Is that sort of the math, the 14 or 
$1,800 times six, times the number of beds — is that roughly 
the formula? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The way the cost is calculated is such that 
it would cover the cost of the administrator, who you would put 
in to manage the home; the cost of one month’s lost rent, in the 
case of the person who ran the operation already collected the 
rent and then didn’t use it to pay for staff and other supplies. 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

But then, the ongoing costs would continue in normal course 
and people would pay their rent as it proceeds. But there’d be 
some other costs, but the primary costs are the administrator 
and the concern about that lost month’s rent. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, the Bill 
provides for the appointment of an administrator, and you’ve 
indicated that part of the bond fee is to cover the cost of that 
administrator. And it also says that the minister, yourself, can 
require that an operator in any existing personal care home, in 
any category, can also be required to post a bond or similar 
sorts of securities. Does that . . . When the words, in any 
category, are used, does that circumvent the minimum of 21 
beds? And what I’m concerned about is a concern that has been 
expressed by some personal care home operators that are 
smaller than 21 beds, who say is the provision, such as the way 
it’s written, give the latitude for the minister in some 
circumstances to be able to impose this bonding requirement on 
personal care homes that would be smaller than 21 beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question for 
clarification because it is an important question. 
 
The way this is set up is that it wants to capture those places 
that would expand. And so for example an existing personal 
care home with the daily census of 20 or less who wanted to 
increase to more than 21, well then they would have to get a 
bond. Or an existing personal care home with more than 21 
beds and they want to increase it by at least 10 beds, then they 
would have to get a bond. 
 
So it’s to deal with people who make a fairly major expansion 
of their operations. But not existing homes. So existing homes 
wouldn’t have to worry about it at all. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That was one of 
the fundamental concerns that were raised, that were brought to 
our attention in terms of the existing personal care homes. 
 
Is there any provision in this legislation in the bonding 
requirement that determines or predetermines any parameters 
on what the monthly fees can be set, or is this left to other 
legislation in terms of the parameters for setting fees or for 
establishing operating procedures and establishing what 
services are required? Is this legislation in any way affect the 
standards of the operation of these homes above 21? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The fees that are charged in personal care 
homes are based on the market in a community and there isn’t 
anything here that would affect that — other than I suppose the 
fact that the bonding costs, they may end up trying to recoup 
that through their fees. But that would be a very, very minimal 
cost. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I guess an important part of this 
exercise would be to find appropriate administrators to . . . that 
would have some experience in the services that personal care 
homes provide. So it isn’t sort of like finding a administrator 
out of a public accounting firm or something of that nature that 
would be the case in other bankruptcies or disruptions of 
business scenarios. 
 
Does the department have any vision as to where these 

administrators would come from? Would they be from the 
regional health authorities? Are there a pool of people that 
potentially you could see drawing on as potential people to act 
as administrators in the event the bond would have to be acted 
on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the first place that the department 
or the court would look for in getting an administrator is 
somebody who had a strong financial background. And most 
often those are people who are in some of the consulting firms, 
whether it’s accounting or otherwise. And so that would be the, 
often the first choice. 
 
But there may be some people who would have been retired 
administrators or other people who had some connection with 
the regional health authority or the department that could 
possibly put themselves forward. But most often they would be 
in a consulting capacity as well. 
 
But I think the simple answer is we’re going to get a 
professional to do this and make sure it’s done properly. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — One final question, Minister. I’m assuming 
that in the legislation there is the ability to make sure that 
before a licence is awarded to a personal care home above 21, 
that the requirements of the bonding or irrevocable line of credit 
are in place and continue to be in place at the appropriate level. 
Because sometimes, in other instances, we understand that 
there’s a bond in place and when all of a sudden something 
unfortunate happens, it’s shown that the bond wasn’t large 
enough or it wasn’t kept up and it wasn’t monitored to make 
sure that the level of bonding was appropriate to the 
circumstance. 
 
And I wonder, Minister, if you could outline the process for 
ensuring that the appropriate level of bond is in place on an 
ongoing basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As you can see in the legislation, if the 
bond isn’t in place the licence is suspended for the personal care 
home. 
 
The practical matter of how this will be dealt with is within the 
Saskatchewan Health. Approximately four months before the 
end of a particular licence there will be a contact with the 
personal care home to make sure that all of the appropriate 
documents are in place before the expiry of the bond or letter of 
credit, because it also is directly tied in with the licence. And so 
I think also what happens, especially as with some of the larger 
operations, there is a regular conversation, if I could put it that 
way, that takes place between the personal care home and the 
people within the department. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Now, Minister, in terms of receiving the 
licensing and reviewing this issue four months prior to the 
expiry of the current licence, is there the requirement to submit 
financial statements as well to the department to sort of get 
some sense of the financial stability of the institution, or are 
those not requirements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — When the initial application is filed for a 
large personal care home, included in that package will be the 
budget or the plan, the operational plan for the operation, and 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

 

also obviously the bond or confirmation that there is a bond or 
letter of credit in place. 
 
On an ongoing basis there wouldn’t be a request each year for 
the operational plan unless there was some concern. But there is 
the ability for the department, through the minister’s order, to 
request information at any time if there is some concern about a 
particular operation. 
 
But on a practical basis I think the ongoing operation would be 
a signal to everybody that things are going well. And they will 
have clear evidence of the bond being in place and that will be 
the protection for the individuals who are resident in these 
homes. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
the officials who have provided the advice, and the member 
opposite for his questions, and I move that we report this Bill 
without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
 
The Chair: — I’ll take a brief pause while the minister brings 
in different officials. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Request leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair through you 
to the Assembly I would like to introduce the students from 
McLurg seated in your east gallery. There’s 14 students that 
have travelled from Wilkie some four and a half hours to visit 
Regina and visit the Assembly, and take a little tour of the 
Assembly and the Legislative Building as well. 
 
With them is Scott Meunier, teacher and chaperone, with the 
students as well. They are having some opportunity to, I guess, 
partake in the activities of our Assembly, as well as I’ll be 
meeting with them a little bit later on this afternoon. 
 
So if you can join me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
(continued) 

 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Health to introduce his 
officials. 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me again, Leanne Lang, who’s Crown counsel from 
the Department of Justice. And to my immediate left I have 
Kevin Wilson, who is the acting executive director of the drug 
plan and extended benefits branch, and accompanying him is 
Andrea Laturnas, who’s the manager, policy and information 
unit drug plan and extended benefits branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome this 
afternoon to some new officials and of course, the minister. 
Minister, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 as outlined in 
second reading discussions is something that we very much 
support in principle and think this is probably very worthwhile 
amendments. 
 
In some way, a number of components to it; some of it’s 
technical that is just updating the Act and changing wording in 
the Act. The second component, I understand, creates a 
different framework for a fund, a research fund if you like, that 
will . . . has sort of been hung up in limbo because of some 
technical reasons. 
 
And it also prescribes a framework whereby pharmacists are 
going to be enabled to, under proper circumstance and 
protocols, be able to prescribe some medications primarily 
designed in emergency birth control field. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Minister, the technical kinds of a housekeeping nature, if you 
like, to the association, am I correct in my assessment that a 
good proportion of this legislation in detail is technical 
updating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer is yes. Basically the 
major part is changing the name of the association from the 
Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association to the Saskatchewan 
College of Pharmacists. And that engenders a number of 
changes or amendments right throughout the Act and so I think 
that’s really the bulk of the Bill. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The second part 
of the Bill, as well as I understand it, relates to the ability for 
the Pharmaceutical Association to access this research fund that 
was developed. Can you explain how this legislation will permit 
access ability to those research funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to that question 
is that this creates bylaw-making authority to allow them to 
transfer the funds so that they can be used. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, can you as well describe how the 
fund was established, where the funds came from, and why they 
sort of got hung up in limbo? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’ll try to explain. Basically what 
happened was in, I think 1994 approximately, there was a goal 
to, through the Saskatchewan pharmacists’ association, to set up 
an alternative reimbursement fund. And there was a vote in 
October of 1994 whereby the members voted to ratify a contract 
with the drug plan that included a check off of three cents per 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

prescription. And pursuant to this amount, these funds were 
kept and paid to a specific fund that would allow for funding 
innovative services for people who are pharmacists. 
 
And some of them were . . . One of the suggestions at the time 
was certain fees for trial prescriptions. In 1999, June 17 of 
1999, the Minister of Health received notice from the 
association that they didn’t want this check-off to continue any 
more so it ceased effective July 1, 1999 and since that date no 
further deductions have been made. 
 
But there is a fund of money that’s there available, that is 
comprised of this 3 cents per prescription over a 
four-and-a-half-year period, approximately, and that fund will 
be used for its intended purpose by the association to look at 
some innovative and alternative ways to basically pay fees to 
pharmacists. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. The third component 
in this legislation sets out the framework at least whereby 
pharmacists could be enabled to prescribe certain medications, 
and I believe that they are particularly designed in regard to 
emergency birth control. 
 
Does this legislation provide a framework for prescribing 
medications broader than the emergency birth control or are 
they restricted to that specific category? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This legislation provides the regulation 
power within this Act to allow for some expansion of the role of 
the pharmacist. But in consultation with the medical profession 
and with the pharmacists, it’s very clear that this particular 
power is limited to the prescription of the emergency birth 
control or the morning-after pill. 
 
And the control on that is very much within the Saskatchewan 
Health and the Minister of Health as far as any expansion. And 
I think it’s very clear to say that any change in that would 
involve a lot of consultation with the pharmacists and with the 
medical profession and any other professions that may be 
affected. The clear goal now is just to have the ability to deal 
with that one particular type of medication. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In our discussions 
with the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, and the College of Pharmacists, that 
seems to be where the consensus is, is that all three are in 
agreement that they will work collaboratively to establish the 
protocols and the terms of reference, and also I believe a 
training program that would be required for any pharmacist that 
would be interested in availing themselves of the right to 
prescribe these prescriptions. 
 
So I think the comment from the medical profession is that 
they’re supportive of this as it pertains to this specific 
medication. But they would want very much — and I’m pleased 
to hear you assure the House and for the record — that if there 
was any consideration of expanding this issue that they would 
be fully consulted, and I think that’s important. 
 
Minister, some of the concerns that I’ve heard, notwithstanding 
the official position of the respective associations, is concerns 
about saying, for example, will a pharmacist be able to avail 

himself of sufficient medical background about an individual 
who may present herself for a prescription of emergency birth 
control? 
 
Would they be . . . In these protocols that are going to be 
established, are they going to be able to access enough medical 
information so that the pharmacist would feel confident and 
competent about writing script for emergency birth control? 
And what procedures do you have envisioned so that the 
pharmacist could avail themselves of that required information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Very clearly, the intent here is only those 
pharmacists who wish to participate in this program would do 
that, so not all pharmacists are required to do it. The School of 
Pharmacy, together with the College of Pharmacists — as it will 
become when this legislation is passed — have worked together 
to put together a training program that deals with that particular 
issue. And they obviously will be working together with some 
of their other professional colleagues, the doctors, on some of 
the specific questions. 
 
But clearly the goal is that nobody would be involved with 
providing these kinds of prescriptions unless they’ve gone 
through the training that’s provided, and they also are willing or 
volunteer or have made a choice to actually be participants. And 
so, it’s a process that allows for this to happen; it doesn’t 
require it to happen. And I think that’s an important point. But 
we also know that there is a need across the province and so 
that there will be requests that come from pharmacists who 
want to participate in this program. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, has there been any assessment of 
where the request may come from and where the pharmacist 
might be likely to accept this accreditation for these 
prescriptions? Are they coming from more remote and rural 
communities where there might not be a 24-hour medical clinic 
available or availability of doctors, or are they coming from 
both potentially rural and urban settings? Or do you see this as 
being something that will be used in greater frequency in rural 
and remote areas where there might not be as easy access to 
24-hour physician services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s a bit of a hard question to answer 
prospectively about Saskatchewan. But we know that in other 
provinces where they’ve introduced this ability, it appears that 
most of the prescriptions are requested late at night, or during 
the night, or on weekends. And that otherwise people would use 
their family doctors like they normally would because nothing 
in here prevents the normal way of getting these prescriptions, 
which is to go to your family doctor. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, do you envisage that in the 
protocols that if a pharmacist would then prescribe one of these 
medications, that there would be a requirement that the 
pharmacist would notify that individual’s family physician so 
that their health record could show that this prescription was 
indeed written for this individual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that in most cases that’s exactly 
what would occur, is that the pharmacist would provide the 
information. But it's not a specific requirement that that happen, 
but that would be the professional thing that would happen. And 
I think it would be part of the training of the pharmacist. 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
the officials who provided advice in this session and the 
member opposite for his questions. And I move that we report 
the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Personal Care Homes 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move the Bill a third time right now. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(15:45) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the Minister of Health to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me today, to my immediate left, Glenda Yeates, who 
is the deputy minister; to my immediate right, Rod Wiley, 
who’s the executive director of finance and management 
services. Immediately behind me is Duncan Fisher, who’s the 
assistant deputy minister; to his left is Lauren Donnelly, who’s 
the executive director of the acute and emergency services 
branch; and to Duncan’s right is Bert Linklater, the executive 
director of district management services. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And 
welcome, Minister, and officials this afternoon for I guess about 
an hour of estimates, and it’s a pleasure for me to be here today. 
 
Today we’re going to sort of cover the waterfront of some 
topics. A number of my colleagues have questions that they 
would like addressed as well; so rather than focussing on one 
specific area, we’re going to sort of ask a number of areas that 
are going to cover it. So it will be a little unfocussed. 

Mr. Minister, I have two or three issues that I’d like to address 
first and then turn it over to my colleagues, and depending on 
how verbose they are and you are, we may be able to ask a few 
more questions later on. 
 
Minister, one of the questions pertains to the issue surrounding 
the medical age of, or the age of consent for medical 
procedures. Would you outline what the current situation is and 
under what legislation it is enabled? What is the age of 
majority? Is it 18, is it 16, is it 15? How, from a medical 
standpoint, is the age of consent applied as it pertains to minors 
receiving medical procedures with or without the consent of 
their parent or guardian? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. This is a 
chance to provide a little bit of information. In Saskatchewan 
there is no legislated age of consent for medical treatment, and 
this is common across the country. 
 
There are a couple of provinces that have some legislation but 
most provinces allow for common law principles to apply, so 
that patients who — it doesn’t matter their age or their marital 
status — can consent to their own medical treatment when 
they’re able to understand and appreciate the nature of their 
illness, the options that are available for treatment, and the risks 
and the benefits associated with each treatment option. 
 
Basically how it works is that the health practitioner determines 
whether the individual, regardless of the age, is capable of 
giving consent for the proposed treatment, and it’s a 
patient-doctor relationship, or nurse practitioner that’s involved. 
And this is the common approach across the country. And so in 
Saskatchewan we could say we use the common law method of 
deciding what the age of consent is for medical treatment. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, you mention that there were some 
exceptions to that. Could you outline . . . are you aware of 
where the exceptions are and in what circumstances they apply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, I think in a couple of provinces, 
Ontario, New Brunswick, and British Columbia, they actually 
put right into their law that the common law principle is the law 
in their province. Quebec permits young people who are at least 
14 years of age to consent to treatment, and in Manitoba they 
have some legislation that talks about age 16 but there are other 
pieces of legislation that say the common law consent applies. 
 
So I think generally, other than Quebec, it’s the common law 
position that applies in Canada. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I’ve had 
concern expressed from people that have a lack of timely 
reception for a medical procedure, I believe it’s called bariatric 
surgery or in . . . more commonly called a stomach stapling 
procedure. And there was some concerns that the wait times for 
this procedure were inordinately long. 
 
And I believe that it was indicated that there is a concern about 
having appropriate equipment, table and operating table 
facilities, for people who are over 300 pounds in weight. And of 
course this is why they would be interested in that procedure 
which is fairly radical. 
 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

Minister, can you update us on the availability of this 
procedure; and indeed if there is an issue surrounding 
replacement of equipment, if that issue is being addressed; and 
what you foresee about the availability of these procedures to 
move forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question and I will try 
to answer all of the components of it. And if I miss something, 
please ask more. 
 
But basically what happens is that in Western Canada there 
appear to be two places that do this surgery — Saskatoon and 
Medicine Hat. And in Saskatoon there are some challenges with 
some of the equipment, some of the beds, related to 
occupational health and safety. And it is on the plan to look at 
replacing some of the equipment to deal with patients over 300 
pounds in weight. 
 
Right now if a patient is over 300 pounds of weight they then 
have to go to Medicine Hat. It’s a fully insured service so it’s 
covered by our medical plan here, but the operation would be 
done in Medicine Hat. 
 
As it relates to the waiting list, it’s a little more complicated 
issue. With the procedure there has to be a critical care bed 
available after the procedure is done. It’s a fairly invasive or 
dramatic surgery so it requires some recovery time in critical 
care. So therefore it’s a scheduled surgery but then there has to 
be made sure that there’s a critical care bed available. And 
that’s why sometimes the waits seem to take a little bit longer, 
would be one of the explanations. 
 
But practically, there haven’t been a large number of cases so 
therefore not many places. There’s two in Western Canada that 
do it. But there is an increasing number of people unfortunately 
who require this service. And so I know that they are looking 
carefully at some of the equipment money that’s available this 
year or next year to deal with the bed issue or the operating 
table issue in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, you mentioned that there are some 
issues surrounding waiting times. Could you indicate, are the 
waiting . . . what the waiting times are in Saskatoon and in 
Medicine Hat, and what the referral processes are if Medicine 
Hat’s waiting time is less? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We don’t have the specific information 
about Medicine Hat because practically, any patient over 300 
pounds from Saskatchewan would be referred to Medicine Hat 
as an option. If you would like, we can attempt to get that 
information for you. But at this stage we don’t have the actual 
waiting time. 
 
Patients under 300 pounds and under are being dealt with in 
Saskatoon. And they would fit into the procedures that are 
available in Saskatoon. And the best way to find out those 
waiting lists would be to call the surgical care coordinator in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I have one other issue 
that I want to touch on briefly before I turn it over to my 
colleagues. 
 

Last month I had submitted a written question requesting the 
cost of procedures that are public insured by the health system. 
And I received a reference to documents that show what fees 
physicians are paid for certain services. And that is only part of 
the answer, of course, because for any given procedure there’s 
more costs associated with that procedure than just what’s paid 
to physicians. And I was wondering if the department . . . 
Perhaps the department doesn’t have that kind of statistical 
information. What I’m sort of getting at is, does an 
appendectomy cost $500 of which $200 is made up of physician 
services and $300 is made up of district health board cost to 
provide all the other services? 
 
And so what are the total costs of an appendectomy, first of all? 
And then second of all, how many of those procedures do we 
perform in the province in a year, was the information that I 
was looking for. 
 
And I was wondering, does the department have that 
information? Am I looking for something that is simply not 
available; or is it available, and if it is, would it be possible for 
me to receive that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the not-so-simple answer is that we 
don’t do cost accounting in the same way that an American 
hospital does or a hospital that sort of bills for each service. 
 
We obviously have the numbers of a particular procedure that 
are done that . . . So for example, appendectomies, we would 
have some idea of the numbers and so that would be there. 
 
But to actually put the cost for the whole regional health 
authority and then divide it up in some way that relates to the 
various procedures, we haven’t set our system up that way in 
Saskatchewan. Sometimes you try to make some guesses about 
it, but they’re not very good and they’re not very helpful for lots 
of reasons. 
 
But I know often people will ask me, as the Minister of Health, 
well you know if I went to Grand Forks or Minneapolis, this is 
how that would be billed to me and they show all the different 
kinds of things that happen. We don’t end up keeping our 
accounting that way. And I don’t think it’s some way that we 
would actually go, in that those ways of accounting are fairly 
expensive. 
 
But practically, we try to do some proxies or guesstimates of 
where we fit. And so sometimes you may see some of those 
figures, but they’re really fairly broad guesses. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Minister, I’m wondering if there are 
. . . there’s the undertaking for sort of a transparency and 
accountability in the health system across the country. And I’m 
wondering if some of these ideas . . . I’m not particularly that 
much interested in comparing it to the American system but 
comparing it to other Canadian jurisdictions, to learn. 
 
You know, again keeping on the example of appendectomies, 
are the way we provide our appendectomy services, you know, 
sort of effective and reasonable in comparison to other 
jurisdictions across Canada? And if we don’t sort of compare 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

 

those notes . . . I’m not interested in keeping track of every 
gauze and bandage that might be there. 
 
The other thing is, is that I think some services are actually 
contracted to, like Workers’ Compensation for example, where 
there would actually be a charge to Workers’ Compensation for 
certain services. And I’m wondering how those numbers are 
determined if you don’t keep any of this information. 
 
That’s more where I’m interested in the transparency and 
accountability, not only of what it costs us and how many we’re 
doing, but maybe we’re doing it an awful lot better than other 
jurisdictions and they could learn from us, and we from them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — You’re asking some very good questions 
and they’re the same kind of questions that are asked 
continually within the system. What happens now is that we 
work with CIHI, the Canadian Institute of Health Information, 
around specific issues and so that practically there are 
comparators in that information that would talk about numbers 
of procedures per population, numbers of procedures per the 
numbers of providers that you have in your province, and 
comparisons are made. 
 
One of the challenges becomes, are we using our resources in 
the most effective manner within the province? And sometimes 
that relates to the number of centres where you do it, whether 
it’s too many or too few, the numbers of providers who do that 
kind of work. That’s exactly the kind of question that we will 
also be sending to the Quality Council. I mean it’s one of the 
kinds of things they will be looking at. Are you using your 
dollars most effectively? 
 
It’s some of the kind of work that HSURC (Health Services 
Utilization and Research Commission) actually did around, 
should you be doing certain kinds of procedures any more when 
there’s a better way to do it? Or are there some other more 
effective drugs that you might use, which is what our drug plan 
looks at, the people involved there, on a continuing basis. 
 
So I think if, you know, if there are some very specific 
questions, I can see if I can find some of the answers. But these 
kinds of questions are being asked on a continual basis. 
 
One of the things that we’re doing in our new accountability 
structure for the regional health authorities is allocating the 
money into the various parts of the system on a regional health 
authority basis. The health authorities then are saying to us, 
well these are some, these are the things that we’re going to be 
doing on a regular basis. 
 
This is the first year with that kind of a structure, but it will 
provide us I think over some time with answers to more of the 
kind of questions that you’re asking, because they are clearly 
the questions that are being asked right across the whole 
system. And they’re important questions. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and thank you, 
Mr. Minister, and welcome to your officials as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to read a letter I received from one of my 
constituents. Her name is Pat Parent, and I’m sure you are 
familiar with this case, but I will read the letter. I quote: 

I read with great interest, the article on “The Third Page” of 
the Star Phoenix dated Feb. 24th, 2003. I was struck by 
how the case of Laureen Schan, who has waited 37 months 
for surgery, so closely parallels mine. I have been waiting 
42 months for a total right knee replacement, which was to 
be followed in 6 months by a total left knee replacement. 
 
In the article, Mr. Nilson, stated that you “Need to find out 
these kind of stories” so here is mine. 
 
A year ago, in January 2002, I received a copy of a letter 
written by my Orthopedic Surgeon to the booking office of 
the Yorkton Regional Health Center — stating that I had 
been waiting two and a half years at that time for the 
surgery, and that a “Very urgent appointment to arrange 
surgery was needed within the next three months.” 
 
Well, the three months came and went, I called the doctor’s 
office but was told it was up to the booking office. I called 
there several times and there was only a recorded message. 
So I left my name and phone number, each time, and stated 
the reason for my call, but received no answer. 
 
I called the doctor’s office early in Oct, 2002, and . . . (told 
that I would) was told that I would be put on the “Urgent” 
short list. In the meantime the strike happened and 
everything was at a stand still. Then my Specialist gave his 
resignation and left Saskatchewan at the end of January 
2003. Apparently, his operating room time had previously 
been reduced, but after he gave his resignation he was 
allowed more O.R. time, but the urgent list was so long, 
(that) he never got to my name. 
 
I have since seen another Specialist who feels (that) he 
cannot do the surgery because of (the) possible 
complications, and (he) has referred me to yet another 
Specialist. This was done on January 14th of this year and I 
am still waiting to see him. I’ve been told there is a 7-9 
month waiting period for the initial appointment, but 
because I am classed as urgent, I’ve been put on the 
cancellation list, hoping to get in sooner. But then, how 
much longer do I have to wait for surgery? 
 
I can barely walk from room to room in my . . . (house). I 
need to use a cane in the house. I’ve also had to purchase a 
brace at the cost of $1,000.00 and a walker for $400.00. 
Some of this was covered by insurance, but not all. I am 70 
years old and in reasonably good health except for my 
knees. My husband is 74 and had a 6 by-pass surgery last 
June, and suffered complications for a couple of months 
which slowed his recovery. He has to do most of the 
housework as I can’t, I also cannot do the shopping, or 
walk any distance at all. As my knees deteriorate, I find 
even going to church a hardship. I love to play cards, but 
when I get up from a chair, the pain when I get up is almost 
unbearable. 
 
When I could not sleep at night because of the pain, my 
family doctor Prescribed a narcotic to help ease it. I don’t 
like taking it, but the pain at times is unbearable. 
 
Did I slip through the cracks like Laureen Schan? How 
many more are (out) there like us . . .? 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

I’m waiting & waiting & waiting...................and the pain 
goes on.....And on........and............on........... When will it 
end??? 
 
Sincerely, Pat Parent. 
 

And, Mr. Minister, Ms. Parent . . . this letter is dated March 7 of 
this year and she also states on here that she has cc’d (carbon 
copy) you. And I was wondering what action has been taken 
regarding her situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for your question. 
Unfortunately I’m not able, as the Minister of Health, to 
respond to specific cases of individuals. What I will say though 
is that I did respond personally to that letter on March 27, and 
so I have written back to that particular individual. 
 
What I would say though is that the story that you’ve read here 
is one of the reasons that we’ve set up the Saskatchewan 
surgery registry and also put in Saskatchewan surgical care 
coordinators, where we have people in Saskatoon and Regina 
now who will be able to talk to individuals who are involved in 
the whole business of trying to sort out where they fit on to a 
surgical list. 
 
And we are in a position where we have developed, with the 
doctors and with the administrative and other people within the 
health authorities, an assessment package — which has been 
tried out now in Moose Jaw for the last four and a half months 
and we hope to have it expanded to the whole province very 
shortly — whereby all patients will be assessed on a similar 
basis depending on which particular kind of need that they do 
have. 
 
And practically it’s a response that we have been working at 
together with many, many people to try to make sure that 
individuals know where they are on a waiting list, they have 
some clear expectation of how that would . . . fits into the 
appropriate care for them. One of the key points is that we want 
to make sure that people are being dealt with in an optimum 
time around various procedures. And it will be clearly the goal 
of the action plan from December 2001 that we have this 
service implemented as soon as possible. 
 
But as you can understand, this is a very complicated thing. It 
involves the surgeons and their doctors’ offices, it involves the 
operating rooms and the scheduling of the operating rooms, it 
involves the administration, and it involves people who are 
working together with them on a province-wide basis. 
 
Clearly we also have the Web site which has some of the 
preliminary information as it relates to surgical care in this 
province. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You have stated that 
it was a complex situation and albeit it may be, but this woman 
has now waited 45 months for surgery. And this is a 
government that promised during the last election campaign for 
shorter waiting lists and this . . . You take back 45 months from 
right now and this situation has been going on since before the 
September 16, 1999 election. And I really think that this is 
inexcusable, the treatment that she has received from . . . with 
her health care. 

The lady in question did tell me that she received a letter saying 
that she would have to wait another six to nine months for 
assessment, and this is already after waiting 45 months. Now 
her doctor that used to treat her in Yorkton, he has since moved 
to BC (British Columbia), and he offered to put her on a list out 
there but she cannot make the trip out there. And there is an 
article in the Leader-Post that says, and it quotes you, Mr. 
Minister, or it quotes the minister, Mr. Chair, as saying: 
 

“By the summertime . . . we will have (everyone) . . . who 
is lined up for surgery have an assessment by their doctor 
based on standardized method of assessment . . . We hope 
to eliminate any of the longer-term waits that some people 
have.” 

 
And then in her letter she received from the Minister of Health 
it says that she will have to wait another six to nine months for 
assessment. Well it’s getting awful close to summertime so the 
dates just don’t jive. So I would like a response from you on 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Perhaps I could have a clarification. You 
said there was a letter from the minister that referred to six to 
nine months. Perhaps you could clarify that. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — She said she heard from someone in the 
minister’s office, that is what she told me, Mr. Chair. And so 
she said the letter said six to nine months. And when you said 
that you had responded to her letter, I believe that’s what you 
said when I asked the initial question, I just assumed that that 
was the letter she received from you. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that to clarify that, basically these 
are handled in the regions. The minister’s office would never 
give a time frame on these kinds of things. And so practically, 
that’s one of the challenges. 
 
I think, I think though, on a general basis — and it makes it 
difficult here in this House for me as minister when you keep 
referring to a specific patient — but generally we are working 
very carefully. And the point is exactly right that we will be 
going into this assessment program for the patients right across 
the province. 
 
But I think the key point, and it is referenced in your comments 
as well, or the member’s comments as well, which is that we 
have to rely on the professionals. We have to rely on the doctors 
who are doing the assessments of the patients. And one of the 
challenges has been to make sure that the availability of the 
surgical procedures matches some of the things that the doctors 
have assessed. And that’s been one of the challenges, not just in 
Saskatchewan but right across the whole country. 
 
What we are trying to do is to make sure that we end up having 
a process in Saskatchewan that allows for the surgical or 
physician assessment of patients in a way that is understandable 
to the patients, understandable to everybody in the . . . who is 
involved in that particular kind of process. In other words, that 
it’s fair but it also meets some of the optimal kinds of 
procedural points that we need. And so that’s the system that 
we’re putting into place. And it’s because of various problems 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

 

that have arisen over the years because we need to address this 
one. And so we’re working at it. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the minister, 
through the minister, welcome to his officials as well. 
 
A couple of different wide-ranging topics if I may. The first one 
relates to a constituent concern that was raised with me. This 
particular constituent is a nurse and is diabetic and uses the 
insulin pump method, mostly because of her erratic hours at 
work and this particular method allows her to ensure that she’s, 
that she’s using the insulin correctly without having to schedule 
her hours around injection. And I’m wondering, Minister, if you 
could explain whether or not the department looked at or is still 
looking at changes with respect to the materials required for the 
insulin pump method as it did for the needles, for the injection 
method. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question because 
clearly one of the goals of our system would be to try to provide 
the kinds of equipment that would assist in this particular case. 
 
The answer to your simple question is yes, we did look at this 
very carefully. We had a certain amount of money to work with 
and we knew that by expanding around some of the supplies on 
the diabetics we would affect about 15,000 people who were 
getting those ones. 
 
We also knew though that there was a demand, especially for 
people like you mentioned who have some erratic hours of 
work, around the pump. We are looking at this. One of our 
goals obviously would be to try to figure out a way, over time, 
to further expand our program to include this. The Canadian 
Diabetes Association has been very diligent and helpful in 
pointing out some of the opportunities. 
 
One of the, I guess, signs of hope around this is that the 
technology is getting better and better. But also I think some of 
the costs are coming down a bit and so at some point our ability 
to pay for this and the costs are going to be close to matching. 
And then hopefully we’ll then have it as a standard across the 
whole province as something that we can afford. 
 
But at this point we’ve had to be pretty careful. The costs of the 
drug plan have gone up dramatically anyway and this would be 
something that we’re adding. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that response. In 
looking at the insulin pump technology then and the potential 
for its coverage, does the department have a handle on how 
many diabetic patients would be using this currently and so 
therefore you would have been able to cost out what it would 
cost Sask Health if it was included similarly to the recent 
changes for injection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think I can provide some information, 
but basically what I would be doing is relaying information that 
we confirm as being pretty close to the best estimate which 
comes from the Canadian Diabetes Association. And in the 
province, there are about 10,000 insulin-dependent patients in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and of that, sort of a high 
estimate of who might use the pump is about 10 per cent, so 
around 1,000 people. 

The cost for the pump, as you may know, is $5,000 
approximately to purchase. But then the annual supplies are 
about $2,000. And so it ends up being a cost that in some cases 
is manageable within a family, in other cases not. 
 
And so part of our goal, obviously, would be to figure out at 
what point we can further expand the drug plan to include this, 
and I mean sooner rather than later. But once again, we also 
have a lot of people saying no more taxes. You know, where do 
you get the resources? And so it’s dealing with that particular 
issue. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If I can switch to 
another topic very briefly and it has to do with the budget 
announcement this year of the CT (computerized tomography) 
scan purchases for the province. 
 
The question specifically is, as I understand what the budget 
laid out for the province, is that new CT scans would be 
purchased for Moose Jaw and Yorkton I believe — believe it 
was Yorkton — and Swift Current would be allocated, as I 
understand it, the used CT scan that has previously been shared 
between Moose Jaw and Swift Current and been up and down 
that highway. 
 
And so I wonder if you could, Minister, explain the rationale for 
that? In other words, how closely has Sask Health officials 
when they . . . Have they inspected or had a look at the used CT 
scan that Swift Current will get in terms of the condition that 
it’s in because it has been going up and down that highway now 
for I can’t remember exactly. The previous minister I think had 
made the announcement two or three years ago. So I was just 
wondering. 
 
So it’s been up and down the highway quite a bit and I wonder, 
there’s a bit of a concern in Swift Current about the state of that 
used CT scan that Swift Current’s getting. And I wonder if you 
could comment on the work that the department did to inspect 
that unit and tell the Assembly about any . . . whether or not any 
costs to bring it up to the proper state, if it’s not indeed in the 
premium state, are those to be covered off by Sask Health if 
there are attendant costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think I have a relatively positive answer 
for this one as well in the sense that what is happening right 
now is we are working together with the regions across the 
province around the technical specifications for new CT scans 
in the places that we’re going to put them. Also in some other 
places where we have ones that are a little bit older. 
 
The question becomes whether, if you buy a number of them, 
that you would then trade in all of the ones that you do have and 
get a whole batch of new ones or whether some of them have 
life left in them or not. And so I think that CT scan that’s been 
shared between Moose Jaw and Swift Current is in that 
category of being assessed at the same time as they’re looking 
at purchasing some new ones, about whether it shouldn’t be 
traded in on some new ones. 
 
Now the other side of this — I know from going to visit both 
Moose Jaw and Swift Current — is that the biggest challenge 
really around that particular machine, which is a good machine, 
is that when you move it, it ends up needing to be adjusted all 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

the time. And so one of the factors that has to be assessed by the 
people who are looking at this, together with Sask Health and 
the regions, is well, if it is affixed in a certain place and doesn’t 
move, will it be at the standards that we need or its capacity? 
And that will also be weighed into the whole process. 
 
Now ideally both you and I would prefer if we could somehow 
trade all these ones in and get the latest technology. 
 
Another aspect for Swift Current is the issue of . . . As we move 
towards the new building, it will be . . . As they’re doing their 
planning, they may want to say well let’s not make a decision 
about what kind of a new equipment we have until we know 
what space and what kinds of things we want to do in that 
particular building, so that when it goes on line we’ve got the 
latest equipment at that stage. 
 
So there’s a whole number of options. They’re all being 
discussed, and clearly we’re working together with the 
professionals who have some questions, who and . . . but also 
we’re looking at, well what kind of resources do we have now 
and how do we roll this out across the province. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. I 
think you’ve helped answer this, the question which I could 
have probably put more succinctly. And the question basically 
is why, you know, what is the criteria for the department to 
decide that Swift Current ought to receive the used CT scan and 
other centres should receive a new one? How do you make that 
decision at the department is a question? 
 
And I’m hearing — and I’ll sit down and let you clarify this if 
I’m wrong — I’m hearing what you’re saying is that well Swift 
Current may be, you know, a matter of years away from a 
brand-new facility, and at that point it may wish to either put in 
a brand-new machine and/or some other technology and 
therefore that’s part of the reason. 
 
And so I would assume then — not, certainly not being expert 
in this area — I’d assume then that if a new CT scan were to go 
into an old facility that was slated for replacement down the 
road, that it’s not somehow desirable to have to move, to simply 
move the new CT scan — new in 2003 or ’04 — move that new 
CT scan to the new facility 2005, 2006? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer is more that there are 
possibilities of doing a trade-in so that you might end up with 
newer equipment in Swift Current sooner. But one of the 
challenges is that as you move to the higher end, the more 
renovations required, the more specific space is required. And 
so I think that there are some challenges as they go forward 
with the design. 
 
But it’s not counted out at this possibility that we would end up 
getting rid of the existing one and getting two new ones. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And one last topic I 
want to touch on, and to be fair in written questions I think 
yourself and the department have answered this quite clearly 
but I wouldn’t mind getting it on the record in terms of 
Hansard. 

It has to do with the new facility that the government 
announced, and again I think it’s fair to say that the people of 
Swift Current and area, including the MLA, were grateful for 
the announcement that was made shortly after the budget. The 
subsequent written questions were trying to confirm clearly that 
— because we’re talking about next fiscal year — trying to get 
a grip on exactly how the government could make that 
confirmation in light of the fact that it wouldn’t be expended 
until fiscal 2004-2005. So that’s the question then. 
 
In the answers that you provided, Minister, you clearly 
indicated that it is, I think the word was, that it has been 
formally budgeted, the government share — 65 per cent — of 
the hospital. Not the study, not the 500,000 for the study, but 
the capital dollars for the hospital has been formally budgeted. 
So I’m assuming then that that has occurred in the next fiscal 
year as a part of the department’s multi-year plan, five-year 
plan. But that Sask Health has clearly said look, this money for 
the Swift Current hospital capital project is there, next fiscal, 
it’s approved and it’s a done deal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to your question 
is yes. One of the challenges is that the scope is still being 
discussed with the regional health authority and with the 
architects and with everybody else in the planning. But this 
government plans to build that hospital during its next term and 
we will continue to do that, sir. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to 
your officials, I welcome the opportunity to ask questions 
today, a number of questions today. 
 
I’m going to start by asking you about the early childhood 
development fund. I think it was something that was brought 
into your budget about three years ago. And I believe at that 
time it was about $10 million that was divided between Health, 
at that time Education, and I think, Social Services. And I 
believe that at the introduction it was divided equally between 
the three departments and I see that now you’re getting about $6 
million. Is that still federal money and is the money still divided 
. . . Is it still federal money divided between three different 
departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for the question. This is an 
important program for the children and mothers and families of 
the province. 
 
This year the total budget is approximately $13 million and 
Health’s share is 6.69 million, and that’s an increase of 2.56 
million in Health. 
 
Health does some of the addictions work, the mental health 
work, those kinds of things. Learning has another aspect of it 
and Community Resources has the sort of a daycare aspect, and 
the dollars are federal dollars that are going into this program. 
 
But they’re spent through three different departments because 
that’s how we’ve provided these services, but they’re very 
clearly coordinated. And I think the lead minister on it is the 
Learning minister. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understood that it 
was federal dollars and I do appreciate the fact that they’re 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

 

spent between these three departments. Is it up to your 
government to determine the split of the money between the 
three different departments or is it something that the federal 
government determines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What happens is that the provincial 
government reports to the federal government what, what we 
. . . how we spend the money. And so they will ask us questions 
about how it’s spent. 
 
How is it allocated is the question I think you’ve asked. In each 
community, the way we’ve set up the program, there is a local 
community group of people who have worked on this particular 
project and they decide in their community how it’s allocated 
between the different programs that come out of Health, 
Learning, and Community Resources. 
 
Then the figures that are reflected here are . . . We just add all 
those numbers together we get from the local communities, and 
then that’s what number shows up in our provincial budget. But 
it’s the local area working together with, obviously, some of the 
provincial government employees deciding how to allocate the 
money. But those kinds of allocations are made in the local 
community. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I wasn’t, I’m not sure if I got the answer 
correctly but I believe you said that $13 million or 
approximately $13 million that was . . . (inaudible) . . . from the 
federal government this year, you could . . . your government 
could determine how much of it went to Health, how much 
went to education, how much went to community services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that we can determine it. How 
we’ve decided to do that, as a government, is to work with the 
local communities, and the actual allocation of the dollars 
happens in each community. 
 
So in Prince Albert they may decide to allocate it between 
Health, Learning, and Social Services programs in a way that 
they want. Then we take all of those numbers that are created 
across the province, add them together, and that’s the number 
we put in our budget. 
 
And so practically, we have to be responsible to the federal 
government in our reporting for what’s happened, but we . . . 
what we would say to them is that we think that the local 
community has a better idea of which services they need to 
complement what’s happening there already. And that’s what 
we’re reporting back to you here in the legislature, and what 
we’re reporting also to the federal government. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that clarification. 
I understand now that the federal government is asking you to 
be accountable for the money, and in doing so you are asking 
the local people how it should be spent. And that of course is 
something that we believe in. The local people know what they 
need in their community. 
 
The area that I want to go down today is probably not going to 
be surprising to you and that is the area of fetal alcohol 
syndrome, and I believe that you, through this, this is the area or 
the amount . . . In this budget item is where you are spending 
the money on fetal alcohol syndrome, probably some education 

although maybe a lot of that is through the Department of 
Learning, but there would be some through Health when it 
comes to doctors’ offices and, more importantly, the area of 
diagnosis. 
 
I know that everyone in this Assembly and in the province is 
worried about and talks about the incidence of FASD (fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder). And to my knowledge right now, 
there is one doctor that is a practising, diagnostic doctor in this 
area in Saskatoon and there’s one that is hoping to be able to do 
this in Regina. But it’s an area of great concern because with 
FASD, there’s the two sides of the issue — there’s education, 
and then assessing and diagnosing the people that have the 
condition at this time. 
 
Can you give me an idea of the amount of money that your 
department spends on FASD, both on the education side of it 
and on the diagnosis side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think your question relates to where do 
we get funds that we work with around fetal alcohol syndrome 
issues, and one of the places is this early learning program and, 
especially from the health perspective, the home visiting 
program which is very much a prevention-oriented program. 
 
And so in all of the nine targeted areas in the province where 
this program exists, we have home visiting and that takes the 
bulk of the dollars that are part of this particular program. 
 
Now we do have some other areas where we work on education 
and we work on our coordination with the Western provinces 
and the territories, and that’s not money that’s included in this 
particular program. That comes from another part of the budget. 
And if you are interested in talking about that I can try to 
answer some questions around that. 
 
But I would say that we have made a very clear decision to 
work on prevention. And through this Kids First program and 
the home visiting part from Health, is very crucial in getting to 
the moms and to the families early to make sure that we prevent 
this very preventable problem. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me how 
much money is spent on the education portion of FASD in your 
department, both from this portion of the budget and any other 
portion, any other area of the budget where you do spend 
money on this condition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question and I will try 
to lay out in a clear fashion all the different kinds of things that 
we do. 
 
In the Kids First program obviously there’s an education 
element to it, but it involves individuals working with 
individuals so we don’t have a specific amount that you can 
allocate or describe there. 
 
But from a different area of the budget we end up providing 
money to the Saskatchewan Institute on Prevention of 
Handicaps. And you know about their program — $82,800 
comes from Health and $40,000 comes from Community 
Resources and Employment. So that’s $122,000 that is provided 
to that institution or that organization which becomes sort of 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2003 

 

our front-line education part for the province. 
 
We also have had some grant money, $15,000 around an FAS 
(fetal alcohol syndrome) advertising campaign — posters and 
things within the province. That is available this year. We paid 
just under $100,000 for what’s called the clinical teratology 
program, and that’s for the funding of the doctor who does the 
assessment of patients. So that comes out of the Health budget. 
 
(16:45) 
 
We’re also are involved with a program in La Ronge which is a 
family intervention project, which is in addition to what we’ve 
been doing on the Kids First program, and that costs about 
$60,000 a year. 
 
As well we’re part of the, new name, Canada Northwest Fetal 
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Partnership. And this was one that 
we were involved . . . Originally it was Prairie, then Northern, 
and then we included British Columbia, and now we’ve become 
Canada Northwest. 
 
And that partnership costs us $20,000 a year plus staff time. I 
mean we end up . . . All of the provinces and territories 
contribute people to do different projects. Some years it’s 
hosting a conference like we did in Saskatoon a few years; other 
years it’s preparing particular research or something for that. 
But the straight cash cost of that is $20,000. 
 
So these are various amounts that we’re spending in different 
ways, and we continue to emphasize though that the most 
important way that we have of dealing with this is through the 
Kids First program and doing the prevention. And so that’s 
where we put obviously the bulk of our money, which is, you 
know, over 6, almost $7 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I agree that when 
we’re dealing with a condition that’s totally preventable, 
education and the issue of ensuring that the general public 
knows that we don’t have to be living with . . . people don’t 
have to live with the outcome of FAS is very important. 
 
I heard you say that part of the money was spent on addictions, 
and of course there’s some of the counsellors that are needed 
for this issue as well. Many of the young people, parents that 
I’ve talked to have said that there isn’t enough of these, enough 
trained people in the province to actually deal with the people. 
There’s different levels of addictions or different levels of 
handicapped as a result of FASD. 
 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) I believe has a course that’s dealing with people 
that . . . with training. Is there any money that comes from 
Health or any expertise that comes from Health into that area as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think there are any direct dollars 
that would go into that program. Often what happens at SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) is 
they ask around in the community and through different 
government departments around particular courses that they 
might like to develop with, is there a need, that kind of thing. 
 

And so I’m sure some of our staff would have been part of that. 
But their budget comes out of the Learning budget and SIAST, 
as an institution, assesses what are the things that are needed in 
the province. And this is something that they have identified as 
a need. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, how many counsellors is the 
Department of Health paying for dealing with young people or 
young adults that have FASD? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have a specific answer around the 
fetal alcohol syndrome diagnosis or related problems, but these 
people are treated and worked with through the addictions 
people right across the whole province that are in the regional 
health authorities. 
 
So what I do know, for the last full year of information which is 
ending March 31, 2002, we had about 20,796 people seen in the 
addictions program. Now if we could make a guesstimate of 
how many of those related to fetal alcohol syndrome then you 
would get some idea of what the number might be, but I don’t 
have that information. 
 
But I guess, I mean the good news on this though is that we do 
have a system across the province that is in the regional health 
authorities that do provide counselling on both the mental 
health side and the addictions side that is directly related to our 
Kids First program and some of the people who are identified 
with the problems there. 
 
And those people also have training, and we in Saskatchewan 
have a lot of people who are very keen on working in this area 
which is fortunate for us. And so we have those people across 
the province as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve had the 
opportunity to speak to some of your colleagues about this 
issue, and I believe there’s six different departments that are 
dealing with FASD in some shape or form, and yet there 
doesn’t seem to be any one department that’s taking the lead on 
the issue. They tell me that there are reports and meetings every 
couple of months, but there actually is no one focused format 
either on the prevention side or talking about diagnosis of the 
many people that actually do need to be assessed. 
 
Can you tell me, is your department trying to take the lead on 
this issue? Is it something that we can be looking forward to 
seeing some kind of a process where departments are actually 
working together to have one voice when it comes to FASD? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. Health is 
taking the lead on this. They’re basically the Chair of the 
departments. But I’ll give you the names: basically Health is 
Chair; Community Resources and Employment’s involved; 
Learning’s involved; Justice, Corrections and Public Safety; 
Government Relations, and Aboriginal Affairs, as well as the 
Office of Disability Issues. 
 
And so representatives from all of those different departments 
work together on an interdepartmental committee on FASD, 
and this has been going on for a number of years now. And they 
provide direction on a number of the things that we’ve been 
doing. And we plan to continue that work but we also plan to do 



May 22, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

 

some more public things as well, which include the community 
in some of the discussion. And I think that’s important as well. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Meadow 
Lake on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I have, and would like to introduce to you and to all 
members of the legislature, guests seated in the west gallery, 
who I might add just arrived in the nick of time to be able to 
introduced in the legislature and to be forever recorded in 
history in Hansard. 
 
I am pleased, and a number of my colleagues made comment to 
the fact, that there’s such a large group. In fact the community 
of Meadow Lake is a growing community and the population in 
fact has been increasing for quite a number of years. That’s why 
you see such a large class. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you 68 — I’m told 68 — grade 9 
students from Jonas Sampson Junior High. With them are 
chaperones, Pat Beauline, Dawn Algers, Bernice Hazzard, 
Morgan Shank, Marvin Milnthorp, Emile Skopyk, and Doug 
Bennett, and their teacher, Terry Paley. 
 
And if you would please join me in welcoming them to the 
legislature today. I’m about to go out and have a photo and have 
some drinks with them. So please welcome them to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it would 
enable the delegates . . . the delegation, I should say, from 
Meadow Lake to say that they came and shut down the 
legislature in the Saskatchewan Assembly. And to facilitate 
that, I will move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1155 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Estimates 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson........................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
  Wall.................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1157 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1157 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1157 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1158 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1173 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Third Annual Premier’s Business Luncheon 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1158 
 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1158 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1158 
 Cadet Corps Ceremonial Review 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1159 
 Norwegian Constitution Day 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1159 
 Canadian Cancer Society Recognition Award 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1159 
 Emergency Medical Services Week 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1160 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1160 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1160 
 International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Application to Labour Relations Board 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1161 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1161 
 SaskTel Investments 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1162 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1162 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1163 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1164 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1164 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 



 

 

 Bill No. 23 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2003 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1165 
 Bill No. 24 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2003 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1166 
 Bill No. 40 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1167 
 Bill No. 41 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1168 
 Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1169 
 Bill No. 28 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2003 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1170 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 25 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1171 
 Bill No. 22 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1173 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1173 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 25 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
 Bill No. 22 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1179 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
 


