















































Hansard: April 04, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 389 
 April 4, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
issue of the renewal of Crown grazing leases in the southwest 
part of the province, particularly in the constituency of Cypress 
Hills, is gaining momentum; it’s not actually dying away as the 
government might like. So I’ve been asked to present this 
petition again on behalf of producers there. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people from the 
communities of Shaunavon, Tompkins, Cabri, and Lancer, as 
well as Abbey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed with . . . by citizens concerned with the 
dangerous and deplorable condition of Highway No. 42. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Central Butte, Tugaske, Eyebrow, and Elbow. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of those people in my 
constituency who are very concerned over the state of Highway 
47 South. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed from folks in Estevan, rural Estevan, as well 
as Regina. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents who are 
concerned with the condition of Highway No. 22, particularly 
that section of the highway between Junction 6 and Junction 20. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make the necessary repairs to 
Highway 22 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise 
in the Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are upset with the 2003 premium increases 
to crop insurance: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to the struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Rabbit Lake, Glaslyn, and North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 12, 13, and 18. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that on day no. 19 I’ll ask the government the following 
question: 
 

In 2003-2004, how much of the provincial highways and 
transportation budget comes from federal programs; what 
are those federal programs; and how much will each federal 
program contribute? 

 
And I have similar questions, Mr. Speaker, for the fiscal year 
’02-03 and ’01-02, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 19 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister for the Public Service Commission: under 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

the existing process, how many cases of confirmed sexual 
harassment were found to have occurred in the fiscal year 
1994-95; further, how many of these findings were passed 
on by the Public Service Commission to the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police for possible criminal 
investigation? 

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the years 
from ’95-96, ’96-97, ’97-98, ’98-99, ’99-2000, 2000-2001, and 
2001-2002, and 2002-2003. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 19 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Environment: for the 
fiscal year 1995-1996, how many ranchers in hunting zone 
no. 50 did your department construct fences for to protect 
feedstock; and for that same year, how many requests to 
construct these fences did your department receive? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for every year hence, up 
to including the present year 2003-2004, with a slight 
modification. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

All Saints Anglican Church — 100th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members, 100 years ago, the All Saints Anglican Church held 
its first service in a schoolhouse at Flett Springs. The Canon, T. 
J. Clarke, their first minister, presided over a small 
congregation of 10 to 20 people. A short time later the 
congregation moved to their permanent home in Melfort where 
generations have found comfort and celebrated in their church. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many of us know, maintaining a church in a 
rural setting involves the hard work, dedication, and faith of the 
religious leaders and everyone in the congregation. It is a 
testament to this church’s successful role in the Melfort area 
when, 100 years later, they have 200 families listed as members 
of their church. Canon T. J. Clarke’s grandson, Tom Clarke and 
his family still live in Melfort and will be among the 300 people 
expected at the 100th anniversary celebration this weekend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members, I was honoured to be invited to this 
celebration and I would like to bring the congratulations of the 
House with me when I attend this weekend. Please join me in 
expressing our hope that with the help of God, the All Saints 
Anglican Church will continue to perform an essential role in 
our community. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Employment Statistics 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is jobs Friday, 

Mr. Speaker. Those experts of statistical objectivity have 
released their monthly report and that means just one thing, Mr. 
Speaker, more good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, for the 11th straight month, jobs 
are up. For the 11th straight month, we have more concrete 
evidence that the plan we have been working on . . . and that 
our future is wide open for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a slogan did not create these jobs. 
 
During March of this year, 477,100 Saskatchewan people were 
employed. That’s 1,600 more than in February. And get this, 
Mr. Speaker, 11,400 more people were working this March 
compared to March one year ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, our unemployment rate for March 
was 5.9 per cent, a decrease from February. The national rate 
was 7.9 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s another fact or two, Mr. Speaker. Agricultural 
employment in March was up by 500 from February. 
 
And get this — employment for people between the ages of 15 
and 24 increased by nearly five and one-half thousand from 
March a year ago. The Saskatchewan Party tells us that that 
these kids can’t find work here, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party is 
wrong. 
 
For those who believe in this province and believe in it, this is 
very good news. For those others, Mr. Speaker, we feel sorry 
for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Wildlife Week 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Sunday, April 6 marks the beginning of National Wildlife 
Week. The week is in honour of Jack Miner, one of the 
founders of Canada’s conservation movement. 
 
This Act was proclaimed by the parliament back in 1947 and it 
gives Canadians the opportunity to give extra focus on 
conservation. This year’s Canadian theme is Native Species, 
Nature’s Choice. 
 
The Canadian Wildlife Federation states that timeline . . . that 
the theme highlights the growing concerns about the 
devastating impact of alien species on Canada's wildlife and the 
environment. Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wildlife Federation 
reports that these species wreck havoc on biodiversity and 
ecosystems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must recognize the importance of maintaining 
a healthy and safe environment, and that we must do all that we 
can to ensure responsible stewardship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our hope that everyone take some time during 
National Wildlife Week to reflect upon the importance of our 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

 

environment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan’s Economy 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this government is building for the future. Through investment 
in business and research and reductions in business taxes, we 
have fostered a prosperous and competitive economy and we 
plan to build on that momentum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is good economic news flowing from all 
corners of this province and our current initiatives of reducing 
personal income taxes, corporate capital taxes, and small 
business taxes, and our investments in such areas as green 
technologies, mineral exploration, health, education, 
community resources, tourism, and forestry will ensure that this 
good news continues to flow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has a prosperous and 
competitive economy and will continue to have a prosperous 
and competitive economy is good news for everyone in this 
province — except it seems for the Sask Party because, Mr. 
Speaker, the Sask Party sees good economic news for this 
province as bad political news for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s entire agenda consists of 
predicting doom and gloom for this province and then hoping 
their predictions come true. Pathetic, but there you have it. On 
the other hand, Mr. Speaker, this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government has a plan and clearly that plan is working. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Watrous Winterhawks Win Senior Hockey Title 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to rise in the 
Assembly today to talk about another winning team from 
Watrous. Quite recently the Watrous Winterhawks won the 
2003 SAHA (Saskatchewan Amateur Hockey Association) 
Senior “B” provincial title by defeating the team from Leroy in 
a two game sweep of the best of three series. 
 
Team manager Dennis Fry said that the team is very pleased 
with the recent victory and have had a good season this past 
winter. Mr. Fry indicated that the team posts a regular season 
record of 17 wins, 5 losses, 2 ties, including that four of the five 
losses were the Leroy team. This made the provincial victory 
over the Leroy team just that much sweeter for the Watrous 
Winterhawks. 
 
Mr. Fry, who became team manager in 1995 and also team 
president in 1999, has enjoyed working with the team and their 
head coach, Craig Miettinen, who joined the team as assistant 
coach in 1994 and has been head coach since 1999. 
 
This is now the third provincial title that the Winterhawks have 
won in recent years. Mr. Fry went on to say that this team is a 

balanced squad consisting of men between the ages of 18 and 
35. Indeed there are six players who have been on this Watrous 
team for all three provincial title victories. 
 
The team’s scorers included Lindsay Hoerdt, Craig Collins, 
Graham Potts, and Jeff Gorman. Mr. Fry said that he expects 
the team to stay together for the 2003-2004 hockey campaign. 
 
I would ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 
congratulating the Watrous Winterhawks in the provincial title. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Growth in Yorkton and Region 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
remember the old Dixieland song, “Hold That Tiger?” Well, 
Mr. Speaker, on this day, more good news on job front; good 
news about the budget, Mr. Speaker, as well. 
 
On this day when members who believe that the Saskatchewan 
have the opportunity to vote, have the opportunity to vote in 
favour of the budget, I am happy to tell colleagues that in my 
city of Yorkton we have been proclaimed, the tiger of the East, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Paul Martin of the Saskatchewan 
Party recently . . . or of Saskatchewan said this, and I quote, 
that: 
 

Yorkton and the east central region of this province (has 
seen some of the greatest growth that we’ve seen in the 
province. In the past eight months we’re) . . . creating jobs 
at an unusually high rate (and) . . . It (has) outpaced . . . 
other parts of Saskatchewan [in 2002] with an increase of 
(over) just under 6 per cent in (other parts) . . . 

 
But in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, and that region, now over 13 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. Not 6.8 but 13 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, when we note the trusted objective commentator 
of Mr. Martin points out that it’s outstripped any growth in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Yorkton has expanded its industries like Harvest Meats and 
Pastry World, Mr. Speaker, and Popowich Milling which we’ve 
all invested in as government. And we have partnered with 
Painted Hand Casino — 208 jobs, and 57 per cent of First 
Nations people employed there, Mr. Speaker — and 75 people 
working at SecurTek, Mr. Speaker, and it goes on and on. 
 
And the tiger, Mr. Speaker, has just begun. Mr. Speaker, to 
demonstrate its economic strength in Saskatchewan. And I want 
to say in spite of the doom and gloom of the Saskatchewan 
Party, Mr. Speaker, the tiger of the East is on the move, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

Macklin Pee Wee Girls Provincial Champions 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Macklin pee wee girls are provincial champions. The pee wee 
girls beat out the Fort Qu’Appelle Foxes in a two game, total 
point of 5 to 4 to be the provincial finalists. 
 
The girls also won their league championships in the East 
Central Alberta female hockey league by beating the Hardisty 
Long Horns in the final game 1 to 0. 
 
Congratulations to the girls. Help me congratulate these girls. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Saskatchewan Communities 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to help 
fulfill this government’s commitment to building for the future, 
and in keeping with our tradition of managing our province’s 
finances responsibly while investing to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan people, we are injecting more than $10 million in 
new funding as part of a total $115 million commitment to 
support our vision of strong and vibrant Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our strong economy enables us to assist in 
renewing water and sewer systems, repairing roads, and 
improving urban parks. Our strong economy enables us to 
allocate $75 million in revenue sharing to Saskatchewan 
municipalities. Mr. Speaker, our strong economy enables us to 
allocate $10 million for year three of the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program. Our strong economy enables us to 
subsidize transit assistance for the disabled to the tune of $2.3 
million and provide $1 million to purchase 17 additional 
vehicles for people with disabilities. And, Mr. Speaker, our 
strong economy enables us to provide funding to hire 10 
additional police officers to support integrated, 
community-based approaches to reduce crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a plan that includes fostering 
strong, safe, and healthy communities. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
plan is working. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Reaction to Harassment Allegations 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are still 
incensed and outraged about how the NDP government handled 
the Murdoch Carriere sexual harassment case, and in particular 
they are wondering about the NDP’s initial decision not to fire a 
sexual harasser and instead make him a special adviser to the 
government. 
 
In particular, the people of Saskatchewan want to know who 
was responsible for that decision. Was it the deputy minister 
alone? Did he consult with the minister? Did he consult with the 

Premier’s office? Mr. Speaker, is it the government’s position 
that Terry Scott made this decision entirely on his own? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I will again reiterate that I 
made a commitment to review the decision. I reviewed all the 
background materials, I made the decision, and I would hope 
that the opposition supports that decision. 
 
Now what I will say further is that I did inquire into what 
advice was given regarding the decision. And it was done in the 
usual way the process dictates. There would have been legal 
advice, there would have been labour relations advice, and there 
would have been the normal supports that there are for 
managers who make decisions in government. I can assure you 
100 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in this House, on the record, that no 
minister interfered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, if Terry Scott ultimately made this 
decision on his own, then he either didn’t understand the 
government’s zero tolerance policy or he didn’t follow the 
government’s zero tolerance policy. And, Mr. Speaker, if he 
didn’t follow it, then the government has a big problem with the 
deputy minister. If he didn’t understand the policy, then the 
NDP has done an extremely poor job of communicating this 
policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, which one is it? Did Terry Scott not understand 
the zero tolerance policy? Did he not follow the zero tolerance 
policy? Or is there some other reason that the government 
initially decided to protect the job of a sexual harasser? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I think in making the 
decision we did, we clearly took responsibility that the process 
needs to be improved and I’ve asked for a report at the end of 
April regarding those matters that clearly need improving. 
 
But I will say that zero tolerance, in the way that people 
understand it who work in this field, is that it means you act 
immediately. And this was done. When this came to light, when 
the complaints were made, the employee in question was 
removed from the workplace, immediately — not five days 
later, Mr. Speaker, but immediately. That meets the first 
standard of zero tolerance. 
 
The second question is a question of whether the punishment 
fits the situation, and that is the question, Mr. Speaker, on 
which I made a different determination. And we will have a 
report at the end of this month and that will be public. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has never told its deputy ministers what this zero 
tolerance policy really means. As a result, they have created a 
culture where people look the other way when sexual 
harassment occurs. That is clear, Mr. Speaker, when you read 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

 

the investigator’s report about Murdoch Carriere. 
 
One of his victims, one of his victims reports that she had 
approached two of her superiors about Mr. Carriere’s actions. 
One of them told her, I don’t want to hear it. Another one told 
her, he wouldn’t do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly this zero tolerance policy is not being 
applied and immediate action was not taken, when persons in 
positions of authority are refusing to deal with sexual 
harassment complaints and not advising employees of their 
rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government as an employer has a duty to 
ensure a harassment-free workplace for all employees. Why are 
some people in your government looking the other way when 
harassment allegations are raised? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all I would point out for anybody who cares to examine 
The Occupational Health and Safety Act, Freedom of 
Information, and The Public Service Act that that member had 
freedoms I don’t have to reveal that information. So if she was 
so concerned about this information, Mr. Speaker, why didn’t 
she bring it to someone’s attention? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister . . . or Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to 
see why a deputy minister might not understand the 
government’s so-called zero tolerance policy when the NDP 
seems incapable of explaining it themselves. Mr. Speaker, what 
specific direction has this government given to its deputy 
ministers and Crown corporation heads on how to apply this 
policy? We want to know that and so do the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Can the minister please table any memos or directives . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 
members to allow the question to be put. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, can the minister please table any 
memos or directives that were ever sent to department heads on 
how the zero tolerance policy is to be applied in the case of 
sexual harassment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, every manager in 
government is aware of this policy. As well, it is posted on the 
Public Service Commission policy and procedures manual for 
managers and employees. It is a matter of . . . it’s embedded in 
the collective bargaining agreement with the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union). 
 
I do take exception, Mr. Speaker, for her implying that 
everybody’s running around abusing everyone. This is a huge 
accusation to make that everyone’s guilty until proven innocent. 
You implied that managers do not understand this, was the 
direct implication, Mr. Speaker. And you know, I have to say 

that there are people to advise people if they’re not sure how 
that’s applied. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, every workplace in the province is 
required to have a harassment policy. I am today tabling the 
harassment policy of our NDP caucus. And I want to know, 
does that caucus give any direction to their employees to protect 
them from sexual harassment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for College of Medicine 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Late last year we learned that the College of Medicine at the 
University of Saskatchewan is in danger of losing its 
accreditation with the Association of Canadian Medical 
Colleges. The college has been placed on probation and given 
two years to make improvements to its staffing levels, its 
library, and its curriculum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation is very, very serious. Yet despite 
knowledge of the situation and his own personal commitment to 
help the college meet the accreditation requirements, the 
Finance minister left the college high and dry in this year’s 
provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is the university, and specifically the college, 
to plan for improvements to meet the accreditation standards 
when they have no budgetary commitment from this NDP 
government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We continue to 
support a strong and viable College of Medicine at the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan), for the U of S and for the 
province. 
 
We are working together with our partners in Health and in our 
departments to address the issues that the accreditation report 
identified. Some of the issues are being addressed within the 
college as we speak. Some of the recommendations . . . The 
recommendations came to us from the Academic Health 
Sciences Network. Those recommendations came before the . . . 
or too late for the budget process to include them in the budget 
determinations. But we do have a commitment to the college 
that we will provide financial assistance to them as necessary 
later on in the year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the college 
was notified that it was in danger of losing its accreditation, 
alarm bells sounded across the province and people started 
looking at the NDP government’s commitment to supporting 
our medical college. 
 
In fact, one of the NDP’s own cabinet minister, the former 
minister of Learning and now the new Finance minister, told 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio that indeed 
the college has been underfunded for years. Yet despite this 
belief, he continues the same tradition. 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is facing an uphill battle when it 
comes to attracting health care professionals to our province. 
Training and retaining doctors here in Saskatchewan should be 
a priority for this government. Yet they’ve given up on their 
responsibility to the point that our only medical college is now 
at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was this not considered important enough to 
be a budgetary item for this government, given the light of the 
information that the Health minister has said in the past? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said before, 
the recommendations that came to us from the Academic Health 
Sciences Network were . . . came too late for the budgetary 
process. We are reviewing those recommendations now and 
anticipate being able to assist the college in meeting its 
requirements with announcements as early as this spring. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — This government must be asleep because 
everybody in the province except this NDP government 
understands the critical importance of the College of Medicine. 
 
And the Finance minister, when he was Learning minister, 
acknowledged that the college was underfunded for years. And 
yet this government stands here and says, we didn’t know 
anything about this in time for this budget. The Finance 
minister, last fall, acknowledged that this was a critical issue. 
 
The report says and the dean of the College of Medicine 
indicated that it may need as much as $10 million to rectify the 
issues confronting the College of Medicine. And the Finance 
minister says, no big deal; we can kind of handle that on a 
special warrant basis as time goes by. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the planning for the future of health 
care service delivery in the province. This is sitting here and 
fiddling while Rome is burning. 
 
(10:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to the necessary funds to 
get the College of Medicine’s accreditation handled? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, for the third time, the 
recommendations that came to us from the Academic Health 
Sciences Network, in response to the accreditation report, came 
to us too late in the budgetary cycle to put money in without 
reviewing those recommendations. 
 
They are being reviewed now, and we will be working with our 
partners to resolve . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I want to be . . . 
make sure that the response is able to be heard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
recommendations are being reviewed, and we will be making 

some announcements as early as this spring. It’s interesting that 
the member stands on his feet and asks for more money from 
us, where his commitments in the last . . . their last platform 
were zero funding for health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member says 
where is the money going to come from the College of 
Medicine. Mr. Speaker, if this government doesn’t make the 
appropriate commitments to the College of Medicine they’re 
going to be presiding over the loss of the only college of 
medicine in our province. 
 
If that’s what they intend to do, just stand up in this House and 
say we don’t need the College of Medicine. Tell them you don’t 
value the College of Medicine. Tell them that . . . the people of 
this province that you had no way of understanding . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, let that government tell the 
people of this province that this comes as a complete surprise to 
those members. Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister’s a graduate 
from that college. Is he going to preside over the loss of the 
College of Medicine in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a long record of 
working very closely with our partners in supporting those 
institutions which support our health system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The College of Medicine is the core of 
many of the services that we provide in our province and we are 
working very closely with them. And we will make sure that 
that college is here for the long term because that’s a key part of 
our action plan for Saskatchewan health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk about themselves as a 
grassroots party. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we should be 
actually calling them an Astroturf party — no roots, no policy, 
and no plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question is for 
the minister of Liquor and Gaming. How much did the NDP 
government spend installing link bingo, also known as mega 
bingo, in bingo halls across Saskatchewan and what were the 
results of this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the question from 
the member. I regret I don’t have the specific responses but I 
will get them for you. You could have contacted my office at 
any time. I’d be pleased to share that with you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, well I will inform the minister 
that the NDP spent 6 million in taxpayers’ dollars in its failed 
mega bingo expenditure that ran for just over one year. Mr. 
Speaker, here’s what an SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority) official had to say about the $6 million 
failure and I quote: 
 

. . . there was a fair amount of thought at the time . . . that 
the game . . . would attract . . . new players, revitalize the 
industry, and . . . those new players and those new dollars 
would pay for the system. 
 
The unfortunate part of the process . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — 
 

The unfortunate part of the process was . . . those new 
players . . . never really materialized. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those new players never did materialize so the 
game was shut down and the province lost $6 million. Mr. 
Speaker, what sort of due diligence did the NDP do before it 
spent $6 million on this failed mega bingo scheme? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess members 
opposite feel that they live in a perfect world. We attempt to 
work with local groups, local communities on any endeavours 
that will try to enhance our charities and people in communities 
that want to get into any kind of entertainment. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as a result of what happened there, we chose to not 
proceed. It was an attempt we made to work with communities. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s curious that members opposite 
are asking these kinds of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
Order. We seem to have about half a dozen debates taking part 
at one time, but I at this stage yield the floor to the minister 
responsible for Liquor and Gaming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are many 
charitable organizations that rely on games such as bingo to 
support their efforts for their community. Mr. Speaker, I think 
those kind of questions should be asked at the Crown 
Corporations Committee meetings to get all the specific details. 
This just proves what was reported in the Leader-Post, and I 
quote: 
 

“What the Sask. Party has shown is that it doesn’t appear 
capable of governing,” Schmidt said, adding that Sask. 
Party MLAs don’t have enough experience or education 
and are too easily taken in by “simplistic right-wing 
dogma.” 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Six point two million dollars to link bingo 
halls across the province because according to Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming officials: 

The game was commenced because of the industry 
demand. They wanted a province-wide game . . . 

 
Then according to the same Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
officials: 
 

. . . after approximately one year . . . the bingo hall 
operators told us they didn’t want it any more; they wanted 
to develop something else. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister table any market research or any 
other due diligence the NDP did before they blew $6 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
there obviously paid attention to what was said and are 
behaving accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are numerous charities that rely on our 
efforts. And we do, we make every effort to try and assist those 
people. 
 
That game ran from February 2000 to June 2001, and it was 
suspended at the recommendation of the bingo industry’s 
advisory committee, Mr. Speaker. The mega bingo was 
developed to attract new players to a bingo market to generate, 
to generate additional revenues for charities right across this 
great province of ours, Mr. Speaker. It’s not an industry; it’s a 
support mechanism for charitable organizations in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Six point two million dollars — this is more 
than all the new money budgeted for urban municipal 
governments in this year’s budget. After months of the mayors 
in this province, after months of the mayors in this province 
making their case to government that they need more funding 
from the provincial government, what was this government’s 
response? They gave municipal governments, urban municipal 
governments, under $5 million. 
 
Yet this minister, the same minister that is responsible for 
municipal government, spends $6.2 million on a failed bingo 
venture without any due diligence because bingo operators 
asked for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can this minister justify this expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We remain 
committed to working with people to try and support charitable 
communities right across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if that member is accusing this government of not 
supporting municipalities, Mr. Speaker, let me point out that . . . 
let me just point out that we recognized their infrastructure 
needs. In 2002-2003 we increased . . . 10 million last year; we 
increased it by $10 million again this year. The 2003-2004 
budget provides again a revenue sharing with municipalities, 
Mr. Speaker. 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

And I would like to read a letter from one of those municipal 
leaders. And I commend all the municipal leaders that work so 
hard on behalf of their communities and the people they 
represent, as this government does. And let me just quote, and 
this is from the mayor of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
read this into the record: 
 

I am pleased to advise that the City of Moose Jaw may very 
well be able to hold our mill rate again for the 2nd 
consecutive year. 
 
We look forward to working with you as we (continue to) 
develop a positive working relationship . . . 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I recognized 
only one person. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP thinks $6 million is nothing. They decided they were 
going to spend this on a new gambling product, a product which 
went bust in one year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who gave approval for this $6 million 
expenditure? Did the minister approve of this $6 million that 
was spent on mega bingo in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the industry, the industry — 
and that’s what it is — has formed a strategic planning 
committee to put together a strategy to revitalize the bingo 
industry in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me just explain — and this could be all asked in Crown 
Corporations Committee, but I’m pleased to answer here — that 
it cost approximately $1.2 million to develop the game. As well, 
SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) invested 
approximately $5 million in equipment which included cost of 
installation, secure lines in the province’s bingo halls. With the 
suspension of the games, SLGA wrote off approximately two 
and a half million dollars of these costs in its 2001-2002 
financial statements. So not all the $5 million of equipment that 
was spent was lost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Once again, this is an effort by this coalition government to 
assist charitable organizations, something that they, the 
members opposite, obviously do not support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, $6.2 million maybe doesn’t 
sound like a lot of money to this government who loses $28 
million and calls it a success story. It is a lot of money to the 
people of this province. It would go a long way to addiction 
services. It would go a long way toward building schools and 
hospitals. It would go a long way to spending money on seniors 
in this province. It would go a long way to building a health 
facility in Saskatoon at the university to educate doctors. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of ways this money could have been 
spent, and this government just laughs about it — $6.2 million 
— it doesn’t matter to this government. Mr. Speaker, where is 
this government’s priorities and did the minister approve of this 
expenditure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is a 
reaffirmation and a confirmation that those members would not 
support charitable organizations in this province. That’s 
obvious. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very curious. I wish, I wish that some 
entity in this province, in this country, had the money that those 
people deem to have in order to spend on all the demands that 
are placed on the taxpayers of this province. The 
holier-than-thou attitude, the sanctimonious attitude, Mr. 
Speaker, when we add up all the expenditures that they are 
promising, is phenomenal and totally unbelievable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
(10:45) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll convert this for 
debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 37 has been converted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 
amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please, 
members. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It has 
been a pleasure to be able to say a few comments in regards to 
the budget, the 2003-2004 budget brought forward by the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears as though . . . that the government of the 
day is certainly quite interested in my remarks and are 
enthusiastically joining me in this debate. And we certainly on 
this side of the House appreciate their enthusiasm for listening 
to our comments and making sure they understand clearly some 
of the concerns that we have in regards to the 2003-2004 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

 

budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I ended the day by talking and making a 
few comments on how the budget might affect the people from 
northern Saskatchewan, the community leaders in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — certainly those municipalities in 
northern Saskatchewan who were certainly looking forward to 
some promises being fulfilled that this government has been 
promising since 1991 and even earlier, Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to infrastructure, in regards to education and to health. 
 
And again I was able to point out by going through the budget 
and pointing out to the government, Mr. Speaker, that there 
were some significant shortfalls, some significant shortfalls, 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget when it comes to improving the lot 
of life for the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was one comment that I didn’t get a chance 
to finish up on yesterday . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order, members. 
Order, please. Order, please. I would ask members just to 
contain their conversations across the floor. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I want to 
thank the government for being so . . . participating so 
enthusiastically in my response to the budget speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one area that I was unable to finish up on 
yesterday before time was called on the clock was the area of 
infrastructure and how it relates to economic development in 
this province and specifically, Mr. Speaker, how it relates to the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I know the government in their own way is talking about . . . 
And I want to reiterate they talk and talk and talk about how 
they’re trying to help the people of Saskatchewan. And of 
course the biggest thing they can do to help the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is to call an election on Monday — 
call an election on Monday — and that’s how they can help the 
people of Saskatchewan, so that the Saskatchewan Party can get 
elected to ensure that the promises the NDP have made can be 
carried out by the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of infrastructure for northern 
Saskatchewan, specifically as it relates to economic 
development, it is important for the people of Saskatchewan to 
understand that not only do the people of northern 
Saskatchewan need access to the South, but southern 
Saskatchewan needs access to the North. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
talk about two areas specifically that relate exactly to this 
subject. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the east side of the province there’s a highway 
that runs right from the United States border up through Prince 
Albert, La Ronge, and further north. As you get north of La 
Ronge, Mr. Speaker, the highway starts to diminish in its ability 
to carry. . . for capacity. 
 
And what has the NDP government done over the past several 
years about this, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, they’ve made 
promises. They’ve talked to people. They’ve gone into the 
North. They’ve met with community leaders. They’ve talked 

about having a study. We’ll study this issue. We’ll hold some 
more meetings. And what has been the result of that, Mr. 
Speaker? Well in this budget the result of that has been they 
would like to hold more meetings and have a study. Well the 
studies have been done, Mr. Speaker. They’re sitting on a shelf 
in some minister’s office, collecting dust. 
 
The result of that, Mr. Speaker, the result of those studies is that 
they believe, the people of northern Saskatchewan believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that northern Saskatchewan needs to be opened up for 
development. The people of northern Saskatchewan believe that 
northern Saskatchewan needs to be opened up for development, 
Mr. Speaker. And they are telling us, the Saskatchewan Party, 
representatives from the Saskatchewan Party — whether it’s the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar, they’ve told the member from 
Wood River, they’ve told the former member from Carrot 
River, they’ve told the member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood, 
they’ve told the member from Thunder Creek — we want 
assurances that we . . . of no more talk. 
 
If there’s going to be a Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 
Speaker, they want to know that the North is going to be opened 
up so that they can participate in the economy of Saskatchewan 
and not be held back by the regressive policies of that NDP 
government any more. That’s what the people of northern 
Saskatchewan are waiting for. 
 
So the Highway No. 2, it’s a very good highway, Mr. Speaker, 
up to La Ronge. It proceeds in very good condition for about 
another 10 kilometres further north to the La Ronge airport, Mr. 
Speaker, but after that, Mr. Speaker, it becomes a gravel 
highway. It’s in fairly good condition but . . . up to Otter 
Rapids, up to the Churchill River, and after that, Mr. Speaker, 
the road progressively begins to rescind into . . . By the time 
that it gets to Stony Rapids it is nothing more than a tote road. 
 
I noticed in the budget, in some of the . . . in the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, the plans by this government for that road north of Lac 
La Ronge. Are they going to make major improvements to that 
road so that there will be access for economic development up 
as far as Stony Rapids, Mr. Speaker? There was absolutely 
nothing in that budget, in this present 2003-2004 budget, Mr. 
Speaker, that alludes to the fact that this road needs to be 
developed to a primary highway status to improve the economic 
conditions of the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
All they’re talking about in the budget, Mr. Speaker . . . And I 
read the report; the member from Cumberland House has read 
that report. He knows full well, Mr. Speaker, all they’re going 
to do is fix up a couple of soft spots in that road, and nothing 
more. There’s a few little soft spots in that road, Mr. Speaker, 
and all they’re going to do is fix up those soft spots. 
 
Nowhere does it allude to the fact, Mr. Speaker, that that road 
will be improved to carry heavier traffic, that it’ll be improved 
to be a safer highway for the residents that live in northern 
Saskatchewan. Nowhere in the budget, Mr. Speaker, is there 
any mention that that’s going to happen for the No. 2 Highway. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on the east side of the province going into 
the North we have the No. 2 Highway. On the west side of the 
province there’s Highway 155, and I’d like to make a few 
comments about this. 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

This is infrastructure. This is clearly infrastructure, Mr. 
Speaker. This is the kind of spending that the people of 
Saskatchewan are demanding. They want spending in health. 
They want spending in education. They want spending in 
infrastructure. They don’t want spending in bingos. They don’t 
want spending in SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company). They don’t want the Crown 
corporations spending taxpayers’ . . . hard-earned taxpayers’ 
dollars in Atlanta, Georgia. They don’t want it spent in 
Nashville, Tennessee. They don’t want it spent in Australia. 
They want it spent in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
important that this NDP government understands that when the 
next provincial election is called. The people of Saskatchewan 
understand that even though that NDP government does not, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Highway No. 155. It’s a secondary highway in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, carrying primary weights. I’ve been on that road 
so many times, Mr. Speaker, that it’s reached the point that the 
frustration level that I feel, the frustration points of members on 
this side of the House feel when they have driven that highway 
. . . the frustration level is extreme, Mr. Speaker, of the people 
who have to live along that highway and drive it on a daily 
basis, trying to carry out their business affairs, and having to 
use a highway that is only a secondary highway and primary 
weights being used on that highway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people of Saskatchewan understand that the Saskatchewan 
Party is in favour of opening up northern Saskatchewan for 
economic development. And that the people of northern 
Saskatchewan — whether on the east side or the west side of 
the province — as far north as Stony Rapids, Uranium City, 
even as far north as Camsell Portage, Camsell Portage, Mr. 
Speaker, those people want to participate in the economic 
growth of this province. 
 
The ability to grow this province by 100,000 people in 10 years, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the people of northern Saskatchewan 
want. They want that highway, that 155 Highway upgraded. 
They want it rebuilt. They want it completely rebuilt to a status 
of primary highway status in this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what those people want. 
 
What’s in this budget to accomplish that? Is it even on the radar 
screen, Mr. Speaker? No, no — no to both questions, Mr. 
Speaker. All that’s in the budget is a little bit of tinkering. And 
that’s what this government is very good at, Mr. Speaker, is 
simply tinkering — tinkering with the infrastructure in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one final comment in regards to the budget 
that I think is important and needs to be said. As I eluded to 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, there was three speakers by the 
government who spoke, who got up to talk about the budget, 
who spent their allotted time — some of them a little more than 
their allotted time — not talking about the budget. They got up 
and spent their time talking about what the Saskatchewan Party 
will not tell them they need to do to run this province. 
 
We hear that again and again on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. 
This budget is so devoid of vision, is so devoid of a strategy to 
make Saskatchewan a better place to live, that their entire 

strategy as a government, as a caucus, Mr. Speaker, is to harass 
the Saskatchewan Party for ideas because they are completely 
bereft of ideas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the whole NDP caucus is so incensed that 
the budget is so devoid of ideas that the whole concept of what 
needs to be in a budget spread through the entire, the entire 
government, Mr. Speaker, by a NDP government that is so 
lacking in direction, that they’re actually coming to the 
Saskatchewan Party to come up with a sexual harassment policy 
for them to bail them out, to bail them out, Mr. Speaker, of their 
own pitfalls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important the people of Saskatchewan know 
that the Saskatchewan Party will run this province when they 
become the government. 
 
But in the meantime if the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, is 
having problems running this government, running this 
province, then what they should do is the Premier needs to go 
across the pond, talk to his . . . talk to the godfather, Frank Hart, 
ask for his permission, Mr. Speaker, to call an election. That’s 
what this government needs to do instead of getting up on the 
floor of this House on a daily basis and questioning the 
Saskatchewan Party on ideas to bail them out of their problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why, that is why, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
be supporting the amendment by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar. I will be supporting the amendment by 
Rosetown-Biggar. It is bereft of me . . . It is beyond my ability, 
the demands, the demands of my constituents, Mr. Speaker, to 
be able to support the budget of this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud to 
be able to stand in this Assembly and support the budget of our 
government, just as I have done for the past 11 budgets 
presented since I was elected by the great people of Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
One needs to look no further than my constituency of Regina 
Wascana Plains to see the future for this province is indeed 
wide open. We’re looking at new homes springing up, people 
moving in, families moving in, and new businesses coming on a 
daily basis and opening up to provide goods and services for an 
expanding economy. 
 
The future is wide open for Wascana Plains, Mr. Speaker, but 
with this budget the future is indeed wide open for the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be voting against the amendment 
presented by the members opposite. And I find it very strange 
that the members present first to the public of this province that 
they’re going to grow or expand this province by 1,000 jobs 
over the next number of years, and at the same time they’re 
saying that within 30 days of forming government they’re going 
to have a core services review that will put thousands of 
government workers out on the street, that will cut back 
programs and services to thousands of Saskatchewan residents, 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

 

and somehow say that that major unemployment initiative by 
the members opposite, the Sask Tory government wannabes, 
will be increasing the jobs in this province. 
 
They’re also saying that their predictions of the numbers of tax 
cuts that they have, and their own economists will say, that the 
tax cuts they project will increase unemployment and see 
further drops in the economic growth of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, when you have a group that say that they want to grow 
Saskatchewan, well the weather out there is telling us exactly 
what they’re trying to do is snow Saskatchewan into believing 
that somehow at the same time they’re going to have job 
increases when they’re laying off people. And their own tax 
cuts would suggest that there’s . . . the highest rate of 
unemployment will ever be caused by the members opposite to 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — It’s also very strange that a group who say 
that they’re not the gloom and doom of this province — 
although every day we hear it in this Assembly — that they’re 
somehow going to be positive on the economic prospects of this 
province, will then stand up and say that when we say that 
we’re going to return to a normal crop year and our economic 
growth projections are 6.8 per cent, they’re hollering, that can’t 
be so, Saskatchewan doesn’t have that kind of a future, for 
Saskatchewan it’s awful, it’s going to be terrible. 
 
When we have members stand up and talk today about the job 
numbers in the province, who’s looking gloomy and doomy but 
the members opposite. Can they be positive? Can they be 
happy, have a positive outlook and attitude about the province 
of Saskatchewan and take that out to businesses to make certain 
that they’re selling this province not only here but into other 
provinces and abroad? No. It’s the gloom and doom message. 
 
Well I’m not taking their word for it and I’m not supporting 
their amendment. I’m going to take the word of the bond raters, 
the bankers, the people who look at the world economics and 
tell us that, for example, CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce) World Market notes: 
 

. . . the associated level of real output falls within the band 
foreseen by economic forecasters . . . 

 
The Bank of Montreal doesn’t question the 6.8 per cent 
forecast. They simply note it’s based on a return to normal crop 
levels after two years of severe drought. 
 
The Conference Board of Canada has said that if we get a 
normal crop I don’t think 6.8 per cent economic growth is 
overly optimistic. It’s just based on the assumption of a normal 
crop. 
 
An economist at Scotia Economics has said the government’s 
forecast is entirely possible, especially in the agricultural sector. 
History has shown that when you have a sharp decline as you 
have had, particularly over the past two years with the drought, 
that very often the bounce back is major. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, here’s what one economist had to say 
about the 6.8 per cent forecast: 

Is this estimate too rosy? Well, normally I would say yes 
but there is one nagging problem. Saskatchewan Finance 
Ministry has always gotten it right. In fact the department 
has been remarkably accurate in its economic growth 
forecasts (says Paul Martin, Paul Martin on March 31 of 
2000 . . . of this year.) 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

It’s not the first time that they were out of step with 
everyone else. When the bean counting was done, it was 
our finance department that had nailed it (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Well when I’m talking about 6.8 per cent 
forecast, I’m not going to listen to the gloom and doom of our 
opposition members, the Sask Tories who want to be. I’m going 
to listen to the people who say when we return to a normal crop 
year. And, Mr. Speaker, at Ducks Unlimited the other evening 
people were telling us it’s looking pretty good. This snow is 
very good for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s important for the people of the province, but in my 
constituency I know they found it interesting, when we’re 
putting budgets together, that every year putting a budget 
together is no easy task. It has not been easy. It was particularly 
difficult in the early ’90s and since then there’s been no easy 
year. 
 
When there’s a little bit of money there’s pent up expectations 
by groups and individuals that we should catch up for them 
first, and it’s not an easy job to distribute fairly a little bit of 
money; even more difficult when there is none after the 
devastation that was left behind by the cousins and the people 
who have been associated with the members opposite. But each 
year has been a very difficult budget year and this year has been 
no different. 
 
We’ve been faced with many challenges, many challenges, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve talked about them in here, and one of them is 
forest fires. Who can predict that in our second year of drought 
we would be faced with the kinds of devastation that fire can 
present to our northern communities and throughout this 
province? And it was us, it was the members of government, 
who had to look and see how we were going to fight those fires 
and what budget we could find to do so. And that required $47 
million extra in the budget. 
 
The second worst drought in the history of this province and it’s 
this government and on this side of the House that came up with 
the livestock program that was an additional $25 million. 
 
If that wasn’t enough, Mr. Speaker, the daunting enough task to 
address the drought and the forest fires and all the things 
attendant with very dry conditions, the federal government 
presented to us, presented to us a bill in the order of $300 
million on equalization. We are very thankful that we were able 
to work with the federal government and get that down to half, 
but that’s still quite a bill in a second year of drought — $150 
million. And it was up to us to face that challenge and meet that 
challenge. 
 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

We’ve had some further investment in this province by the 
federal government, but we have to come up with money at the 
local level first to be able to get that money and to be able to go 
after the money for health and education and other initiatives 
that the federal government comes up with because they say, 
show us your money. And so on this side of the House we do 
that, Mr. Speaker. We put that in the budget; we go for it; and 
we present good programs and services to the people of this 
province. 
 
So we’ve had resolve to get past the difficult circumstances of 
global economic conditions because we all know that there have 
been conditions globally that have had an impact on our 
province as well. 
 
But our economy is performing well. There’s been steady 
economic growth and it’s projected for 2003 and beyond. We 
fulfilled that by both our traditional strengths and by the 
emerging new industries that we’ve been willing to take on and 
to invest in and to see this province grow. 
 
No budget happens just in any one given year, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’d like to give credit where credit is due because it’s 
certainly by the hard work of past ministers, and particularly the 
member from Saskatoon Mount Royal, that we see Bruce 
Johnstone commenting that: 
 

Previous budgets by former finance . . . (ministers) were 
logical, measured, and built on conservative assumptions. 
 
(Now the member from Mount Royal in) His four-year plan 
to reduce personal income taxes was carefully laid out, with 
offsetting increases in other taxes, and aimed at modest, but 
attainable, targets. 
 
(The former minister’s) goal was to get most Saskatchewan 
taxpayers within spitting distance of Alberta’s personal 
income tax rates, without bankrupting the provincial 
treasury. And for the most part, he has succeeded. 

 
So it’s in this budget, in this year we’ll see the culmination of 
that grand plan, with the final instalment of the personal income 
tax cut on January 1, and inflation indexing of income tax 
brackets and exemptions to prevent bracket creep starting in the 
year 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Why have I been on my feet to not only 
support this budget but previous budgets, Mr. Speaker? Well 
let’s look at what people have said again — bond raters, 
bankers, people who are involved in looking at the economic 
situations. People like the people of Regina Wascana Plains 
who are accountants, who are professionals, who are business 
people, who are farm people, who look at these forecasts and 
really want to make certain their province knows how to 
govern. And they agree with these individuals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For example, David Rubinoff of Moody’s Investors Services 
says: 
 

Saskatchewan has done a great job over the last few years 
in getting its fiscal house in order . . . Saskatchewan has 

done a great job in addressing what was a very serious debt 
problem. It has its fiscal house in order and we’re quite 
pleased with what we see. 

 
Now that’s from Moody’s and of course what they do then, the 
bond raters, they look at their . . . the situation, they look at 
those kinds of statements, and they increase the credit rating for 
this province which saves the taxpayers millions of dollars 
when we want to provide programs and services. Have we got 
bond rating increases? They just keep going up. 
 
Now the other person that the people of Saskatchewan look to, 
to say well what’s it like? You’ve got a look at the books; you 
know the accounting practices. What are you saying, Mr. 
Provincial Auditor? Well the Provincial Auditor, Fred Wendel, 
said: 
 

. . . the government’s financial condition has been 
improving considerably over the last many years. When we 
compare ourselves inter-provincially, we stack up about 
third place in Canada. 

 
So then an attendant story from the Leader-Post, October 9 of 
that year, last year, said Saskatchewan ranked third out of 10 
provinces — fourth overall behind Alberta, Ontario, and the 
federal government on a budget performance index compiled by 
the right wing think-tank, none other than the Fraser Institute. 
The Fraser Institute, Mr. Speaker, gave Saskatchewan a 53.6 
point rating, one of only four provinces to score higher than 50 
on an index that measures fiscal performance in three areas: 
spending, tax rates and revenues, and debt and deficits. 
Saskatchewan was ranked second on debt and deficit, and third 
on taxation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — The economic forecasters, for the members 
opposite — the same people who say their numbers just don’t 
add up, don’t add up — well there is a long list of others that 
would give credit where credit is due to not only this Finance 
minister but the ministers that have come before him, 
particularly the minister from Mount Royal. 
 
So despite many of the fiscal challenges we talked about, the 
first nine months of last year we were pleased when the revenue 
side fell into place especially during the last quarter. And why 
we said . . . When all was said and done, our government was 
able to declare that in 2002-2003, that it was a successful year 
financially and we ended up with a surplus of just over $2 
million — a surplus. 
 
What’s also important to note is that this is not done by drawing 
down the Fiscal Stabilization Fund for that year. And what did 
Nesbitt Burns say about that? “Balanced Budgets — No 
Drought About It,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — No drought about it. 
 
The last few days, I’ve been watching with interest the 
unfolding of the city budget for a number of reasons — 
because, Mr. Speaker, you would know that I was once a 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

 

member of city council in the city of Regina — and noted that 
over the Tory years, as a member of SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), we always asked when was 
the municipal government going to become a pillar of that 
government and the budgets of the Tories. And the members 
opposite would know that municipalities never did make that hit 
parade, never did become a pillar or was ever supported by the 
Tories opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year, what have we done for municipalities? We’ve 
increased their revenue sharing by $10 million on top of the $10 
million from last year, and next year another $10 million. 
That’s not $30 million, Mr. Speaker, because that’s $10 million 
last year which makes 10 for this year and an additional 10 
which is 30 million. And next year, it’s an additional 30 million 
which comes to $60 million . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — . . . additional monies for revenue sharing in 
this province. 
 
At the same time, we’re looking at an 8 per cent increase in 
health care approximately, about a 5.6 per cent increase in 
education. 
 
Municipalities received a 15.4 per cent increase in the revenue 
sharing to their municipalities. But in addition to that, there was 
$12.8 million in grants of lieu of taxation which particularly 
impacts on the city of Regina — $12.8 million in grants in lieu 
of taxes to governments where Saskatchewan Property 
Management owns properties, Mr. Speaker. And another $10 
million for the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. 
 
Then there’s another one that I’m very proud to be able to 
support is $2.38 million in subsidies for transit for the disabled. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Right now I’m not going to go into talking to the members 
opposite about savings plans because it was obvious yesterday 
they didn’t know much about that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I must say the other reason I’ve been 
watching the city budget deliberations with great interest is 
because in the days when I served there, I served with a 
member named Darlene Hincks — Darlene Hincks, who made 
no bones about her work to recruit candidates to run for the 
Progressive Conservative Party. Mr. Speaker, to me and others, 
she made no bones about it that her and her husband at that 
time, Terry, were recruiters for the Progressive Conservative 
Party. 
 
Now she’s a candidate for the Tory wannabes, the Sask Tories, 
Mr. Speaker. And what’s she saying over there at the budget 
deliberations for Regina city council? Well we promised no tax 
increases so what should we do? We’ve got a reserve of $3.9 
million; why don’t we take that reserve and balance the budget? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should call an executive 
meeting. Here’s another one. Here’s another embarrassment. 
While they’re saying we should not be using our Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, a fund that was a savings plan for 

Saskatchewan — not a reserve plan but a fiscal plan to say 
when times were good put it in a savings account and take it out 
when you need it — but the city’s reserve, she’s saying spend it 
all, spend it all. 
 
There we are. Two faces — one face, two sides of the story. Are 
they going to call their executive and expel her before she gets a 
chance to run? You never know. Democracy doesn’t mean 
much to the members over there. 
 
We were, on this side of the House, chuckling yesterday 
because the members opposite . . . And I’m sorry to say that a 
member who is a former Finance minister for our government 
has forgotten that before it was a Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 
there was a Liquor and Gaming reserve here. 
 
And to look at budgets, every year we would look at whether or 
not, in the Liquor and Gaming reserve, there were monies that 
were made in that area. And of course most years there’s some. 
But you can’t rely on that every year there’s going to be money 
in that fund. It depends on whether people drink or they gamble. 
That’s not a stable source of revenue so you don’t put it into 
ongoing operating. You can’t rely on it. 
 
But it was there. It was there every year and former ministers 
also used that money when forest fires emerged that were out of 
control or when there were unexpected expenditures or when 
people called about crisis in health care. Two hundred new 
nursing spaces came from the Liquor and Gaming reserve. How 
is this different than a Fiscal Stabilization Fund? 
 
Well, number one, the members opposite every year spent the 
Liquor and Gaming reserve 46 different ways. They’d stand up 
every day and say, why aren’t you spending the Liquor and 
Gaming reserve? Why wouldn’t you give more money to 
farmers out of the Liquor and Gaming reserve? Mr. Speaker, 
this same group of people now stand up and say, you’ve got a 
savings plan, the money that you had when times were good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I take my children to the bank for their first 
savings book, I don’t say to them the bank has a drawer with 
your name on it and the money’s in there. Of course I don’t. 
Mr. Speaker, when you have a savings plan you take that 
money and, as the Provincial Auditor said, what have we been 
doing? Good cash management practices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — You take that money . . . you don’t put it in a 
box labelled Fiscal Stabilization Fund, and the money lays there 
in the drawer. You utilize that money. And how did we use it? 
To buy down debt or interests payments that were higher, to 
invest in things that made more money to be able to put into 
that drawer for the future. 
 
But there’s no monies in there. No one would expect it to be 
there. A bank doesn’t keep the money that you put in savings 
into a drawer and say any time you go to that drawer, you take 
your bank book, the money falls out. No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What did the Provincial Auditor say about the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund and how we use it for cash management 
practices? It saved the province of Saskatchewan already over 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

$20 million in good cash management practices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I’m going to be out of time here, Mr. 
Speaker, but if there’s one other area that gives me the greatest 
deal of personal satisfaction in this budget is that it’s a people 
budget. It’s a caring budget. It’s a budget of hope, Mr. Speaker. 
We dared to care. 
 
And I could go into, but I know others have covered the areas 
that strategically have focused on Saskatchewan Community 
Resources and Employment, their housing initiatives, their child 
care initiatives. 
 
There’s the Kids First program. There’s a program for people 
with disabilities. Two million dollars in new funding for 
employment supports. An additional $1 million in social 
assistance provided . . . funding provided for an increase of 
about $10 a month to disability allowance available through 
social assistance. And there’s also an additional $1 million for 
new and enhanced residential and day programs for people with 
disabilities. 
 
There’s a bit more money, not as much as we’d ever like to give 
to groups who need more, but more money for the 
community-based organizations and targeted programs for 
high-risk children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that is a budget of hope. It’s a 
caring budget. It contains the foundations for a future wide 
open, a future wide open for Wascana Plains but for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I stand in support of the budget that has been presented this year 
by the Minister of Finance, and I will stand and vote against the 
amendment by the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
Speech from the Throne or a budget speech should be about 
vision; it should be about leadership; it should be about hope 
and faith; it should be about a plan, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, both of those documents presented by the Premier of 
this province, the member from Riversdale, fails on those 
counts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, listening to the previous member speak, she was 
talking about how the mayor of Moose Jaw agreed with this 
budget. Well indeed, Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Moose Jaw 
came out and praised this budget. But he was the only mayor, 
Mr. Speaker, that spoke in favour of it. When the mayors were 
here, Mr. Speaker, when the head of SUMA spoke about this 
particular budget, his words were anything but complimentary, 
Mr. Speaker. And included in that was a representative from the 
Moose Jaw council who spoke out in opposition to this 
particular budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that the NDP like to 
take a minority of comments, the ones that are a little bit happy 
about it, Mr. Speaker, and then they try to blow that up. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at a budget that has a growth 

projection of 6.8 per cent, which is double, Mr. Speaker, double 
of what any other jurisdiction is saying is possible, you have to 
stop and say to yourself, what’s happening here? 
 
You look around this province, Mr. Speaker, and there is high 
hopes in agriculture and yet this government was saying, not 
more than two years ago, that agriculture does not carry that 
much weight in this province any more. We are so diversified in 
Saskatchewan that what happens in agriculture is irrelevant to 
the financial stability of this province. Now all of a sudden, Mr. 
Speaker, now all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Finance is hanging his entire budget on agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well, I agree with him in the sense that agriculture is extremely 
important in this province. It is the engine that drives the 
economy of Saskatchewan. But the growth rates that they are 
projecting, Mr. Speaker, are unrealistic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of the members want to stand in their 
place on the opposite side and try to explain the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. Well, Mr. Speaker, they can try to explain it 
and they have to try to explain it, Mr. Speaker, because it isn’t 
there. And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, the previous minister of 
Finance stood in his place during estimates and admitted, Mr. 
Speaker, more than two years ago, that there was no money in 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund; that there wasn’t even one red 
cent there, Mr. Speaker — not one. 
 
So when the members opposite speak about taking money out 
of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, in reality they’re simply using 
NDP doublespeak to try and confuse what is actually 
happening. What’s actually happening, Mr. Speaker, is that at 
one time it was possible the minister of Finance transferred 
some money into a savings account, into the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, but then he promptly came along with a sledgehammer, 
smashed that little piggy bank up, and took the money out, and 
left behind an IOU — an IOU, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now when they go to the piggy bank to look for the money 
that they put in there, all they got is a paper . . . piece of paper 
saying I owe the piggy bank X millions of dollars. So when 
they use money out of that savings fund, Mr. Speaker, which 
isn’t really a savings fund, what they do with that money, Mr. 
Speaker, is they have to borrow it, driving up the debt of this 
province; a debt which, Mr. Speaker, is now higher than it was 
in 1991 when this government took over, an issue that they 
vilified the previous government for, Mr. Speaker, ran around 
the province saying how horrendous the debt was, Mr. Speaker, 
and yet they’ve driven it higher. And they’re saying, Mr. 
Speaker . . . I remember the Minister of Finance made a 
comment, well, Mr. Speaker, there’s good debt and there’s bad 
debt. 
 
Well I’d like to try that line on my banker sometime, Mr. 
Speaker. He looks at it and says, it’s debt. I don’t care whether 
you think it’s good or you think it’s bad, you got to pay it back, 
and it’s debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s what the members opposite are trying to hide from 
the public. They’ve increased the debt under this Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, by over $1 billion in the last two years, and it 
continues to go up. It’s costing us $1 million a day, Mr. Speaker 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

 

— $1 million a day. And yet they dare to say that that’s 
leadership, Mr. Speaker. That leadership is driving us into the 
hole. They’re selling the future of our province, Mr. Speaker, 
by driving us into debt for programs and policies, Mr. Speaker, 
that don’t work. 
 
We’ve seen so many examples, Mr. Speaker, for this 
government where they have simply lost money. Their whole 
idea of growth in this province is simply to grow the size of 
government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if growing government, if growing Crown 
corporations is the economic salvation that the members 
opposite believe it is — they’ve been practising it since 1944 — 
why is this province not number one, Mr. Speaker, in Canada, 
instead of number six and dropping? Pretty soon Nova Scotia’s 
going to pass us, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t grown in population 
since the mid-1930s. And yet the members opposite keep 
claiming that growth in government and Crown corporation is 
the solution. 
 
They go out buying up businesses across the province. They 
buy businesses offshore and lose millions and millions of 
dollars. Mr. Speaker, they have failed to provide a vision for 
this province, a vision of growth. And yet they like to brag 
about how good they are — how sanctimonious they brag about 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read a quote from the budget. It says: 
 

Within our vision of a wide open future for Saskatchewan 
. . . 

 
Which they are promoting outside of the province again, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re trying to bring people back to the province, so 
they have an advertising campaign. They spend a little money 
in Alberta where most of the people go to — our children, Mr. 
Speaker. They spend a little money across the rest of Canada. 
And yet they’re saying this program is to bring people to 
Saskatchewan and the majority of the advertising money gets 
spent in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(11:30) 
 
You have to wonder is this a campaign to bring people back to 
Saskatchewan or is it a pre-election campaign, Mr. Speaker, 
funded by the government? Mr. Speaker, I think it’s the latter 
rather than the former. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at this, Mr. Speaker, it says our 
government believes in secure families and vibrant 
communities. Well, Mr. Speaker, we saw an example in the 
House this week of the government’s belief in secure families. 
 
We saw an example, Mr. Speaker, that happened with one of 
the government’s employees in the bureaucracy. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think what we see from this government is words and 
not actions. And I think we need to judge the government, Mr. 
Speaker, by their actions not their words. Because they’re very 
good with the words, Mr. Speaker — there’s no doubt about it 
— very good with the words. See how they work together, Mr. 
Speaker, to camouflage what the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s simply debt. But they work very hard to 

camouflage that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about the case that came 
before this legislature. Mr. Speaker, the case of sexual 
harassment. This issue was raised, Mr. Speaker, this issue was 
raised a number of times in the past to the employees, the 
supervisors, Mr. Speaker, of the women involved and, Mr. 
Speaker, nothing happened. And the fact is to quote, Mr. 
Speaker, from some of the affidavits in the report, Mr. Speaker, 
you have to wonder what was happening in that department. 
 
What was happening that allowed this to happen, Mr. Speaker? 
How in allowing these things to proceed does that square with 
the comments in the budget, Mr. Speaker, of secure families? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the employee involved told a number of people 
these issues but I’d like to quote this one sentence. He — 
referring to Mr. Carriere — and I quote: 
 

He has told her of his importance within the department, 
his political ties, and (that he has had many . . . ) that he has 
had people fired in the past. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this was an attempt to intimidate that 
employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, employees in that department have come forward 
and complained to their supervisors that there was incidents 
happening, that there was problems developing there, and yet, 
Mr. Speaker, what happened about him? Well, Mr. Speaker, a 
quote from another affidavit, and I quote: 
 

. . . stated that a staff member had told her that she had 
brought her concerns regarding Mr. Carriere forward to an 
individual who said, I don’t want to hear it. 

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, she had, and I quote: 
 

She had also went to see another supervisor about the issue 
and was told, he wouldn’t do that. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, twice, even before these complaints came 
forward — a minimum of twice — these issues were raised. 
And I’ve listened very carefully to the minister of the PSC 
(Public Service Commission) who said, as soon as these issues 
are raised, we deal with them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s clearly not the case. The minister 
stood in her place on Tuesday proclaiming the NDP’s vaunted 
policy on zero tolerance and today she reinforced that by 
saying, whenever we find an incident, we deal with it 
immediately. 
 
Well that’s not true, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t happen that way. 
Again, the minister on Monday and — excuse me — on 
Tuesday and Wednesday and Thursday was using NDP 
doublespeak. Yes, we have a zero tolerance policy, Mr. 
Speaker, but they don’t know what it is. But it sure sounds 
good, Mr. Speaker, to have a zero tolerance policy. The only 
problem is when it comes to being secure, having secure 
families, they don’t enforce it. They don’t even know about it, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s all words; it’s no action to protect the families 
that are involved, Mr. Speaker. 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

I’d like to quote again from another affidavit, Mr. Speaker, and 
I quote: 
 

There were complaints of Murdoch kissing staff, touching 
them, and acting inappropriately. Usually staff have not 
wanted to make formal complaint because they fear they 
will lose their jobs. Staff have a genuine fear of retaliation. 

 
Well that fits in very well, Mr. Speaker, with the quote from the 
first affidavit, he has told her . . . 

 
And I quote: 
 

He has told her of his importance within the department, 
his political ties, and that he has had people fired in the 
past. 

 
Inappropriate, Mr. Speaker, the sexual harassment and the 
intimidation that this government allowed to go on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those complaints were initially ignored. Then six 
women came forward, Mr. Speaker, and complained to the 
department. The department did investigate, Mr. Speaker, and 
filed a report that found Mr. Carriere guilty of sexual 
harassment. That report went to a long-time, long-serving 
deputy minister who we have to assume, Mr. Speaker, knew of 
the government’s zero tolerance policy, knew that the 
government was saying, when we find these incidents we deal 
with them immediately. 
 
And this wasn’t one complaint, Mr. Speaker, this was six 
complaints. It wasn’t some sort of comment in the hallway, Mr. 
Speaker, in passing. It wasn’t laughing at the Playboy jokes, 
Mr. Speaker. This was serious. It was physical contact, Mr. 
Speaker — not once, not twice, Mr. Speaker, but six times — 
and involved, Mr. Speaker, visits to employees’ homes. It 
involved staking out an employee’s home in the middle of the 
night and then demanding of that employee, why weren’t you at 
home when I came to visit? 
 
These were not minor allegations, Mr. Speaker. These are the 
kind of things that families need to be protected from. These are 
the kind of things that a statement out of the budget book 
should deal with — our government believes that secure 
families and vibrant communities are fundamental. Those are 
very good words in the budget, the government’s budget. But 
why don’t they believe in them, Mr. Speaker? Why don’t they 
act on those words, Mr. Speaker? Why do they ignore these 
incidents, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The deputy minister in his report, Mr. Speaker, suspended Mr. 
Carriere with pay and then transferred him to Regina to take a 
senior adviser’s post to commence in May. Mr. Carriere is 
punished with a promotion, a transfer, approximately five or six 
months off with pay, Mr. Speaker, and retains his position as a 
government employee. 
 
On April 1, The StarPhoenix reports the incident as a headline 
in its paper. The Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, raised the questions 
in question period to the Minister of the Environment who does 
not respond even though it’s his department, Mr. Speaker, and 
they are dealt with by the minister of PSC who states they have 
a zero tolerance policy — zero tolerance. 

Now when people look at zero tolerance, that means you have 
no acceptance of it. It’s not a little bit of acceptance. It’s not a 
medium amount of acceptance. It’s not a large amount of 
acceptance, Mr. Speaker. It’s no acceptance. And yet, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister when we asked her to explain the policy, 
couldn’t do so, Mr. Speaker. She could not explain her own 
government’s policy of zero tolerance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So April 2 . . . You have to remember, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister stood in the House and said she had no knowledge on 
April 1 of the incident, other than what was printed in the paper. 
Well the papers come out early in the morning, Mr. Speaker, 
available to all of us. Question period . . . The House starts at 
1:30, question period generally starts quarter to 2 or so. So the 
minister had four hours at least, if not six hours, to have 
inquired into this situation, comes into the House and says she 
knows nothing about it. 
 
April 2, Mr. Speaker, in further questioning, the minister steps 
forward and says she’s reviewed the case and now Mr. Carriere 
is fired. Well you have to ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, what was 
the difference between April 1 and April 2? The only 
difference, Mr. Speaker, is it was now a public story and the 
families of Saskatchewan were no longer feeling secure. The 
words that the government was putting into their budget speech, 
Mr. Speaker, about secure families, about vibrant communities, 
Mr. Speaker, were shown to be hollow words. 
 
You have to look at some of the other issues we’ve had before 
this legislature of a similar nature, Mr. Speaker. We had the 
case of the minister of Environment last year who was accused 
of harassment. The government investigated, had an 
independent investigator do the investigation, report comes 
back, and there’s no conclusions drawn in that report, Mr. 
Speaker. The minister retained the position in cabinet. But then, 
Mr. Speaker, the minister decided to speak out on the issue and 
make it a larger public issue. And the minister was subsequently 
fired. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Why was the minister fired? Was the 
minister fired for the alleged harassment incident? No. So what 
can we conclude from this, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, the only 
valid conclusion is that the acts of harassment themselves do 
not bother the NDP. It’s getting caught by the . . . and published 
by the media that’s the punishable offence, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the offence. Doing it is fine. Don’t get caught or you’ll be 
punished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, harassment, sexual harassment, intimidation, are 
obviously, from the actions of the government, acceptable 
business practices in an NDP workplace. It’s a major offence, 
Mr. Speaker, to get caught and get reported by the media. 
 
Murdoch Carriere and the previous minister of the Environment 
were both fired because they embarrassed the NDP with the 
NDP’s own inaction, the NDP’s acceptance of harassment, and 
the NDP’s hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s one other group, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 
workplace, when it comes to families in this province, you have 
to wonder where they stand. Mr. Speaker, that’s the unions. 
Where are the unions on this issue, Mr. Speaker? I haven’t 
heard a comment in the public from them. 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

 

I haven’t heard a comment from the union representatives 
sitting on the floor of this Assembly on the opposite side. 
Where is their defence of those six women that brought forward 
the complaint? Where is their defence of the two women who 
have gone to the Human Rights Commission? Where is their 
defence of the woman who has gone to the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police)? 
 
(11:45) 
 
You know we have the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 
here, I believe it is, the Minister of Labour. We have the 
member from Regina Elphinstone. The member from Regina 
Dewdney, the government whip. The member from Saskatoon 
Eastview and the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Now the member from Saskatoon Fairview, Mr. Speaker, 
cannot be held accountable for this. That member is newly 
elected in here. Just took his place, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure 
that had he known about this, he would have spoke up on behalf 
of the union membership. 
 
But I have to question those other union leaders that do sit on 
that side, Mr. Speaker. Where is their defence of these women 
that were being harassed by their manager? 
 
Why is the union leadership not standing up for the rights of 
their members against the harassment of a senior manager? Are 
they condoning the actions of Carriere or is the relationship 
between the NDP Party and the union leadership more 
important than protecting the people and working on behalf of 
their union members? Where is this vaunted solidarity against 
the oppressor, against management, Mr. Speaker? Perhaps 
silence gets the union leader a shot at an NDP nomination or at 
a cabinet position. But what price, Mr. Speaker, does the union 
membership have to pay so that the union leadership can get a 
title? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to protecting the security of 
families, the minister’s zero tolerance policy is important. But 
her own comments, Mr. Speaker — but he was a long-term 
employee, he was a good manager — does that somehow 
excuse the guilt he has in sexually harassing six of his 
employees, Mr. Speaker? No. It should not and does not, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s confirmed by the minister’s own actions. She fired 
him or had the Minister of the Environment fire him or the 
deputy minister, but anyways whoever did the firing, he’s gone, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when does zero . . . When does zero mean zero, nil? Does it 
mean your first offence and you’re out? Well obviously to the 
NDP it doesn’t, Mr. Speaker. The NDP have a three-step policy 
on all issues, Mr. Speaker, not just this one. 
 
The first step is, don’t ask and don’t tell. That was the response 
actually from the Minister of the Environment when asked 
about some of the items in the budget a couple of years ago. 
They didn’t ask, so I don’t have to tell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second step in their three-step platform policy 
is see no evil, hear no evil, and speak no evil to the media. 

That’s their policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the third step of the policy is, if someone tells, if someone 
speaks, then punish the one who spoke out or the one who 
embarrassed the NDP. That’s their three-step policy, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not a zero tolerance policy, it’s a don’t ask and 
don’t tell policy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the NDP’s record of 
responsibility. Channel Lake is involved in improper gas 
trading and loses $5 million, poof, because somebody can’t read 
— no minister is responsible. SPUDCO loses 28 million and the 
minister misleads the public and the legislature for six years — 
and no minister is responsible. SLGA fails to ensure proper 
accounting of SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) 
funds, resulting in millions of dollars of inappropriate spending 
— no minister is responsible. Million dollars of Crown 
corporations’ dollars are lost on foreign adventures and affairs 
— and no minister is responsible. 
 
These are only a small sample, Mr. Speaker, of the NDP 
failures. And finally there’s the Murdoch Carriere case which 
clearly shows the failure of the NDP’s zero tolerance policy on 
sexual harassment — and no minister is responsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do know of one NDP ministerial responsibility 
that the members opposite take very seriously, and they practise 
it diligently, Mr. Speaker, and that is to pick up their paycheque 
at the end of the month. That’s the only responsibility that the 
members opposite accept, Mr. Speaker. That’s the only 
responsibility they accept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne and the budgets fail to 
provide a vision. They fail to provide leadership to this 
province. Mr. Speaker, the only ones who provide faith and 
hope for the future and a plan to accomplish the growth of 
Saskatchewan — which these members opposite say 
Saskatchewan cannot grow; it’s statistically impossible, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’ve proven it to themselves for failing to grow 
this province in the last 60 years Mr. Speaker — the 
Saskatchewan Party has a plan to grow. 
 
We are going to grow this province, Mr. Speaker, by 100,000 
people in the next 10 years. And we’re going to do it, Mr. 
Speaker, in spite of the failures of the NDP, in spite of their 
driving up the debt, Mr. Speaker. We will do it in spite of the 
fact that they’re driving the young people out of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan to do, indeed, grow this province. 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asks, what is it? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, all he has to do is read the comments made by my 
colleague, the member from Canora-Pelly, our Finance critic. 
He laid out the finance plan. My colleague from Melfort, Mr. 
Speaker, the Health critic, laid out some of our health policy. 
The member from Watrous laid out, Mr. Speaker, some of our 
agriculture policy. The member from Kelvington-Wadena, Mr. 
Speaker, laid out some of our education policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . And the time is growing very nicely for me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my leader has asked me to coordinate our 
efficiency and innovation review and I am pleased to be able to 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

do that. We look forward, Mr. Speaker, after the next election, 
to working very closely with the bureaucracy in developing a 
plan for this province to grow Saskatchewan. And yes, Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite laugh at that concept, but we 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that there are very, very good and 
competent people in that bureaucracy. 
 
The failure lies, Mr. Speaker, at the political level and the lack 
of leadership from this government, the lack of vision to take 
this province forward. Given direction, Mr. Speaker, and a 
vision so people know what the goal is and where we wish to 
. . . what we wish to achieve, the people who work for this 
province in the bureaucracy, the civil servants, Mr. Speaker, 
will gladly carry out those programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because they too . . . It’s in everyone’s interest, including the 
members of the public service, that this province prosper and 
grow, Mr. Speaker — not that it be driven into debt; not that it 
continue to shrink, Mr. Speaker. We need more people here 
helping to pay the bills, not fewer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, because of this government’s failure to 
provide leadership and vision for the future, because of their 
inability to grow this province, I will be supporting the 
amendment and not the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
deal of pleasure to join in to the budget debate as well. I want to 
begin by acknowledging the good work of my colleagues, the 
Minister of Finance and the now current Minister of Justice and 
Industry and Resources, who has done such a good job, in my 
estimation, of managing the finances of our province. 
 
The former minister produced a string of balanced budgets 
through the ups and downs of global economic conditions and 
federal transfers and droughts, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
personally congratulate and thank him. 
 
The new minister has demonstrated in his first budget, Mr. 
Speaker, that he will continue our government’s approach of 
investing in the priorities of Saskatchewan people while 
maintaining a strong balance sheet for our province. 
 
The soundness, Mr. Speaker, of that approach, has been 
recognized by credit rating agencies who have given 
Saskatchewan 10 upgrades in the last number of years, Mr. 
Speaker — 10 upgrades that I think a lot of the public of 
Saskatchewan are not aware of, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
something that speaks very well and speaks to what the people 
of Saskatchewan have given in getting those upgrades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the turnaround of our Crown corporations over the 
last decade is a big part of the turnaround of the finances of the 
province of Saskatchewan as well. The Devine government left 
a lot of fiscal destruction in its wake. And nowhere was the 
damage greater than in the Crown corporations sector. 
 
The member from Swift Current and others on that side, who 
were part of the government, may have a new name for their 
party, Mr. Speaker, but they should remember it very well. 
 

When we began sifting through the debris in 1992, we found 
the Crowns had a $2 billion — I repeat, billion dollar — debt 
within the Crowns which had been run up through the 1980s. 
We found the equity had been stripped out of the Crowns and 
we found that the retained earnings were gone. Public assets 
like the Potash Corporation, which could have helped, had been 
sold for a song, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was like taking over a successful farm — which I suspect a 
number of the members over there would understand — taking 
over a successful farm that had been run well for several 
generations and then running it into the ground in less than a 
decade. And I think it’s something they should be ashamed of 
and they should apologize to the people of Saskatchewan for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province was taken on a ride to near 
bankruptcy by the Devine government and the Crowns were 
absolutely gutted along the way. The situation was so bad that 
hundreds of millions had to flow from the General Revenue 
Fund to the Crowns in the early 1990s to repair their balance 
sheet; I repeat, from the General Revenue Fund to the Crown 
corporations. 
 
By 1995 our government had the fiscal situation in the province 
and in the Crowns turned completely around. Since that time 
the Crowns have put $1.6 billion — I repeat, $1.6 billion — 
into the General Revenue Fund back from the Crowns into the 
General Revenue Fund in the form of dividends and equity 
payments. 
 
That averages out to more than a quarter of $1 billion a year to 
help pay for schools, hospitals, highways, and other services 
across our province. 
 
Over the same period, the $2 billion in Crown debt run up by 
the ’80s version of the Saskatchewan Party has been paid 
entirely off, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The major Crowns are at or 
near their industry appropriate debt ratios, and the holding 
company, CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), has absolutely no dead-weight debt left 
whatsoever. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rapid return of the 
Crowns to financial health in the 1990s is indeed a remarkable 
achievement. It’s been acknowledged by credit rating agencies 
who have cited improved Crown performance as one of the 
main reasons for the straight A’s they have given our province 
in recent years. 
 
Saskatchewan people continue to pay the lowest overall utility 
bills of any province in Canada, amongst the lowest rates, I 
should say — not entirely the lowest, but amongst the lowest 
overall utility bills of any province in Canada. So this recovery 
has not, I repeat, not been achieved on the backs of utility 
customers, nor has it been achieved by cutting back on services. 
 
SaskTel, for example, has invested heavily in improving 
high-speed Internet to rural Saskatchewan, and we are a world 
leader in that area. The 1.5 billion that Crowns have spent over 
the . . . that the Crowns spend every year on goods and services 
in Saskatchewan continues to help grow our economy. 
 
(12:00) 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

 

Now you might expect that the members opposite would have 
learned from the events of the last two decades, Mr. Speaker. 
Unfortunately, when it comes to Crown corporations that 
doesn’t seem to me to be the case. It’s the same old hostility to 
public enterprise in the Saskatchewan Party that we saw in the 
previous version of that party some 20 years ago. It’s the same 
old triumph of ideology, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over common 
sense, in my estimation, though it is dressed up in different 
words these days. But it is the same old privatization agenda 
hidden away from the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are many criticisms that can be made of the Devine 
government but at least — I say at least, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
they were upfront with the Saskatchewan people on their pet 
plans for public assets. 
 
Now again I say, the member from Swift Current never stands 
in this Assembly and says that his party would sell the Crowns, 
Mr. Speaker. He never directly says that he would sell the 
Crowns. He knows that Saskatchewan people don’t support 
privatization so he says it in other ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some days he attacks the Crowns for competing inside our 
province. Other days, Mr. Speaker, he attacks our Crowns for 
competing outside of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But 
every day he demands that they be restricted — so-called — to 
core services. 
 
Now I wouldn’t have the time ordinarily in a news conference 
or in a clip, or an eight-second clip, to explain this. So I’m 
about to do it now for the people of Saskatchewan and for the 
members opposite because I think there might even be some 
over there, Mr. Speaker, who don’t quite understand what 
restricting Crowns to core assets really means. 
 
This policy adds up . . .This policy of the opposition adds up to 
— which involves, I should say, growth, which involves growth 
or diversification of the Crowns — it adds up to anything but 
growth and diversification, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No business can stand still. Either a business is going forwards 
or it’s going backwards. A policy of no growth and no 
diversification is a policy of shrink and of sell. We know what 
the results would be of putting the members opposite in charge 
of the Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I could, I’m going to again 
refer to The Outlook of Monday, February 17, 2003. And I 
quote: 
 

But it is no secret the Sask. Party wants to rid the province 
of most Crown corporations, however, (and I quote, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker) Brkich said the “core Crowns” — such as 
Sask Water, SaskPower, SaskTel and SGI — will be 
treated differently than the other “treasurey (Board) 
Crowns,” (now here’s how they’re treated differently) 
which would not be sold off immediately (not 
immediately), but when the selling price would reap the 
“best bang for the buck” (Mr. Speaker). 

 
So it’s not an issue of policy. Absolutely not an issue of policy. 
It’s only an issue of timing — when they would get their best 
bang for the buck. 

And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they’re talking about 
SaskTel, SaskTel is doing very well. It’s the strongest company 
in . . . it’s the strongest telco in all of Canada right now, Mr. 
Speaker. So if they ever form government, I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, get ready because SaskTel’s the first one on the 
block, the first one on the block, so they can pay for the 
promises that they’ve made in this legislature on a daily basis, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let’s look at SaskTel, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as an example 
of the consequences of applying the Saskatchewan Party’s 
no-growth policy to a thriving Crown. 
 
SaskTel, like every other viable telecommunications company 
on the planet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is diversifying for a couple 
of very good reasons. The first is that there is a rapid change 
and fierce competition in the telecommunications industry and 
no company can stay in business any more if it is just providing 
traditional local and long-distance services. 
 
As competition has brought down the cost of these services, it 
has brought down the earnings of the companies that provide 
them. That revenue has to be replaced by leveraging the assets 
and the expertise of the company into related services, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why SaskTel has invested heavily to 
provide digital and high-speed Internet services to most of our 
province. 
 
That’s why it’s offering the latest digital interactive services to 
its customers. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why it has partnered 
with security dealers in Saskatchewan and other provinces to 
establish SecurTek, a venture which has resulted in 75 new jobs 
— I repeat, 75 new jobs — in Yorkton at the SecurTek call 
centre. 
 
The second reason for diversification, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
telecommunications market has been flung wide open by the 
CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission). The federal regulator has looked at where the 
industry is headed and created regulatory environment that 
forces telephone, Internet, and cable companies to compete to 
provide the same kinds of services. And that’s why cable 
companies have teamed up with Rogers AT&T to sell telephone 
service to their customers. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel, MTS (Manitoba 
Telephone System), and other telecommunication companies 
are offering their customers an Internet and television package. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the rules are the same for every 
telecommunications company in every province. The CRTC 
didn’t make special rules for Saskatchewan just because we 
have a publicly owned telecommunications company and an 
opposition which is hostile to public enterprise. 
 
So if you strip away the diversification initiatives at SaskTel 
and you are left with the part of the business that is growing, 
instead of the healthiest telecommunications company in 
Canada that we see today we would have a company rapidly 
losing value that might just as well be sold, as I said earlier. 
 
That’s the real Sask Party policy on SaskTel and the other 
Crowns that provide vital services across our province. It’s a 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

plan, Mr. Speaker, to shrink some of our province’s biggest 
companies from a party that claims that they want to grow 
Saskatchewan — a direct contradiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Crowns are a Saskatchewan success story that 
go back to 1901, Mr. Speaker. I know the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member says, “Yeah, right.” Well the first 
Crown was formed in 1901, Mr. Speaker — 1901. They may 
want to pay attention and listen, Mr. Speaker, so they know 
about the role the Crowns have played in our province. 
 
I know the members opposite don’t like good news, Mr. 
Speaker, but I want to review the many ways our Crowns 
contribute to growing our economy. I mentioned earlier 
SaskTel’s heavy investment in bringing the latest 
telecommunications services to people throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Although Crowns have invested nearly $6 billion in upgrading 
and expanding their services over the last decade, just to put 
their investments outside the borders of the province in 
perspective, that’s $20 invested here in Saskatchewan for every 
$1 invested elsewhere — 20:1, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every year Crowns, guided by buy Saskatchewan policies, 
purchase over $1 billion — $1 billion — worth of goods and 
services from local suppliers here in Saskatchewan. They are 
important customers for 12,000 Saskatchewan businesses. 
Crown employees spend an annual payroll of more than a half a 
billion dollars a year in communities they work in throughout 
our province. 
 
That’s a lot of economic activity from the users, from the user 
fees we all have to pay anyway for our utility services. And 
much of it would be gone if the Saskatchewan Party ever got 
the opportunity to implement its plan and to sell the Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have come a long way in Saskatchewan over 
the last decade. We have built a thriving economy that can 
weather droughts and keep on growing. We have repaired the 
damage done to the Crowns by the Devine government and 
restored their ability to contribute to the economic development 
of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, with my last few minutes, want to as well talk 
about some of the other highlights in the budget, other than the 
huge success of our Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of people won’t be aware of this — some 
will — but 13.5 per cent of our provincial population is 
Aboriginal and half of that is under the age of 18. I want to 
mention and want to point out, particularly through the Crowns 
and to our province and to our government, what a tremendous 
resource this represents for our province, Mr. Speaker. These 
young people, and many of them in my constituency, are the 
future of Saskatchewan and they will make great economic and 
cultural contributions to our province for years and years to 
come. And believe me, when I talk to them and when I talk to 
their leadership, Mr. Speaker, they see the Crown corporations, 
as well, as a vital and integral part of a growing Saskatchewan. 
 
Now for the strategy that we have for Métis and off-reserve 
First Nations people. We want to address the circumstances 

facing Aboriginal people and achieve meaningful change in the 
lives of Aboriginal people over the generations, Mr. Speaker, 
and I think we’ve made huge successes in that regard. 
 
Here’s some of the initiatives that we’ve launched. We’ve 
launched the Community Schools Program; skills training 
targeted at the growth sectors of the provincial economy, like 
forestry up in the North. 
 
I have to look no further than my own constituency as proof of 
the point. The Meadow Lake oriented strand board or OSB mill 
is an economic partnership that includes First Nations and Métis 
peoples, Mr. Speaker. The Meadow Lake Tribal Council and 
northwest communities have an ownership stake in the project 
which will also employ First Nations and Métis people. 
 
The Aboriginal Employment Development Program, a $50,000 
increase in the budget, Mr. Speaker, uses the unique approach 
to increase the number of skilled Aboriginal people in the 
provincial workforce. There’s a focus . . . The focus, I should 
say, is to identify future job opportunities, match skills, assist in 
competition for jobs, and identify, I should say, economic 
development opportunities. And since 1992, Mr. Speaker, this 
program has achieved significant success and recognition. 
There have been 41 — I say 41 — partnership agreements with 
Saskatchewan employers to improve future job prospects for 
Aboriginal people. 
 
Almost 1,500 Aboriginal people have been hired by the AEDP 
(Aboriginal Employment Development Program) partnership 
employees, and five provincial health sector unions have 
adopted representative workforce language in their respective 
collective agreements. I think that’s a huge success, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I want to speak briefly as well about the 
Kids First program. There was a 45 per cent increase to $13 
million, Mr. Speaker. That’s helping 440 additional families 
receive the support that they need to build independence for 
themselves and ensure that their children get the best start in 
life. Mr. Speaker, this program is up and running in Meadow 
Lake and in our community in the North and has been very 
successful over the last few years. 
 
The Community Initiatives Fund will see $10.5 million over the 
next four years. Five million will go to increase the physical 
activity levels of Saskatchewan youth, and I think that’s very 
important and a very good initiative. And even members 
opposite have complimented that, and I acknowledge and 
recognize that from them. At least they’ve complimented 
something in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Five point five million to increase the participation and access 
to culture, recreation, sport, and leadership programs for 
Aboriginal people. Culture, recreation, and sport is such an 
integral way, Mr. Deputy, or Mr. Speaker, I should say, for 
youth to express themselves. And I’m proud to announce here 
that Flying Dust First Nation in my riding will be hosting the 
2003 First Nations summer games and I know everyone in this 
Assembly will want to attend that event, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The centennial affordable housing 
program, Mr. Speaker, is also a very good initiative. In that 
initiative there are 1,400 new units of affordable housing over 
four years, for an investment of approximately $40 million 
which . . . with contributions from the federal government and 
from municipalities. 
 
The fiscal year conditional . . . this fiscal year, I should say, 
conditional commitments will be made to community-based 
organizations for the construction of more than 40 new homes 
with contributions of about $12 million. This includes the 
recent addition of eight new one-bedroom housing units in 
Meadow Lake as well, to address the affordable housing needs 
in my community. 
 
I want to close on post-secondary or Learning if I could, Mr. 
Speaker, where their budget is now at $390.1 million. 
Post-secondary, specifically institutions, I guess, the additional 
40 seats in northern nursing education program. Again, for a 
member who represents a northern riding, this is received with 
huge applause in northern Saskatchewan. We think this is just 
wonderful and I want to take the opportunity to compliment the 
Minister of Learning for that initiative. In addition to that, 40 
spaces for northern residents to upgrade their math and science 
skills through the northern health sciences access program. 
 
These are all wonderful initiatives and it is for that reason, Mr. 
Speaker, that I will be voting against the amendment and 
supporting, with great enthusiasm, the budget delivered by our 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to enter into the debate on the budget. We’ve heard over 
the last few days a whole bunch of rhetoric from the other side 
about the budget. 
 
But one of the things I’d like to touch on to start out, Mr. 
Speaker, is about the war in Iraq. I very much support the 
American position in the war. 
 
But one of the things that really came to my attention within the 
last four or five days, especially when we’ve been debating the 
budget, in Iraq we have the Minister of Information that’s 
getting in front of the TV and suggesting to the Iraqi people that 
all is fine, that in fact Iraq is winning the war. Even as early as 
this morning, or as recent as this morning, there is a clip of 
Saddam saying, we are winning the war. 
 
The reason I use that, Mr. Speaker, because Iraq is very, very 
adept at the propaganda campaign. And the reason I bring that 
up is all you have to do is listen to members opposite about this 
budget. It has been a propaganda campaign from all of those 
that wish to speak about the budget. It has been totally 
propaganda. 
 

I give you the example, 10 balanced budgets. Who in this 
province believes that it’s 10 balanced budgets? Let me suggest, 
let me suggest in kindergarten finance 01, if you give a 
kindergarten student 50 cents and a candy bar costs 75 cents, 
guess what? The individual has a deficit. Goes to the piggy 
bank and there’s no money in the piggy bank. What does the 
kindergarten student do? You either borrow money or you don’t 
have the candy bar. That’s finance 01 in kindergarten. 
 
So what is this government saying? We’re going to spend 6.6 
billion but only take in 6.2 billion and it’s balanced. The 
kindergarten kids could tell you people, those people, more 
about how a balanced budget or a deficit works. It’s 
unbelievable that individuals could get up on that side of the 
House and display the propaganda myth that they’re trying to 
put to the people of Saskatchewan. You have so much money in 
one hand and not enough in the other to pay it off, and yet it’s 
balanced. Totally, totally fictitious. 
 
If in fact this Fiscal Stabilization Fund is the be-all and end-all, 
I ask the government why they didn’t put $12.4 billion in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, pay off all the debt, and the province 
would be rich? That’s their way of thinking. 
 
The actual fact, Mr. Speaker, is we would still be $12.4 billion 
in debt. Where would the balanced budget be? It’s totally, 
totally ludicrous. 
 
And the 6.8 per cent growth, that’s created a chuckle, that’s 
created a chuckle throughout the province, and was identified 
again this morning with funding for the university. The Minister 
of Finance, all he had to do is go to the machine, crank up the 
6.8 growth to 7.5. If one is fictitious, why not make the other 
one fictitious too? Crank it up more. That is how ridiculous this 
budget is. 
 
And then we get on to some of the other aspects of the budget 
that I find are quite humorous. When I first picked up the 
budget document, Mr. Speaker, it says here: 
 

The Government’s plan for 2003-04 touches upon past 
accomplishments . . . 

 
And I sat, and I thought, what are the past accomplishments of 
this government? And that’s how quiet it was. I couldn’t come 
up with any. So I got thinking, to be fair with them, was the 
waiting lists at the hospital an accomplishment? If you consider 
them growing, I guess that’s an accomplishment. 
 
How about the roads? And I look at my constituency — yes, 
there’s talk in the budget about money for roads — I probably 
have collectively the worst roads in the province. Is that an 
accomplishment? 
 
Balancing the budget. I’ve already spoke about balancing the 
budget and we know it’s fictitious. So is that an 
accomplishment? I think not. 
 
The control of spending, that’s definitely not an 
accomplishment because it’s going wild. We know since the 
unelected Premier took over, it’s $1 million a day more deficit. 
Now, do people on that side of the House consider that an 
accomplishment? I think not. At least we don’t on this side of 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

the House. 
 
How about fulfilling the promise of the police force for the 
province. Has that been done? Has that been an 
accomplishment? I think not. 
 
How about out-migration. We have huge out-migration from 
this province. Is that an accomplishment? Unequivocally, no. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I picked up the copy of this budget and I 
tried to figure out what the accomplishments of this government 
was and is, I could see their accomplishment of cover-up, 
deception, deceit. But do they want to put that on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would just ask the member to 
keep all of his language parliamentary. And a couple of the 
words he just used are sort of outside of that category. So I 
would ask the member to continue. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think 
everybody gets the drift. So I looked at the accomplishments of 
this government in picking up this budget document and, Mr. 
Speaker, there was the list of accomplishments of this 
government on their own document. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to go on, I wish to go on and talk about the 
rest of the budget document. 
 
We talked about . . . we talk in this government . . . in this 
document the government says, we have a strong, competitive 
business climate . . . is resulting in more prosperity for business 
in this province. Now just think about that for a minute. This 
government creating a climate for prosperity for business. And I 
wish to read again into the record the manifesto of this 
government: 
 

No C.C.F. (NDP) Government will rest content until it has 
a eradicated capitalism and put into operation the full 
programme of socialized planning . . . 

 
So right there, right there, Mr. Speaker, that contradicts their 
own budget document where our strong, competitive business 
climate is resulting in more prosperity for our business. 
 
It doesn’t add up. It must take the innards of some of those 
people opposite to actually be able to read that in a budget 
document that they are promoting business when at the same 
time their manifesto says they want to eradicate it. Quite a 
dichotomy there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . as time is going to run out, there’s a 
couple of issues that I really wish to touch on before time runs 
out. 
 
Rural revitalization. I just can’t believe the wording of rural 
revitalization. It’s a joke. There’s no doubt about it. And 
specifically I want to talk about infrastructure in the rural areas. 
And I specifically want to talk about cellular coverage for some 
of the rural areas. 
 
I have talked about it in the Crowns. I’ve talked about it in a 
letter to the minister. I’ve talked about it or wrote a letter to the 
CEO (chief executive officer) of SaskTel. And you know what 

comes back from all of those individuals, Mr. Speaker, is 
there’s not a business case for it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a rhetorical question here. Is 
there a business case for Navigata? It only lost 2.4 million. 
What’s the business case for that compared to the business case 
for cellphones in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
What’s the business case for SecurTek? We just had the 
minister get up and talk about how good SecurTek was but it 
lost $1.3 million — 2001. And he talked about growing or 
shrinking the economy. Is that growing or is that shrinking? 
That’s NDP finance. They probably consider it growing. To the 
taxpayers, they would ultimately say it’s sinking and shrinking 
the economy. 
 
How about Craig Wireless? Where’s the business plan for that? 
How about the business plan for Soft Tracks? That was a small 
one, only 2 point something million. Retx, I would like to see 
the business plan for Retx. How about tappedinto.com? Persona 
Inc.? All-Star? 
 
The point being, Mr. Speaker, there’s a host of ventures that 
have gone sour on the NDP and yet they say they’ve done due 
diligence and there’s a business plan. But when it comes to 
providing services to rural Saskatchewan, it doesn’t make 
business sense so we’re not going to do it. 
 
I also want to touch base on rural revitalization. They talk about 
we’re doing good for rural Saskatchewan. Well let’s put some 
fact into this. 
 
Rural businesses have a very difficult time with this 
government. I’ve had three businesses start up in my 
constituency in the last year, Mr. Speaker, and every one of 
them have contacted me and have said unequivocally that they 
would never set up a business in this province, under this 
government, had of they known the difficulty it was going to 
take. They had problem after problem, and every problem they 
had was with a government agency. And yet here we have a 
government that says we’re open for business. Ask the people 
that are actually entrepreneurs and trying to set up a business in 
this province, and they will tell you how difficult it is. 
 
We talk about rural revitalization and helping the livestock 
industry. I’ve already talked about the livestock . . . the 
livestock industry in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. Here we 
ship our cattle out. We ship our grain out. And we ship our 
children out to feed these cattle our grain in another province. 
That doesn’t make economic sense. And it’s not something that 
just happened in the last six months. That’s happened under an 
NDP government for the last number of years. 
 
And now we’re going through a very, very serious issue with 
land lease. And here on one hand they’re talking about helping 
agriculture, helping the rural areas, expanding the livestock 
industry, and on the next hand they’re talking about taking 
away the lease land from the ranchers of this province. 
Absolutely disgusting. Absolutely a shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to find one that’s a little bit quicker 
here. Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about highways for minute. 
When I talked in my opening remarks about highways and the 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

 

situation in my constituency, these are not just my words, 
they’re the words of the constituent. 
 
I have a letter here that talks about Highway 4. And it talks 
about the dissatisfaction of the council with the condition of 
Highway 4 since — since — the $3 million improvement. 
That’s after the highway is improved, Mr. Speaker, and there is 
a problem and an issue with it. And the minister has the letter 
and I don’t know if he’s responded to it. 
 
Now also through my constituency runs Highway 13. And this 
is on behalf of the Red Coat Regional Economic Development 
Authority, and talk about the critical condition of Highway 13 
from Assiniboia east to Highway 6. And this is a pivotal 
corridor, Mr. Speaker, and it’s necessary for . . . it’s a major 
corridor for tourism and for trade. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as my time is winding down, I guess I will 
just like to close — I have about another hour’s worth here — 
but I would like to close by saying I will definitely, definitely 
be supporting the amendment to this budget, but there is no way 
that I would support the budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Pursuant to rule 15 of our rule book, it 
is my duty now to advise the Assembly that the Minister of 
Finance will have 20 minutes to complete the debate on this 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’d like to begin this afternoon by thanking my 
family, friends, constituents, and colleagues for their support of 
me in my new role as Finance minister, and for their support of 
this budget. 
 
I was very honoured to stand in this House last week as the new 
Finance minister to deliver the government’s 10th consecutive 
balanced budget. That’s right, Mr. Speaker, despite what the 
members opposite might say, this is the 10th consecutive 
balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And it’s not only us calling it 
balanced, Mr. Speaker. It’s also CIBC World Markets and it’s 
the Bank of Montreal Nesbitt Burns. They’re all saying the 
same thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, putting together something as big and complex as 
a $6 billion provincial budget is no easy undertaking. There are 
months and months of preparation undertaken by the staff of the 
Department of Finance who strive to provide the best analysis 
and information possible for government to assess the various 
needs and priorities and make the final decisions to develop the 
budget. 
 
There are many long hours of work that go into a budget, Mr. 
Speaker. Staff do indeed burn the midnight oil. And I think it is 

worthwhile to commend those public servants on their valuable 
service they provide to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. I 
find it a privilege to work with this department and its very, 
very fine staff. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in the past few days, 
we’ve heard criticism of this budget. But this is a budget that 
this government stands behind, Mr. Speaker, because we are 
building for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d wager you 
can never produce a budget that is all things to all people. Mr. 
Speaker, despite the empty promises of the members opposite, 
people will always say that they want more — more money for 
this, another program for that. That’s just human nature, Mr. 
Speaker. But a responsible government must strike a balance, 
Mr. Speaker, a balance between addressing priorities — that’s a 
very important distinction — and managing the province’s 
finances in a prudent, responsible manner. And with our budget, 
Mr. Speaker, we are doing just that. 
 
We are indeed building for the future, a future that’s wide open, 
being mindful that we are accountable to the fine citizens of this 
great province. 
 
And how are we building for the future, Mr. Speaker? By 
making a record $2.5 billion investment in health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And a record $1.2 billion investment 
in education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We’re increasing revenue sharing to 
municipalities by over 15 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We’re investing almost $300 million 
in road and highway improvements. We’re investing $145 
million for research and development . . . (inaudible) . . . 
expenditures and tax credits. We’re providing more than $300 
million in capital projects and $650 million in capital 
investments from the Crown sector, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now, Mr. Speaker, these are real 
investments, real commitments, and we’re very proud of them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what would the members opposite do differently, Mr. 
Speaker? Would they argue that health care and education do 
not deserve additional funding? Would they not be buying CT 
(computerized tomography) scanners or building schools? Do 
they argue that we shouldn’t invest in our roads and highways? 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

Should the government not invest in research and development 
to keep Saskatchewan competitive? Well we know what 
they’ve said. They had a platform in the last election and it was 
frozen for education and frozen for health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talked about tax cuts. We’ve provided tax cuts but we’ve 
also been investing in the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to say, 
don’t spend. But where would they cut? Surely they can’t take 
issue with these priorities, and I will remind them that 
two-thirds of our budget spending, budget over budget, goes to 
health and the other third to education. These are priorities of 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I must remind the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, just who was 
out spending money like basically it grew on trees in the late 
’80s and early ’90s. It wasn’t the members on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker; it was the members across the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this budget we are building healthy and 
self-reliant families, we are building opportunities for youth, we 
are building a prosperous and competitive economy, we are 
building a modern and competitive infrastructure, and we are 
building strong and vibrant communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We make no apologies for building 
for our future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have made quite an issue of 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, despite the fact that jurisdictions 
across Canada use similar funds to balance their budgets. It’s 
recognized as a prudent way to manage finances, and even the 
Provincial Auditor compliments this government on its cash 
management practices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, say what they 
might, the critics across the way cannot dispute the fact that we 
are forecasting to balance last year’s budget with no transfer 
from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Mr. Speaker, zero transfer. It 
was there if we needed it, that’s the intent of the fund. But we 
didn’t need it. 
 
We didn’t even receive any equalization payments from Ottawa 
last year, and we are having a $2.1 million surplus. That’s 
amazing, excellent money management, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now I’ve listened carefully to the 
week of debate here, Mr. Speaker, and I haven’t heard the 
members opposite not once mention that surplus of $2.1 million 
last year. Not once, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now last year, Mr. Speaker, they had plenty to say. The Leader 
of the Opposition, interviewed by CKRM radio, said of this 
government, and I quote: 

They’re in trouble. They’ve done some mismanaging. 
 
He also said, and I quote: 
 

This could be a 3-D budget — a deception and deficit and 
discouragement on the part of Saskatchewan people 
realizing that we’ve gone from surplus into difficult 
financial times. 

 
And the Finance critic, what did he say? On CKTV last year on 
budget day wondered, and I quote: 
 

Will it be a $300 million deficit? Oh, will it be a $700 
million deficit? 

 
And then he said: 
 

We have to be able to create a situation in Saskatchewan 
where we have the revenue to be able to balance. This 
government is (providing) proving they are incapable of 
doing that. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how wrong can they be and how wrong can they 
get? A $2.1 million surplus is certainly not a deficit, and it’s not 
a 300 million or a 700 million, it’s a $2.1 million surplus, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And now, Mr. Speaker, the doom 
and gloomers across the way say our forecast of 6.8 per cent 
growth in GDP (gross domestic product) for this year is, well, 
it’s just not realistic, Mr. Speaker. But everybody else is saying 
it’s realistic. Everybody else is saying that it’s forecast . . . 
They’re all forecasting growth. But the doom and gloomers 
don’t want us to forecast growth, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want 
growth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why are they saying that? Because the 
Finance officials have a proven track record and that’s 
something that can’t be disputed, Mr. Speaker. As much as the 
members opposite would like to say the numbers don’t add up, 
they do. And the department officials have been right year after 
year after year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now our numbers are predicated on 
a normal crop and it seems the members opposite don’t believe 
we’re going to have an average crop. Now I have to wonder 
what their forecast is? What are they predicting? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that while agriculture is 
terribly important to Saskatchewan, that the size of the harvest 
does affect the GDP, the size of the harvest does not have a 
whole lot of effect on the budget’s revenue forecast. There is no 
one-to-one correlation between GDP and revenues. And last 
year, for example, our real GDP dropped 3 percentage points 
from our forecast yet revenues were up $310 million on a net 
basis. 
 
So the impact of change of GDP, up or down, on our revenues 
depends on the specific sectoral economic changes that occur. 



April 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

 

The opposition’s questions on this topic all week further 
demonstrate their lack of understanding of provincial finances, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the last 20 years our forecasts have been based 
on an average crop, and for the last 20 years our forecasts have 
been very accurate. So let’s talk about accuracy of forecasts a 
bit again. 
 
Last year the Finance critic called the government’s provincial 
sales tax forecasts, and I quote, “a bogus revenue number.” He 
went on to claim that an increase of 6.6 per cent or 51 million 
was not possible and didn’t add up, Mr. Speaker. And I am 
pleased to report that the Department of Finance forecast was 
bang on, in fact it might have been a tad low. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, PST (provincial 
sales tax) revenue for 2002-03 is up 7 per cent above the 
2001-02 level. Department forecasters were extremely accurate 
on the revenue projection. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 
about forecasts we know the Department of Finance is very 
accurate. 
 
We know the members opposite are relatively inaccurate, in fact 
they’ve been mostly inaccurate the past few years. 
 
And I would like to comment a bit about what the CIBC World 
Markets notes with regard to our increase. 
 

The associate level of real output falls within the band 
foreseen by economic forecasters. 
 

CIBC World Markets, “Provincial Budget Briefs,” March 28, 
2003. 
 
And the Bank of Montreal doesn’t question the 6.8 per cent 
forecast. They simply note it’s based on a return to normal crop 
levels after two years of severe drought — BMO Nesbitt Burns 
Economic Research, Saskatchewan highlights, March 28, 2003. 
 
And even the Conference Board of Canada has said, that if we 
get a normal crop: 
 

I don’t think 6.8 per cent economic growth is overly 
optimistic. 

 
And that’s a quote from David Madani, Conference Board of 
Canada, Regina Leader-Post, March 29, 2003, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I will also point out that in 1990 we jumped 
7 per cent after recording a 2.4 per cent in 1989 and a negative 
3.4 per cent in 1988. So we rebounded after 2 years of drought. 
And we experienced another big swing in 1993 when we hit 6.6 
per cent after recording a negative 4.5. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a proven track record — a track record of 
accurate forecasts, a track record of balanced budgets, and also 

a track record credit rating upgrades. To be precise, Mr. 
Speaker, 10 credit rating upgrades since 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, we’re on the right 
track with our tax reform measures. We have been lowering 
taxes over the last decade and during the last three years we 
have made dramatic reductions. 
 
A family of four earning 50,000 has had a 37 per cent reduction 
in personal income tax. We’ve also eliminated the flat tax, the 
high-income surtax, and the debt reduction surtax. The dreaded 
flat tax that hit fixed-income seniors the hardest, Mr. Speaker 
— it’s gone. 
 
We have reduced tax rates three times in the last three years. 
The final stage of personal income tax reform was introduced 
January 1, with lower tax rates and higher family tax credits, 
and will result in a further tax reduction of $78 million this 
year, Mr. Speaker — significant tax reductions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our top marginal tax rate is now the third lowest in 
Canada, and beginning January 1, 2004 the income tax system 
will be fully indexed to inflation, eliminating bracket three. 
 
Now let, Mr. Speaker, let me talk a bit more about taxes and 
how we’re encouraging growth, and how we are building for 
the future of this province. 
 
The small-business corporate income tax rate will be reduced 
from 6 per cent to 5 per cent over two years; that will be half of 
what it was in 1991. And we’re also expanding the incremental 
corporate capital tax exemption for Saskatchewan-based 
companies from five to ten million over two years. That will 
make Saskatchewan the highest tax exemption threshold for all 
Canadian provinces, Mr. Speaker — the highest in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite have expressed concern about debt levels, which is 
quite ironic and quite laughable, Mr. Speaker, when you think 
of their past experience in running up the debt for nine 
consecutive years on an accumulated deficit basis. 
 
The cost to fight forest fires, the cost to providing drought and 
livestock assistance — these have contributed to our increase in 
debt, Mr. Speaker. And we’re not apologizing for fighting fires 
or for providing assistance to livestock producers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will also point out, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan went from 
having one of the highest government debt to GDP ratios in 
Canada when that group left, Mr. Speaker, to having one of the 
lowest debt to GDP ratios. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, our government has 
debt under control. In this budget we’re also providing funding 
for social housing, social programs, more child care spaces, 
programs for vulnerable families and youth at risk. We are 
providing funding to hire more police; funding for 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2003 

 

municipalities — a $60 million increase in funding over three 
years to municipalities. And I might add we’re adding $27 
million in funding for northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(12:45) 
 
More funding for health. More funding for education. More 
funding for highway improvements. Mr. Speaker, we are 
optimistic about the future of the province. It’s wide open and 
we are embracing every opportunity that we can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe that this province has a future that is wide open and 
despite the negativism, the doom and gloom from the members 
opposite, we are moving forward with this budget. We are 
moving forward with progress for the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I obviously will be supporting the budget and not the 
amendment by the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. Members will come 
to order. Order. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:48 until 12:50. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 23 
 
Toth Heppner Julé 
Krawetz Gantefoer Bjornerud 
Elhard   
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Order. Thank 
you. 
 
Wakefield Stewart Harpauer 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Huyghebaert Dearborn 
Brkich Wiberg Weekes 
Lorenz Hart Allchurch 
Hillson   
 

Nays — 30 
 
Calvert Addley Crofford 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Thomson Junor 
Nilson Atkinson Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Yates McCall Iwanchuk 
 
The division bells rang from 12:53 until 12:54. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Calvert Addley Crofford 

Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Thomson Junor 
Nilson Atkinson Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Yates McCall Iwanchuk 
 

Nays — 23 
 
Toth Heppner Julé 
Krawetz Gantefoer Bjornerud 
Elhard Wakefield Stewart 
Harpauer   
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please, 
members, we must respect . . . Order. We must respect this 
process, members. We must respect this process. The vote will 
continue. 
 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Huyghebaert Dearborn 
Brkich Wiberg Weekes 
Lorenz Hart Allchurch 
Hillson   
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish everyone a good weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:58. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................389 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................389 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................390 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 All Saints Anglican Church — 100th Anniversary 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................390 
 Employment Statistics 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................390 
 National Wildlife Week 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................390 
 Saskatchewan’s Economy 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................391 
 Watrous Winterhawks Win Senior Hockey Title 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................391 
 Growth in Yorkton and Region 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................391 
 Macklin Pee Wee Girls Provincial Champions 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................392 
 Funding for Saskatchewan Communities 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................392 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Government Reaction to Harassment Allegations 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................392 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................392 
 Financial Support for College of Medicine 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................393 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................393 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................394 
 Mega Bingo 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................394 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................394 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................396 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................396 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................396 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................398 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................402 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................406 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................409 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................411 
 Recorded Division (Amendment) ................................................................................................................................................414 
 Recorded Division (Motion).........................................................................................................................................................414 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE.........................................................................................................................................................414 
 


