















































Hansard: April 10, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 499 
 April 10, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens very 
concerned about the condition of Highway 47 south of Estevan. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan, 
Lampman, Arcola, and my hometown of Macoun. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with the high cost of prescription drugs: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Davidson and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly again today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the crop 
insurance increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Leoville, Medstead, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 13, 18, and 19. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: what was the total cost for 
forest fire fighting in the calendar year 2002 in 
Saskatchewan; further to that, what were the total number 
of forest fire fighting subcontractor contracts given out in 
the year 2002; and as well what was the value of each of 
those contracts and to whom were they awarded? 

 
I also have the same question for 2001 and 2000. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: what are the terms of 
reference for the Crown land lease review proposed and 
now being undertaken by the Department of Agriculture; 
which departments are involved in this review and what are 
their respective responsibilities; will the public have an 
opportunity to have input into this review; what is the 
anticipated end date of this review; and will there be a final 
public report upon the completion of the review? 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health, regarding gambling addictions 
treatment: why is the new gambling addictions treatment 
program of Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region a cost to the 
health budget as opposed to being taken from the profits of 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two 
sets of guests today. 
 
In the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, there’s a large group of 
students, 18, from Holy Rosary Community School and I’ll be 
meeting with them for photos a little bit later. They’re with their 
teacher, Barb Papandreou. 
 
And I would just say that I don’t see any chaperones here — 
they’re laughing; I said her name wrong I’m sure, so we’ll have 
to fix that up after — but no chaperones. You’re very brave 
coming out with 18 people all on your own there. But we will 
see the students later. 
 
Would everybody in the House join me in welcoming them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, we have one of our public servant tours. And as you 
know they do an in-depth tour of the Legislative Building, they 
tour the Legislative Library, the Clerk’s office, Executive 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

Council, they’re here to observe House proceedings, and as well 
they’ll be meeting with members from both sides of the 
legislature. 
 
And in this tour today we have employees from the following 
departments: Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization; Public 
Service Commission; Health; Industry and Resources; 
Environment; Community Resources and Employment; 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs; Labour; and 
Justice. 
 
Please join me in thanking and welcoming our public servants 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the minister in welcoming our public 
service employees to the building today to observe the 
proceedings of the . . . on the floor of the Assembly, and to gain 
an understanding of what happens in here with pieces of 
legislation and questions that you have already seen members 
asking — written questions — what we do with them, Mr. 
Speaker. I know that that’s one of the areas that the members of 
the public service are interested in. 
 
So I’d like to ask everyone to again welcome them to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to members of the House, a 
number of guests that we have this afternoon here to watch the 
afternoon’s proceedings. 
 
Sitting in your west gallery and also in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, members of the Saskatchewan Professional 
Firefighters. Mr. Speaker, we have met many of these 
professionals over the years at their annual firefighters lobby 
and I’m very pleased to have them here again today. 
 
I would ask that a number of them — I can’t introduce all of 
them, Mr. Speaker — but I would ask a number of the main 
representatives to stand as they’re introduced. Mr. Gerry Huget 
from the . . . president of the local here in Regina and also 
president of the Saskatchewan Professional Firefighters. Bill 
Howes, who is here from Moose Jaw; Bruce Seimans from 
Saskatoon; Greg Litvanyi from Yorkton; Wade Sutherland from 
Swift Current; Clint Bullerwell from North Battleford; Doug 
Reynolds from Prince Albert; and Harold Whiteoak from 
Weyburn. 
 
Along with these gentleman I would like to add a welcome to 
all of you for taking the time to be here on this very important 
afternoon. And I would encourage all members of the House to 
please help me in welcoming our professional firefighters from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the Minister of Labour in welcoming the 

number of firefighters that are here in the gallery today. A 
number of the faces are very familiar to me, whether it’s 
through the firefighter lobby that’s gone on over the last three 
years that I have been a member or some personal friends that I 
see up in the crowd too. 
 
So I’d like all members to join with me and the Minister of 
Labour in once again welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for me 
to join with other members in welcoming the Saskatchewan 
Professional Firefighters to this Assembly and to take this 
opportunity to thank them in their work lives for daily being 
prepared to put their own lives at risk in working for the safety 
and security of the community. And if I may, a personal word 
of welcome to Clint Bullerwell of North Battleford. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and to members of this Legislative 
Assembly, people who are here for the Western Transportation 
Advisory Council, WESTAC. We’ve been meeting for the last 
couple of days and they’re seated in your gallery, in the back 
row. And I would ask them to stand as I introduce them, please. 
 
On the far side, Charray Dutka from the Canadian Wheat 
Board. And next to Charray is His Worship Jon Kingsbury from 
Coquitlam. Jon was born in Rosetown and he lives in the sixth 
largest city in BC (British Columbia). He was raised on a 
family farm about four miles from Carievale. So welcome to 
. . . a return for you, Jon. 
 
Also seated next to Jon is Ron Liberty. Ron is with the 
Brotherhood of Maintenance Way Employees. And next to Ron 
is Dick Corfe. Dick comes the furthest distance — he’s with the 
St. Lawrence Seaway Corporation, president and chief 
executive officer from Niagara, and the office is in Cornwall. 
 
Next to Dick is David MacMartin with CP (Canadian Pacific) 
Railway corporation. And then next to David we have Lisa 
Baratta. Lisa is on staff with WESTAC and doing a tremendous 
job there. Next to her is Lorne Nukina and Lorne has done a 
tremendous job taking pictures and helping in . . . host the event 
for WESTAC. And next to Lorne is Ruth Sol, the vice-president 
of WESTAC, who celebrates 20 years with the organization. 
She’s done a tremendous job over those 20 years and continues 
to do so as vice-president. 
 
So I would ask all to join me in welcoming them here, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to welcome the members of 
the transportation industry that are in the gallery today. 
Transportation is very important to the Prairie provinces as a 
whole, and we appreciate any effort that is undertaken to 
expedite the successful development of an efficient 
transportation system. 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Workers’ Compensation Protection for Firefighters 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 
inform this Assembly that today this government will be 
introducing legislation expanding workers’ compensation 
protection for Saskatchewan’s almost 700 full-time professional 
firefighters. Mr. Speaker, we have the utmost regard for the 
critical services provided daily by firefighters to save lives and 
protect our community. 
 
The amendments that we are introducing today ensure that The 
Workers’ Compensation Act adequately addresses the link 
between specific occupational diseases and the occupation of 
firefighting. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today we will also be introducing 
amendments to The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act that 
will establish two new provincial honours. One of these will be 
a Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal. The Saskatchewan 
Protective Services Medal will recognize exemplary service of 
25 years in Saskatchewan for law enforcement personnel and 
those working in direct capacity to protect the people of 
Saskatchewan. This, of course, Mr. Speaker, includes 
firefighters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was privileged to participate in a firefighter ride 
along in Saskatoon recently, one of the most educational and 
exhilarating events as an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly). 
 
Mr. Speaker, certain occupations contain certain risks. The 
amendments we will be proposing today will help protect and to 
honour those brave men and women who choose to take those 
risks for the benefit of us all. Thanks to all the firefighters who 
worked so hard to make this day a reality. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
University of Saskatchewan Huskie Salute Awards Banquet 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend I had the pleasure of 
attending the University of Saskatchewan’s Huskie Salute 
Awards banquet in Saskatoon. These awards recognize the 
achievements of the students, faculty, and staff involved in 
Huskie athletics. 
 
Although it did not receive an official award, the Huskie 
women’s track team and Canadian champions received a 
standing ovation. Two members of that team, Jamie Epp and 
Kelsie Hendry, were named male and female Athlete of the 
Year, respectively. 
 
This year’s Coach of the Year is Brian Towriss, who led the 
football Huskies to the Vanier Cup. 
 
Basketball player, Ashley Dutchak, and hockey player, Dean 
Beuker are the female and male Rookies of the Year. 
 

The Top All Round Huskie awards — awards which recognize 
athletics, academics, and sportsmanship — went to Misty 
Bertram of the women’s hockey team, and wrestler, Mickey 
Jutras. 
 
Another noteworthy award presented on Saturday was to 
Shannon Kekula-Kristiansen. Ms. Kekula-Kristiansen was 
inducted into the Athletic Wall of Fame for her outstanding 
five-year shot put career in the mid-’80s that resulted in Canada 
West gold twice, CIS (Canadian Interuniversity Sport) gold 
three times, and numerous records at both championship levels. 
 
I would invite all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating this year’s Huskie Salute Awards recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

International Special Librarians Day 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again it is 
time to take just a moment of one day to pay tribute to the 
people who, year in and year out, help us manage the flood of 
information which flows over us. I am talking of course of chief 
librarian, Marian Powell, and her extraordinary staff at our 
beautiful and special Legislative Library. A special library, I 
remind members, is one that caters to the special needs of a 
particular discipline. 
 
The theme for this year’s International Special Librarians Day 
is quote, “Orchestrating a World of Information” and this theme 
aptly describes what they do — direct and manage a changing 
world of information for the benefit of their clients. They 
orchestrate this constantly changing flux of information with 
the skill, the élan, and the grace of a classical composer. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, not only do they manage the flood of paper 
which is the traditional medium of the librarian, they are 
intrepid interpreters of the Internet — that beast which still 
terrifies many of us. It has been truly said that without some 
skilful guidance, going on the Web to get information is like 
trying to drink water from a fire hose. Whether it’s a 
government document, an obscure quotation from an even more 
obscure Winthrop Macworth Praed, or some warm statistic 
from www.whatever, the Legislative Library crew can find it 
for us. And they do it time after time, for which we are 
perpetually in their debt. 
 
I know all members will join with me in thanking them on this, 
their special day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Larry Janzen Obituary 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to pay 
tribute to Larry Janzen. Larry died Saturday, April 5 at age 55. 
He is survived by his loving wife Doreen, daughter Wendy, and 
son Paul. 
 
After his U of S (University of Saskatchewan) education, Larry 
moved to Regina where he started his teaching career at Thom 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

Collegiate. Shortly after that he moved to Saskatoon so he could 
be closer to Rosthern. He started teaching mathematics at Evan 
Hardy Collegiate in Saskatoon and also worked on the farm on 
weekends and during the summer. 
 
Coaching was a huge part of Larry’s life. He was the head 
wrestling coach and assistant football coach at both Thom and 
Evan Hardy. He also coached the Rosthern Wheat Kings for 
three seasons, the first of those to the provincial finals. 
 
Larry dreamt big. In 1981 Larry finally was able to fulfill his 
dream of becoming a full-time seed grower. In ’85 he built a 
seed-cleaning plant under the company Spruce Grove Seeds. He 
was awarded the Saskatchewan Pulse Growers Association 
Pulse Promoter of the Year for the year 2002. 
 
Generosity and community services were core values. A major 
undertaking was the voluntary work when he worked with the 
Seager Wheeler Farm and was the Chair of that society from its 
inception to 2002. He was also very involved in the Canadian 
food banks. Over the years he served as youth leader, Sunday 
school teacher, church choir, worship leader. He was a true 
Saskatchewan builder and we will miss him dearly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Housing Starts Double 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker — more 
good news for Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, all the 
gloom-and-doom predictions of the Sask Party have not been 
enough to prevent this province’s economy from being on a 
roll. Here’s the latest in a long string of good news stories for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, housing construction in Regina is off to a strong 
start this year. A strong start? Mr. Speaker, the housing starts 
are double what they were last year. A spokesperson for Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corp commented, and I quote: 
 

It looks like we’re going to blow our forecast right out of 
the water. 
 

CMHC’s (Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation) 2003 
forecast called for Regina to post a similar number of starts this 
year as last. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon has had exactly the same number 
of housing starts in the first quarter of 2003 as Regina. And 
outside the two major cities in that same period, Mr. Speaker, 
new housing starts increased from five in 2002 to fifty-four in 
2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a vision and a plan for this 
province and clearly that plan is working. When the CMHC 
spokesperson was asked why the turnaround in housing starts, 
he replied, and I quote: 
 

. . . the most important thing is that we are seeing steady 
increases in employment. When we have increased the 
number of jobs, that means we also see increases in income 
and that encourages in-migration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Youth Achievements 
 

Mr. Wall: — In Swift Current, as it is across the province, our 
greatest asset is our youth. And today I’d like to recognize the 
accomplishments of several young people from my hometown 
of Swift Current. 
 
Local hockey teams in Swift Current won four provincial titles 
this past hockey season. The latest team to cruise to victory was 
the Swift Current PeeWee A Tier 2 Mustangs. The Mustangs 
recently defeated Meadow Lake to capture the provincial title. 
The Mustangs joined the Bantam AA Raiders, the Midget Wild, 
and the Bantam Eliminators/Broncos as the other Swift Current 
teams to claim provincial championships this season. 
 
Congratulations to these teams on another successful campaign. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to pass on congratulations to the 
winners of the regional science fair held in Swift Current this 
week. First place went to Christopher Hueser of Swift Current, 
second place went to Jenna Corcoran of Meyronne, and third 
place was Amanda Lee of Swift Current, while fourth place 
went to Hilary Judiesch of Swift Current as well. 
 
These four outstanding individuals will take their expertise in 
the field of science to the National Science Fair to be held in 
Calgary in May. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all the members of the Assembly to 
recognize the achievements of these young people from Swift 
Current and to wish them well in their future endeavours. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Aboriginal Achievement Awards 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the National Aboriginal 
Achievement Awards were held at the National Arts Centre in 
Ottawa last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these awards were established to help build pride 
and self esteem for the Aboriginal community, provide role 
models for Aboriginal youth, and to inform the larger 
community of the accomplishments of individuals who have set 
high standards for themselves and have had the discipline, 
drive, and determination to attain their goals. It is the highest 
honour the Aboriginal community bestows upon its members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Unooch nitugageneeten. 
 
I am happy and proud to say that three of this year’s 14 
recipients are from Saskatchewan. They are: Métis fiddler John 
Arcand, recognized for helping that important aspect of Métis 
culture; engineer and commercial builder, Gary Bosgoed, who 
received his award for his work in the areas of 
telecommunications, housing, and energy projects for First 
Nations communities; and University of Saskatchewan 
engineering student, Matthew Dunn, who was this year’s youth 
recipient for the numerous scholarships and awards he has 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

 

received and for the example he’s set as a student, athlete, 
performer, and community volunteer. 
 
I ask all the Assembly to join me in congratulating Mr. Arcand, 
Mr. Bosgoed, Mr. Dunn on their successes, on their being 
chosen as recipients of the National Aboriginal Achievement 
Awards. 
 
Kinunaskomananuk — Mr. Speaker, we thank them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I have a few more questions for 
the minister of Liquor and Gaming. Mr. Speaker, yesterday the 
minister said: 
 

The minister responsible for (Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming) . . . did not approve an upfront expenditure for 
this program (the mega bingo program) because initially 
there was no net budget impact . . . projected . . . 

 
That’s an incredible statement, Mr. Speaker. Even if there was 
no budget impact anticipated, there was still $6 million at risk 
without ministerial approval. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister saying that Liquor and Gaming is 
free to assume any amount of risk they want so long as they tell 
the minister there is no net budget impact? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act gives the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority the statutory authority to operate 
and regulate liquor and gaming activities in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In 1997 the cabinet approved a gaming strategy, Mr. Speaker, 
that included linked bingo as an initiative that could help 
rebalance the revenues and assist the charities across this 
province that rely on bingos, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) 
proceeded with the development and implementation of a 
linked bingo game, Mr. Speaker, throughout the province, as 
identified in the gaming strategy approved by cabinet. Linked 
bingo was initially projected to be cost neutral to government. 
The game was expected to pay for itself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Again the minister said the concept was 
approved. The question we continue to ask on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan: was the expenditure, the $6.2 million 
expenditure, approved to achieve this concept and who gave 
this approval? 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, was the money to be spent on this project of 
no interest to the NDP? After all, it was only $6.2 million, small 

change compared to the $28 million lost in SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company), the $107 
million spent on land titles, and millions of dollars more that the 
NDP have lost in failed ventures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: did the NDP decide this bingo 
scheme was going ahead no matter what the cost and no matter 
what the outcome? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I mentioned that linked bingo, based on 
what was happening in other places — okay — was expected to 
be revenue neutral, Mr. Speaker, no cost to government. It was 
expected to pay for its own operations. 
 
SLGA, under its statutory authority, went ahead to implement 
by contracting an agent, the WCLC (Western Canada Lottery 
Corporation), which those people continue to try to discredit, 
Mr. Speaker — we have confidence in. When those costs within 
the budget that were not previously incorporated, because we 
did not know what the implementations cost would be, when 
they were incorporated into a budget, an SLGA budget, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister responsible for SLGA decided on that 
basis to cancel linked bingo in June 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister, was there any 
type of spending control on what Liquor and Gaming could 
spend on mega bingo? The minister seems to be telling us there 
wasn’t. SLGA seems to have a blank cheque to gamble 
whatever they want on mega bingo without a business plan, 
without a budget, and without cabinet approval. Isn’t that what 
the minister has been telling us for the last four days? 
 
Mr. Speaker, could the minister please tell us and the people of 
Saskatchewan what parameters did the minister have in place to 
control how much Liquor and Gaming could spend on mega 
bingo? Did they have a ceiling on what could be spent on mega 
bingo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the bingo industry and 
charities who rely on bingo came to government and said you 
know, there are linked bingos, megaprojects, in other provinces 
that will assist us in increasing our participation by players and 
increasing the revenues we so desperately need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate. Any public loss of funds is 
unfortunate. But SLGA, Mr. Speaker, is in fact . . . And the 
people of this province recognize how successful the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority is in regulating 
those issues that contribute . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the students not to participate in 
the applause, please. I would ask that only one debate take place 
across the floor at a time as well so we can hear the responses. 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

The minister has 10 seconds to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority contributes — 
contributes on the basis of their good management practices at 
that authority, that I have confidence in — more than 300 
million, more than $300 million each year for community 
projects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is admitting that 
there were no spending controls in place. I guess we should 
consider ourselves lucky that they only lost $6 million. They 
could have lost 10 million. Maybe they could have lost $20 
million. We should be grateful to the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) bingo barons because they only lost $6 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is appalling. The minister is admitting the 
only spending controls that were put in place was after the 
money was lost. In other words, the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains just sat back and waited for the jackpot to grow 
to $6.2 million before she yelled bingo and shut it down. The 
problem is she didn’t win $6.2 million, Mr. Speaker. She lost 
6.2 million taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how could the NDP allow Liquor 
and Gaming to lose $6.2 million without any spending controls? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s evident why 
the people of this province will have no confidence in those 
members opposite in governing or directing any business 
ventures, Mr. Speaker. And obviously, none of them have ever 
participated in any type of business ventures. 
 
SLGA, who we are very confident in, the contributions they 
make to this province, over $300 million, Mr. Speaker — you 
know where that goes? To community projects, for the 
hospitality industry, for government programs including health 
care, education, and highways, and in the case of bingo, Mr. 
Speaker, hundreds of charity groups throughout this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. It’s been six months today, Mr. 
Speaker, since the NDP and Broe industries officially 
announced plans to build an 80-million litre ethanol plant at 
Belle Plaine under the corporate name Prairie Sun Energy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prairie Sun Energy offices in Regina are still 
vacant and there’s no activity at the site of Belle Plaine. Will 
the minister explain what the status is of the Belle Plaine 
ethanol project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well unless 
the opposition has changed their position, this is finally one 
issue where they’ve actually stated their position and have so 
far stuck to it, that is that they are supportive of the ethanol 
industry, Mr. Speaker. The only difference is, Mr. Speaker, that 
that party over there, Mr. Speaker, is not interested in partnering 
with communities, unlike our government and our party here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ethanol industry will be a strong industry here 
in Saskatchewan, this year and years into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this year, both the 
Minister of Agriculture . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I recognize the . . . 
Order, please. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this year, 
both the Minister of Agriculture and the minister responsible for 
the Crown Investments Corporation indicated that Broe did not 
yet have its financing in place for their 60 per cent of the 
ethanol deal. In late February the minister responsible for CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) told the 
media that he would be worried if Broe did not have its 
financing in place by the end of March. 
 
It’s now mid-April, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister confirm 
whether or not Broe has secured financing for its share of the 
ethanol deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, 
the members opposite tend to twist the words of what the 
members on this side say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said accurately that I . . . if there was concerns 
that I would have . . . I would have concerns, Mr. Speaker, if 
the financing package was not progressing, is what I said, Mr. 
Speaker. The financing package is progressing, I am advised, 
very well, Mr. Speaker. We are confident in the ethanol 
industry. It’s moving ahead exactly as was scheduled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, in December the former NDP 
Industry minister told the media, and I quote: 
 

I would suggest if Pat Broe can’t get his equity portion 
from a bank, the deals won’t proceed. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if the minister is now saying that Broe has secured 
their equity financing or will likely secure equity financing in 
the near future, will he assure Saskatchewan taxpayers that the 
NDP government did not and will not help Broe with its 
financing through the public treasury? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this is an 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

 

interesting attack from that member who would benefit in his 
own riding, Mr. Speaker. This ethanol plant in that member’s 
riding . . . this is really interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said, the package is moving ahead, the financing is being 
negotiated. Everything is on schedule, Mr. Speaker. We . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I said, Mr. Speaker, that everything is 
moving ahead as scheduled, financing continues to be 
negotiated, there has been a draft terms sheet agreed to, Mr. 
Speaker. Everything is moving exactly as was anticipated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, when the Belle Plaine project 
was launched six months ago to this day, the minister stated that 
the government was in negotiations with Broe to build two 
other ethanol plants in Saskatchewan — one near Tisdale and 
one in the Yorkton-Melville area — and that these plants would 
be announced early in 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the status of these negotiations and are 
these other two plants still going to be built by Broe industries 
and the NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s another 
interesting contradiction. That member would suggest in that 
question that people should just start dumping money into it 
without any due diligence taking place here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only in Belle Plaine do we work with Broe 
industries, but in those communities that that member had 
identified, we work with the communities, Mr. Speaker. We 
will not come forward with a project until all of the appropriate 
work has been done, unless that member is now suggesting that 
people should just dump money in before due diligence and the 
proper work has been done to assess the projects. 
 
The project in Belle Plaine, as I said earlier, is moving exactly 
as we would have anticipated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for North Battleford 
Sewer and Water Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Government Relations. One year ago, Justice Robert Laing 
tabled a series of recommendations as a result of the North 
Battleford Water Inquiry. Recommendation no. 2 was that the 
city needed to begin construction of a new sewage treatment 
plant at a location downstream from the surface water treatment 
plant no later than this spring. 
 
At the time, the NDP said it concurred with Justice Laing’s 
report and this recommendation. Yet after two attempts to 
secure $2 million from the Canadian-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program to assist with this project, the city has 
been rejected. 

Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP government, who has input in 
the approval of these projects, reject the city of North 
Battleford’s request? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
the members opposite in asking their questions do not . . . are 
not giving all of the facts about who is involved in reviewing 
the projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $1.7 million in federal and provincial CSIP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) funding will be 
provided to the city of North Battleford to support their water 
and sewer needs. North Battleford has been supported in a 
significant way by the province in their efforts to upgrade their 
sewer and water system. The city has access to the 1.2 million 
over the five years of the CSIP program; a quarter of a million 
dollars, $254,000 has already been allotted . . . allocated to two 
new water supply wells, Mr. Speaker. And there’s more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of the 
Environment said that the infrastructure program’s project 
review committee, of which the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association is a part, made the decision to reject 
North Battleford’s application, but that’s not the case. North 
Battleford applied to CSIP as a strategic initiative and the 
Department of Government Relations and specifically the 
minister can sign off on these projects and recommend they 
move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government blaming the project 
review committee when they themselves and their own Minister 
of Government Relations rejected the city of North Battleford’s 
funding request? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — You talk about misconstruing facts, Mr. 
Speaker. North Battleford applied for $3.2 million in additional 
funds under the strategic initiatives portion of the fund in 
2003-2004. 
 
However, that CSIP Project Review Committee which includes 
— and I wish the members would be upfront and give all the 
facts — which includes representatives from SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), from SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), federal 
and provincial governments, who did not recommend the 
application because supported it . . . supporting it would have 
depleted the amount available to fund other projects. 
 
The CSIP Management Committee, which consists of 
representatives from the federal and provincial governments, 
agreed, and declined the project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to read from the 
Canadian-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program, 
federal-provincial projects strategic initiative. And I’d like to 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

quote: 
 

To allow for projects of a regional nature, possibly 
involving more than one municipality, the federal and 
provincial governments may also nominate projects, to a 
maximum value of 20 per cent of the total value of all 
approved projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately this government did not 
nominate North Battleford for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hundreds of people got sick as a result of drinking 
tainted water in North Battleford. And the fact that the city’s 
sewage treatment plant is upstream from the water intake to the 
water treatment plant was identified as a major cause of the 
water problem. Mr. Speaker, the city of North Battleford has 
been working to try to rectify the problems. But two years in a 
row they’ve been rejected by this NDP government for funding 
under CSIP to build a new sewage treatment plant downstream 
from the water source. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government keeps coming down hard on 
communities across this province about substandard water 
supplies yet is failing to live up to its role and responsibilities in 
helping provide safe water infrastructure in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP neglecting its responsibility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if $949,000, what has 
been committed to North Battleford . . . that’s been approved, 
Mr. Speaker, to support the design of a new sewage system 
plant. Now that funding will be used over the next two years. 
The city has been aware that it will receive this funding — for 
some time they’ve been aware of that — and that these funds 
will be part of an upcoming CSIP announcement, Mr. Speaker, 
and other projects that have been approved for the next several 
years. 
 
In addition, this is a point of interest that perhaps people should 
be aware of. North Battleford has been provided $500,000, a 
half a million dollars, from the strategic initiatives portion of 
CSIP, of that fund, to install an ultraviolet system in its water 
treatment plant. Including that strategic funding, Mr. Speaker, 
North Battleford will get about $121 per capita from CSIP for 
its sewer and water and infrastructure, about 40 per cent more 
than any other city will receive on a per capita basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have got their priorities 
all wrong when the people of North Battleford, and people in 
communities like Maple Creek, and Perdue, and Maryfield, and 
Vonda, have raised their money and are paying more to the 
municipality for water and waste water projects, and this 
government neglects their own responsibility for safe water 
infrastructure. 
 
The NDP have $28 million to lose on potatoes; they can gamble 
$40 million on the Australian stock market; they have $6 
million to throw away on a hare-brained bingo scheme. You 
can’t come up with $2 million for the city of North Battleford to 

ensure safe drinking water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why $6 million in bingo 
doesn’t need to be budgeted for, doesn’t need to be approved by 
a minister, yet this government can so easily reject North 
Battleford’s sewage plant project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the allegation that this 
minister or this government has any say as far as what the 
project review committee and management committee 
recommends — reviews and recommends and approves — is 
totally, totally unfair, unjust. That’s not a proper allegation. 
 
North Battleford’s application is reviewed by representatives 
from SUMA, SARM, and federal and provincial governments. 
They did not recommend the application because supporting it 
would have depleted funds that perhaps might have been used 
for the projects in those communities that member talks about. 
And there’s been numerous communities throughout the 
province that have been supported by this coalition government. 
 
North Battleford does have other options, Mr. Speaker, for 
funding the remainder of the project. Based on their excellent 
financial health, there should be no problem, no problem in 
arranging financing to upgrade the sewage treatment facility. 
That city’s reserves are approximately $13.2 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. I was very pleased to note that this 
morning the Premier was on CKRM and he said, and I quote, 
that he was: 
 

. . . ready to sit down with the mayor of North Battleford to 
discuss further assistance to the city in order that 
construction of the new sewage treatment plant could 
proceed immediately. 

 
I want to congratulate the Premier for that statement, and for 
following through on his promise of two years ago that he 
would be there for North Battleford. 
 
So my question for the Premier is: has he contacted the mayor 
of North Battleford and when will this meeting take place? 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in fact we have been 
making effort to be in contact with the mayor of North 
Battleford. I’m not sure as I speak if we have, if we have been 
able to do that. But we were making that effort this morning, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has stood with North Battleford throughout 
this situation. It was this government, it was this government 
. . . If I may say, Mr. Speaker, with the opposition from the 
North Battleford member, it was this government that 
established a commission to investigate the circumstance that 
brought about the drinking water situation in North Battleford. 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

 

It was this government that did that. 
 
It is this government that has followed through on the 
recommendations of that commission. It is this government that 
is working with communities across Saskatchewan to ensure the 
best quality drinking water that we can provide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to hear the Premier’s 
response. But if he’s having trouble getting through to the 
mayor I suggest he try 445-1700. 
 
He’s absolutely correct though that the $2 million that the 
province has been asked to contribute to the $15 million sewage 
treatment plant is the same figure that the inquiry cost. And he’s 
correct that I said that if North Battleford had the choice 
between 2 million bucks on an inquiry and $111,000 on a quote 
“expert” who never once visited the city of North Battleford, 
never once picked up the phone to talk to anybody in North 
Battleford, that we would have preferred the $2 million be spent 
on the sewage treatment plant. 
 
The Premier told us two years ago he would be there for us. If 
he is having trouble setting up a meeting with the Premier, I 
now want to offer to him my services in setting up a meeting. 
And I want to suggest that in view of the minister’s known 
opposition when he . . . (inaudible) . . . for North Battleford that 
the Premier come alone to meet with our mayor, and I will 
assist in that meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It’s pretty clear to members of this 
House, Mr. Speaker, that the last thing the city of North 
Battleford is any more the service of that member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That is pretty clear. The member who 
absolutely resisted . . . 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition now from his 
bench says, call an election. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition from his bench says, call an election, he says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know why he wants me to call an election. I 
know why he wants me to call an election. Because he sees the 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan coming on strong. He sees 
the trouble that he’s got in his own caucus. He sees people 
across the province saying all they can do is sit in their benches 
and be negative. They haven’t had one positive suggestion since 
we opened this legislature. They’re looking at the polling, 
they’re telling me to call an election. And I know the member 
from North Battleford, he doesn’t want an election very badly, 
I’ll tell you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18, 
The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 19, 
The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2003 
now be introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions no. 55 to 59 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 55, 56, 57, 58, and 59 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support of 
The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 and will 
formally move second reading of the legislation at the end of 
my remarks. 
 
This afternoon I’d like to take a few minutes of the Assembly’s 
time to outline the background for this legislation, detail part of 
what it does, and to explain how it benefits Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Professional Firefighters 
Association has lobbied for many years to have certain 
occupational diseases specifically recognized as compensible 
under The Workers’ Compensation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 23, 2002 the Manitoba government 
passed legislation that recognizes the link between exposure to 
the hazards faced by full-time firefighters and five forms of 
cancer. Manitoba undertook a review of the current literature to 
identify occupational diseases associated with firefighting. 
Following that review, legislative amendments were passed that 
presumed certain forms of cancer are an occupational disease 
and therefore compensible unless evidence to the contrary is 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

shown. Manitoba also enacted regulations that set out the 
minimum employment periods for each form of cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker. some provinces have passed legislation in this 
area and others are currently reviewing existing research. In our 
March Throne Speech, this government announced our 
intention to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act during this 
legislative session to include recognition of certain diseases 
associated with the profession of firefighting as compensible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that it’s time to take this action on 
behalf of our firefighters. The legislative action we are taking 
with this Bill is quite straightforward. I’m confident that all 
hon. members will be anxious to support it. This Act establishes 
a rebuttable presumption that five forms of cancer are 
occupational diseases for workers employed as firefighters. A 
rebuttable presumption assumes that a firefighter with one of 
the forms of cancer listed in the legislation acquires the cancer 
as a result of his or her work as a firefighter unless there is 
evidence to show contrary. 
 
The five forms of cancer are primary site brain cancer, primary 
site bladder cancer, primary site kidney cancer, primary 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and primary leukemia. The 
scientific evidence indicates that firefighters are twice as likely 
as the general population to contract these cancers. Regulations 
that establish minimum employment requirements based on 
existing scientific evidence will be enacted. As new information 
becomes available on these cancers and the latency periods 
involved, the regulations can be readily changed to keep abreast 
of new scientific evidence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our most recent WCB (Workers’ Compensation 
Board) committee of review considered a submission by the 
Saskatchewan Professional Firefighters Association but did not 
recommend a legislative amendment. At the time it made its 
decision, the committee did not have access to the medical 
studies that established a correlation between the five forms of 
cancer mentioned and the profession of firefighting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen the medical studies and we are 
persuaded Saskatchewan firefighters are correct in saying that 
these cancers should be recognized as compensible 
occupational illnesses. There are two ways to accomplish this 
objective: by legislation, or by WCB policy. While a board 
policy could have been drafted establishing the rebuttable 
presumption, we believe that, given the significance of this 
issue, this presumption on behalf of firefighters should be 
enshrined in legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The WCB has stated there will be no 
incremental cost attributable to this legislation because claims 
for occupational diseases are being accepted under the existing 
legislation and policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment is the right thing to do because it 
recognizes these cancers are compensible under the Act for our 
professional firefighters, men and women who experience 
exposure to toxins and carcinogens as part of their daily duties. 
It will affect all full-time professional firefighters in 
Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, I should also point out that this legislation does 
not prevent volunteer and forest firefighters from filing claims. 
Such claims will continue to be adjusted on a case-by-case 
basis. 
 
Our Workers’ Compensation system protects employers and 
workers against the results of workplace injuries and disease. It 
has brought stability to Saskatchewan workplaces for over 70 
years by providing coverage at a competitive cost, and 
protecting workers and employees against the risks and 
uncertainties of injuries and litigation and costly court battles. 
 
This government and the Workers’ Compensation Board are 
committed to ensuring the provision of the most accountable 
and responsive compensation system possible. We have the 
utmost regard for the critical services provided daily by 
firefighters to save lives and protect our communities. And we 
believe that these amendments ensure that The Workers’ 
Compensation Act adequately addresses the link between these 
specific occupational diseases and the occupation of 
firefighting. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Workers’ 
Compensation Act we are proposing is both meritorious and 
straightforward. There are very good reasons indeed for passing 
this legislation and I invite all hon. members to support it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 18, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
really an honour and a privilege on behalf of the official 
opposition to speak to Bill 18, The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act. 
 
I want to of course welcome all the firefighters to the legislature 
today for what I know is a very important day and a 
long-awaited day through many years of lobbying that the 
professional firefighters have done. In the three and a half to 
four years that I have been a member, it’s always an annual 
event to see the professional firefighters come in and talk to our 
caucus and give us a heads-up on the issues that are important 
to them. 
 
I think no member in this House can put into words the 
gratitude that we all feel towards firefighters who, day and 
night, actually save the lives of our citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think after the 9/11 attack on New York 
City and Washington, DC (District of Columbia), the role of 
firefighters was brought even closer to the public’s 
consciousness. The act of heroism saw that day were truly 
remarkable. 
 
I think there are the same acts of heroism brought out every day 
in this province that aren’t on the cameras and not televised to 
the rest of the nation, but certainly the invaluable work that they 
do throughout our province can never be thanked enough. 
 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

 

(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about process today and 
how Bills go through the House. And I think it is important to 
go through, with the visitors in the Chamber today, to 
understand exactly the procedure which in . . . as far as the Bills 
are concerned, and how they proceed through the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we saw an example with the Minister of 
Youth, Culture and Recreation who introduced a Bill today and 
then the Bill will be seen by members on our side, read for the 
first time, and then debated on and spoke to into the future. It 
was a real rarity for this House to consider leave and to grant 
leave for a Bill to move from first reading to second reading on 
the same day. 
 
And the very reason for that is, Mr. Speaker, we did not receive 
a copy of Bill No. 18 until right when the minister was 
speaking, Mr. Speaker. And that is very unusual. I can only 
think of a few times in the four or five . . . three or four years 
that I have been here that that has been the case. It has been the 
case when after a by-election; it was the case a couple of days 
ago with interim supply. 
 
But a Bill of this magnitude, a Bill that has been lobbied by the 
professional firefighters to the government to put into place, it 
is very unusual for a Bill to proceed past first reading and into 
second reading on the same date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the government hadn’t introduced 
this Bill yesterday or the week before or the week before that. 
We’ve had two and a half weeks to have a look at this Bill and 
have sent it out and proceed on through. Unfortunately whether 
it was a mistake or an oversight that they didn’t introduce a Bill 
prior to the visitation by the professional firefighters, Mr. 
Speaker, it may have been an oversight and that was the very 
reason that leave was had to have been granted. 
 
And I think it’s extremely important that people in the House 
today realize how rare that is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill itself, as I mentioned before, as dealing 
with The Workers’ Compensation Act and the whole issue has 
been brought to our attention before through the firefighters’ 
lobby. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s certainly a need for this piece 
of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the legislation, until we have a 
chance to send it out because there are many interested parties, 
not only the people that are here in the House today but there 
are many other people that would interested in such a change in 
this legislation because, Mr. Speaker, there may be some costs 
involved. And not that that is as important as the proper thing to 
do. I notice in the minister’s speech she was talking about it’s 
the right thing to do and we would believe that, but there’s also 
some costs that need to be investigated. 
 
And until we can go through that proper process, a responsible 
process of any opposition, it would be the responsible process 
to go through for an opposition to take this Bill, at least be able 
to read it more than once through the minister’s speeches — the 
only time that I’ve had a chance to look at it. It would be 
irresponsible for us to proceed any faster than to have this Bill 

put out to the general public to be looked at and to be studied 
through the proper channels, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The whole issue of the concern with cancer and the five 
different groups of cancer that the minister had spoke of is 
certainly not to be taken lightly. I think it’s very important that 
this piece of legislation . . . we know how hard it was for this 
government to introduce. It’s been three years that I know of 
that they have been lobbied — actually since about 1991 was 
when the first was brought to Workers’ Compensation Board — 
this very issue. 
 
It would be very irresponsible to see this piece of legislation be 
passed without it being properly . . . and made sure that there’s 
nothing . . . properly scrutinized and make sure that there are no 
omissions. I think it would be . . . If it’s taken three years that 
I’ve been in here for this government to move in this direction, I 
could imagine how long it would take for the government to 
admit that they had done something wrong and omitted 
something in this piece of legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, until we have the opportunity to review this 
Bill, to have read it two or three times at least, and to . . . at the 
very . . . probably the most important, to have met with the 
professional firefighters again on this very important subject to 
make sure it meets with every . . . all their requirements, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Podiatry Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Podiatry Act is our response to the request of 
the Saskatchewan Association of Chiropodists to update its Act 
to be consistent with recent health professional legislation and 
also to allow podiatrists with the appropriate qualifications to 
prescribe certain medications and order tests. 
 
The government, Mr. Speaker, has worked closely on this Bill 
with many groups and organizations including the 
Saskatchewan Association of Chiropodists, the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, and the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. The minister 
may continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
acknowledge Dr. Ata Stationwala, president of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Chiropodists, who is with us 
today in the west gallery. Thanks go to Dr. Stationwala and to 
his colleagues for all their hard work in helping update the Act 
with this new Bill. 
 
I would also like to acknowledge the important role podiatrists 
play in our health care system. As specialists in treating foot 
disorders, podiatrists have a variety of skills and experiences 
that can contribute greatly to the primary health care networks 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

as outlined in the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by allowing podiatrists to prescribe medications 
and order tests, we are following up on our commitment made 
in our action plan to identify and remove barriers that prevent 
health care providers from using their training and skills to the 
fullest. Such a move will enrich and enhance the way podiatrists 
serve the people of Saskatchewan. It will also help make 
Saskatchewan a more attractive place for podiatrists to come 
and practice. Mr. Speaker, this is especially important as we 
follow-up with another commitment made in the action plan to 
retain and recruit health care providers to Saskatchewan. 
 
Specifically, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will change the name of the 
Act from The Chiropody Profession Act to The Podiatry Act. It 
will also change the professional body’s name from the 
Saskatchewan Association of Chiropodists to the Saskatchewan 
college of podiatrists. 
 
This name change reflects the trend among most educational 
programs throughout the world to refer to podiatry rather than 
chiropody. At the same time the change to college more 
accurately reflects the regulatory function of this professional 
body. 
 
In addition this Bill will appoint three public representatives on 
the council of the Saskatchewan college of podiatrists, one of 
whom will also serve on the discipline committee. Doing so 
will give the public a greater voice in the regulation of 
podiatrists. 
 
This Bill will also allow podiatrists to set up an investigation 
committee, and to set out requirements for meetings and other 
administrative matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to an accessible, 
quality health care system. We will provide leadership in 
making the changes needed to strengthen and sustain the system 
for the future. For this reason we believe it is important to bring 
this Bill to the House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Podiatry Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is also an important piece of legislation that the 
minister has brought before the House today dealing with 
podiatry and the formation, Mr. Speaker, of a college for their 
professional benefit to set out the terms of podiatry, to set out 
their professional terms, Mr. Speaker. And an organization for 
them to provide for the standards of their profession, Mr. 
Speaker, to set out discipline, to set out membership, Mr. 
Speaker, to set out all of those things that a college such as the 
College of Medicine — not the College of Medicine, the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons — Mr. Speaker, has; such 
as a professional body that the teachers have, or nurses, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is a very important piece of legislation for people in this 
particular field of medicine, Mr. Speaker, that they have a 
professional body and are recognized, Mr. Speaker, as 

professionals within that body. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the case of any, any of these pieces of 
legislation dealing with the establishment of a college — the 
setting up of bylaws, professional standards, the setting up of 
disciplinary measures, the measures and the qualifications of 
incompetence, Mr. Speaker, proper conduct of members — all 
of these things, Mr. Speaker, need to be scrutinized carefully or 
what happens, Mr. Speaker, is they end up coming back to 
either to the floor of the Assembly again because it was not 
done right or it ends up going before the Committee on 
Regulations for changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s important that the public, the podiatrists and the 
people involved in that profession, Mr. Speaker, get to have a 
look at this particular piece of legislation to ensure that it meets 
their requirements, that it meets the requirements that we as a 
general public have in the needs for this profession, Mr. 
Speaker. Therefore I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Occupational Therapists 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Occupational Therapists 
Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will help make Saskatchewan a more 
attractive place for occupational therapists to practise. At the 
same time it will allow for amendments to make the Act 
consistent with other health profession legislation. 
 
In developing this legislation, the government has consulted 
extensively with the Saskatchewan Society of Occupational 
Therapists. I wish to thank them for their hard work in bringing 
this Act today. We worked collaboratively and will continue to 
do so. 
 
I’d like to acknowledge the presence of Marisa Chicoine, who 
is the member for Regina on their board and she’s with us today 
in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently the Act requires that all occupational 
therapists have an undergraduate degree in occupational 
therapy. In doing so it prevents licensing an applicant who has a 
professional masters degree in occupational therapy without 
having first received an undergraduate degree in occupational 
therapy. Due to this legislative restriction, these fully qualified 
professionals are initially permitted to work in Saskatchewan 
under a restricted licence only. Once they meet certain minimal 
requirements they’re required . . . they are provided with a full, 
practising licence. 
 
This amendment I put before the House today will remove this 
restriction. Specifically it will now permit licensure of an 
occupational therapist who has a professional masters degree 
without first having received an undergraduate degree in 
occupational therapy. 
 
We see several benefits in doing this. First, we expect this 
amendment will help make Saskatchewan a more attractive 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

 

place for occupational therapists to come and practise. This is 
especially important to our retention and recruitment efforts, as 
recently more schools are offering professional masters 
programs and more occupational therapists are graduating from 
these programs. 
 
And secondly, this amendment, along with others concerning 
minor administrative details, will make the Act consistent with 
other health profession legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of our government’s commitment to 
quality, accessible, and responsible health service for the people 
of Saskatchewan, we believe it is important to bring this 
legislation to the House today. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
move second reading of The Occupational Therapists 
Amendment Act. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this piece of legislation along with the previous one, I note that 
the minister says will make Saskatchewan a more attractive 
place for health care professionals. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is certainly a laudable goal and 
certainly one that needs to be furthered. Because, Mr. Speaker, 
the minister has been promising, I believe it’s 600 new nurses 
across Saskatchewan along with other health care professionals 
and we’re still going backwards. So any effort, Mr. Speaker, by 
this government to improve the attractiveness of Saskatchewan 
to our health care professionals is a welcome move, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of occupational therapists that 
have contacted our office and want to discuss this particular 
piece of legislation and the Act in general with us, Mr. Speaker. 
So we need to have the opportunity to meet with them to 
determine exactly what their concerns are. I believe that the 
changes that the minister is proposing on this Act are 
worthwhile changes and certainly warranted. 
 
However we need the opportunity to talk with the occupational 
therapists that have contacted us to determine what their reasons 
may be for that discussion, to determine whether or not they 
have concerns with this particular piece of legislation or 
whether they would like to see further enhancements to their 
Act, Mr. Speaker, to make Saskatchewan even more attractive 
to the health care professionals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Registered Nurses 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Registered Nurses Amendment 
Act. These amendments, Mr. Speaker, respond to a request by 
the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association to grant them 
the authority to establish and govern a continuing competence 

program. This Bill will ensure confidentiality of the information 
related to a member’s participation in the program. 
 
The continuing competence program will serve as a 
confidential, self-assessment tool to help nurse practitioners 
identify their strengths and areas where they may need to be 
improved. The confidentiality provisions will serve to 
encourage participation in the program which will result in 
enhanced quality of care. 
 
The SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) has 
proposed this program and we fully support them as they 
develop and implement it. Initially the program will only apply 
to nurse practitioners but may be expanded over to time to 
include all registered nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe this amendment is important for 
several reasons. First, it will help assure the SRNA that its 
members are maintaining their skills at a satisfactory level. This 
is important because it will help to improve the overall quality 
of care that patients receive. Such a move is consistent with the 
government’s commitment that was made in the Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care to greater accountability and quality 
improvement in the health care system and for greater training 
opportunities for health care providers. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this proposal makes the Act consistent 
with recent legislation for physicians. In 2000 a similar 
confidentiality provision was included in The Medical 
Profession Act. This provision protects information relating to 
the College of Physicians and Surgeons professional 
enhancement committee which reviews the quality of medical 
care provided by physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also proposes to specify that a public 
representative’s term of office on the SRNA’s council extends 
to a maximum of three years with the option for renewal to a 
maximum of two terms. Such a proposal makes the Act 
consistent with other health profession legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments were developed after 
consultation with a number of groups including the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and the Saskatchewan 
Organization of Health Organizations. I wish to thank these 
groups for all their dedicated, hard work in helping get these 
amendments underway. 
 
June Blau, president of the SRNA, and Shirley McKay, the 
association’s registrar, are here today in the gallery. I want to 
extend my appreciation to them and others who have worked on 
this amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would also like to acknowledge the vital 
role nurses play in our health care system and in serving the 
health care needs of Saskatchewan people. The variety of their 
skills and experiences, their insight and professionalism are 
essential to building the kind of health care system we want for 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of our government’s commitment to 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

quality, accessible, and responsible health care services for the 
people of this province, we believe it is very important to bring 
these amendments to the House today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have three health-related Bills coming before the House, Mr. 
Speaker, to deal with improvements within the system of health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this one deals with continuing competency 
upgrading, Mr. Speaker, of the nursing profession and we 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that that should take place and needs to be 
encouraged. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in encouraging that we hope that we will 
retain the nurses that we have presently in the province, that 
those new nurses that are graduating from our universities will 
be encouraged therefore to stay in this province and practice 
here, and, Mr. Speaker, that nurses who wish to come and 
practice in our facilities in Saskatchewan will be encouraged to 
do so. Because there certainly is a need, Mr. Speaker, for 
further support within the health care industry, Mr. Speaker, to 
maintain our standards and to improve our standards. And any 
time, Mr. Speaker, that an individual in any of the medical 
professions — but nursing in this particular case — has an 
opportunity to upgrade, that is a benefit not only to that 
individual but to the institution that they’re working in and to 
the patients they care for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we believe that this does have some 
certain merit. However, we have only had an opportunity of a 
day or two to actually see this piece of legislation. We have yet 
to have an opportunity to talk with nurses to see that it is 
exactly what they’re looking for, and we would need an 
opportunity to meet with the SRNA and discuss with them 
whether this is what they’re looking for or whether or not there 
are some other changes that they were anticipating, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR04) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right is Brent Cotter who’s the deputy 
minister of Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs. To 
his right is Curt Talbot who is the executive director of First 
Nation lands and resources. To my left is Al Hilton, assistant 

deputy minister of federal-provincial relations. Behind me and 
just a bit to my right is Donavon Young who is the assistant 
deputy minister of Aboriginal Affairs. Behind me is Wanda 
Lamberti, is the executive director of finance and management 
services. Behind them is John Reid, executive director of policy 
and operations and Paul Osborne directly behind me, who is the 
assistant deputy minister of trade and international relations. 
And those are the officials that are with me here today, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to take this opportunity as well to welcome 
your officials to some of the very interesting times that we’re in 
with regard to Intergovernmental Affairs and the economy 
that’s associated with it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to maybe just start on an area that 
both you and I have discussed in previous years with regards to 
the economy in particular. And I guess I want to talk 
particularly about the mandate of this particular office and its 
mandate for intergovernmental relationships, trade and trade 
policy, and how it’s going to be affecting this province. 
 
As you and I have discussed, the economy of Saskatchewan is 
very dependent upon a global situation and in particular 
dependent upon how we deal with the exports of our products 
out of Saskatchewan. My understanding is that about 80 per 
cent of our production is exported outside of Saskatchewan, one 
way or the other, and about three-quarters of that goes to either 
the US (United States) or to Eastern Canada. So the US 
becomes a very large player in our economy. 
 
I guess where I’m going with this preamble, Mr. Minister, is 
because of the situation that has occurred in Iraq very recently, 
in particular the Canadian response to Iraq and how we were 
involved, I’m wondering . . . from statements I’ve heard, 
member statements from your side of the House that your 
government was not in support of getting involved with the war 
in Iraq and in supporting the federal government, I’m 
wondering what your department . . . how involved your 
department was in the discussions with the federal counterparts 
knowing that there may be a fallout or a repercussion from 
those discussions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, let me begin by sharing the federal-provincial 
dialogue that I guess did . . . has taken place and what didn’t 
take place. The provinces, this province was not consulted on 
the federal government’s position as it related to the war in Iraq. 
I can tell you that our people have and our officials have met 
with the foreign affairs unit in terms of discussing trade issues 
and potential or possible impact. 
 
I would want to say that you are right, the Americans are very 
much our largest trade partners. They’re our most important 
market. I think that that will continue to be the case. I would 
want to say that because of the diversification that this province 
has gone through in terms of our exports, that we feel that the 
impact will be minimal. I mean, you know, certainly there may 
be some impact in terms of travel as it relates to tourism. I’m 
told that some of the tourism operators are already experiencing 
a bit of a downturn in terms of their summer market. But I 
guess it’s fair to say that the role of this arm of government is to 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

 

manage the relationship that we have with other governments as 
it relates to trade and it relates to that important part of our 
economy. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And so we will continue to work with the federal government, 
continue to work with the other governments around the world 
that our businesses are trading with. You know, as I said, the 
Americans are a very large and important market of ours, but 
we do have other areas of the world where we have some good, 
positive trade experiences as well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I think the seriousness of the 
situation with the American . . . trading with the US can’t be 
overstated. I really believe that it’s going to have some 
fundamental impact. You’ve referred to some of the indications 
already from maybe tourism or outfitting. It’s going to go 
much, much deeper than that — that’s my concern. There has to 
be a confidence between traders, and that confidence I think has 
been shaken considerably between the traders of Canada and 
the US, and the business that happens as a result of that 
confidence. 
 
Thinking about Saskatchewan in particular, there was a case 
made by the other provinces than Saskatchewan going and 
making a statement directly to the US, saying that they, from a 
provincial point of view, did not support the federal government 
position and they in fact did support the US. And my 
understanding is that the trade complications have not appeared 
in those particular provinces. 
 
I have examples and I don’t have the actual names, but I do 
have examples of constituents of members from this side that 
have had direct experience when they go into the United States 
— and this isn’t in a business sense, this is just visiting — they 
are not perceived to be welcome. In cases they were told that 
they wouldn’t accept Canadian funds for exchange and it was 
virtually said, you’re not welcome and we don’t need you. I 
think that could have been diverted if the government had taken 
a leadership role and recognized the potential of our . . . the 
harm on our export, particularly to the US. 
 
I’d like to have your comments a little more fully in what you 
think the remedy might be at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, you know I think 
it’s fair to say . . . And the member from Lloydminster will 
recognize that trade is not one-sided and trade is of a mutual 
benefit, both to the Americans and to Canada, both to 
Saskatchewan and the American states. 
 
And I think the ambassador of the United States has quite 
clearly recognized that in the comments that he has made in 
terms of the closeness and the friendship between our two 
countries and the fact that our economies are very much 
intertwined. I mean we can get into anecdotal evidence if we 
wish, you know, where Americans have said that the trade 
relationships and our friendship will still be there. 
 
I mean look, foreign policy is not always, I guess, on the same 
field with the Americans and with Canada. We set our own 
foreign policy, which we should as a country. The federal 

government is charged and has the responsibility to do that, and 
they’ve done so. 
 
The Americans have taken a different position, and I think you 
recognize that as well. And we don’t always agree on issues but 
that doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t or can’t remain friends and 
can’t remain good trading partners. 
 
And so I wouldn’t want us to overreact to the fact that our 
foreign policy as it relates to Iraq is different than the 
Americans and we did not support them in their initiatives in 
Iraq. And I think what we would want to do is not overreact to 
that, but what we should do is have a look at what the facts are. 
 
I’m told by my officials that there’s absolutely no evidence the 
Canadian position on Iraq has impacted on our trade. And I’m 
quite confident that the relationship that we’ve built up with the 
Americans over the years will remain a close one. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure you do 
and your officials do recognize the importance of this trade. 
And you’re right, trade is a two-way street. But as I mentioned 
earlier, there’s a level of confidence that has to accompany that 
level of trade. And we’re detecting that that confidence level 
has dropped off. For how long, we won’t know. 
 
And there is . . . it’s very easy for the US to start trading in a 
different direction, maybe to Australia or to other countries that 
have been much more friendly to their action in Iraq than we 
have. 
 
I guess my question to you, Mr. Minister, with regards to this, 
has your officials — you or your officials — made any 
assessment of how long an impact that this may be? What the 
dollar value might be of a slowdown of trade? 
 
And the American economy as you well know and in fact I 
think documented in the budget items, the American economy 
is going to grow, projected at something like 2.5, 3.8 over the 
next couple of years. We want to make sure that we can also 
grow our economy, but it would appear that without the 
American confidence of being able to accept our exports as we 
did before, that it’s going to impact directly on our economy. 
 
I want to know if you or your officials have made any kind of 
an assessment or an adjustment to the budget so that people in 
Saskatchewan can start readjusting their ability to adapt to your 
budget numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I want, Mr. Chair, to speak to 
confidence, and some of the things that I would suggest to the 
member would constitute developing a good relationship and 
confidence with our trading partners. 
 
And I think some of those confidence issues are the quality of 
our product, kinds of products, the reliability in terms of supply, 
our ability to supply on time. I think the trustworthiness in 
terms of this province and the reputation that we’ve established 
as being very trustworthy trade partners are really what 
constitutes a level of confidence as it relates to trade with the 
Americans or with other clients that we have. 
 
The federal government is, I am told by my officials, doing an 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

analysis of the downturn and the impact in the downturn of the 
American economy on our country. I think it’s, you know, it’s 
fair to say when their economy is not as strong and not as 
buoyant, there will be some impact on us because we are a large 
country . . . large trading country with the Americans. 
 
But I think what we have here in the province is quality of 
supply, we’ve got reliability of supply, and I think we’re known 
as being pretty honest traders. And that in my mind is what 
really is important. 
 
When I talk to people in the manufacturing sector, in farm 
equipment manufacturing just as an example, much of their 
markets are into the United States and it’s, I think, very clear 
that we’re very much leaders in terms of technology as it relates 
to airless seeders, those kinds of things. And there’s a demand 
for the product and there’s a demand for the product because 
there’s quality, there’s . . . (inaudible) . . . supply, and there’s 
trust. And I don’t believe that that’s going to disappear because 
we’ve taken a different position as it relates to Iraq. 
 
And I think that we, frankly, will be least affected of any 
jurisdiction as it relates to security post-September 11. We have 
a country or have a small province, we’re in the middle of our 
nation, and I think security is another issue that will be a benefit 
for us here in this province. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I don’t know what 
discussions you might also have had with your federal 
counterparts. In previous situations where Canada has had an 
international involvement and we kind of went against the trend 
at the time, there was in fact contracts cancelled, from my 
previous memory, in the grain industry. I know there was some 
grain industry . . . grain contracts cancelled and there was some 
compensation negotiated for those cancelled contracts. 
 
Has there been any discussion with your federal counterparts in 
terms of contracts that may . . . that have or may be cancelled, 
and what will be the remedy for those situations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, you know, again I want to 
say to the member that we need to be, we need to be careful not 
to overreact. Trade is a two-way street — we need them; they 
need us. They rely on Canada for 25 per cent of their exports. 
So we’re not inconsequential. And so it’s not a matter that the 
tap will be shut off. 
 
I mean there are contracts that are cancelled, international 
contracts. Historically that’s been the nature of the beast. 
Sometimes a contract will fall through; it’ll be cancelled. But 
we’ve not been made aware by the federal government or 
frankly any industry that contracts have been cancelled as a 
result of public policy initiatives that have been embarked upon 
by, you know, by the federal government. 
 
And I must say, I mean, we took the position as a province and 
we supported the federal government in their position that, 
without UN (United Nations) support, that we would not 
involve ourselves in that war. 
 
And I think that governments, as they are, have the decision, the 
responsibility, to create and develop public policy in the best 
interests of their own nation. And we can’t be crafting public 

policy initiatives here in the province or in Canada that are not 
in the interest of Canada. That’s what we’re all charged to do. 
 
But I want to say that there’s very much an American reliance 
on us for their exports, as we rely on them for exports from our 
province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I have here the global questions that we ask each 
department every year. I’d like to send these across to you. 
They deal with the entire IGA (Intergovernmental Affairs) 
department — not just your particular area, because there’s a 
number of ministers involved — but it’s one department. 
 
So I would ask, Mr. Minister, that you provide the answers to 
these in a timely fashion so that we can review them and 
comment on them and ask further questions if needed — based 
on the results of this — before this House adjourns. 
 
So I would . . . I’ll send these over to you, thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, certainly we’ll have 
a look at the globals. I think it’s a process that’s served the 
opposition and the government side well. 
 
And so my commitment to the House Leader of the opposition 
is that we’ll put them together as quickly as we can. I believe 
we can have them done before session end. We generally don’t 
take that long to get them together and we’ll expedite the 
process as best we can. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — That would be much appreciated. I have, I 
guess I have, following our earlier questioning . . . trade is a 
two-way street. I certainly would agree with you. And again, as 
I mentioned, that confidence has to be there between the two 
sides. And it would appear from some of the examples that have 
come to our attention that that is starting to erode a little bit. 
 
It’s like in a family. We may not necessarily agree on what we 
should be doing, but at the end of the day we go to bat for each 
other and we make sure that we’re supportive and we can get 
over that kind of a misunderstanding at the time. 
 
I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, have you got any plans to 
approach some of the markets of Saskatchewan exports directly, 
some of the state people or in fact some of the corporations that 
receive some of the Saskatchewan exports, to approach them 
directly, to try to convince them that the confidence level 
should be maintained at a traditionally high level, and that we 
will work diligently to overcome that impasse that is apparently 
perceived on the American side from your point of view, but is 
in actual . . . is reality. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I can tell the member that the 
Premier, as has happened in the past, will be meeting with the 
western governors this summer. And I think it’s a process that’s 
served both the states and the provinces well, in that we have an 
opportunity to discuss at a very senior level these very issues. 
We’ve not been made aware of any industry who have large 
concerns in terms of changes in their ability to trade with the 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

 

United States. 
 
I can tell you that we would be very responsive to industry if we 
were approached by any particular sector to involve ourselves 
in discussions to support their initiatives. I think that’s very 
much the role of government; that’s the role of ministers and 
senior officials. We’ve not been approached by anyone, but I 
can tell you that the Premier I think will represent the province 
very well in terms of working to build on the very good trade 
relationships that we have with our American friends. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I want to 
welcome your officials too, Mr. Minister. 
 
Along the same line that my counterpart from Lloydminster was 
questioning on, Mr. Minister, we’ve had a number of examples 
brought to our attention, especially our MLAs along the US 
border, from Manitoba all the way to Alberta. And I think they 
have trade implications because of the war; in fact I know that’s 
what it is. We’ve even had reports of people having their tires 
slashed that are going down spending the night in some of the 
states along the border, windshields smashed when they’re 
shopping in Minot. And we even have people go as far down 
there to not accept Canadian dollars. 
 
Now I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, with things like pulling up 
to a gas station and having them refuse to fill your car with gas 
because you’re spending Canadian dollars, have you had that 
brought to your department’s attention? These type of incidents 
that are happening down there, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think I read the media 
reports as you read the media reports. But I mean, let’s put this 
in context. I’ve told your colleague that we’ve had no evidence 
of a negative impact on trade, and that is factual. I’ve indicated 
that we have had no approach from any sector or any industry 
as it relates to new impediments to them achieving their 
markets and . . . the American markets. I think that what we 
want to watch is that we don’t over-sensationalize what may be 
isolated incidents and what I believe to be very much isolated 
incidents. This is a forum I think where we want to discuss the 
expenditures, the initiatives, the trade initiatives, things that we 
can do to enhance trade, but to unduly explore what I believe to 
be our isolated incidents, I don’t think is helpful. 
 
I think what is helpful is that we continue to share with our 
American neighbours our desire to trade with them, to share 
with them our confidence in them as a people, to share with 
them our support for their forces who are risking their lives 
every day as they encounter the circumstances in Iraq. And I 
think we want to share with them the fact that we, as Canadians, 
support a world where conflict won’t have to take place and a 
world where people are not subjected to the kind of leadership 
that that country has apparently had over the last 25 or 30 years. 
 
These are the types of things that I think we need to do. I mean, 
many of us have relatives in the United States. Many of us in 
this country are dual citizens. And I think that what you refer to 
as tire slashings and those kinds of things would be very much 
an isolated case. 
 
I have many friends who spent the winter in the United States. 
A friend of mine came back a week ago and that was not his 

experience. His experience was that this was a country that was 
shaken after September 11, given the incredible intrusion into 
the lives of so many American people, and that they’re fearful 
for their sons’ and their daughters’ lives and that they’re 
confident that they’ll be victorious in the actions that they’re 
taking in Iraq. But I just would want to say that what you raise 
as issues here are what I believe to be pretty much isolated 
incidents. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but I’m not 
just totally sure that these situations are isolated because from 
our understanding, visitors from Alberta are not getting the 
same reception that they are from Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think maybe with the war, Mr. Minister, not even being a 
month old at this point, I think it’s early to see what the 
ramifications and the retaliation is going to be from the 
Americans. I mean they surely cannot be happy with us as their 
next-door neighbour not standing behind them as a country. But 
even as we are so close to them as a province, I think 
somewhere down the road we are going to pay the price for the 
position that the government of the day has taken in the 
province and for sure in the total nation. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you say these are isolated situations. We even 
heard a owner of a company in Weyburn the other day saying 
that he’s already had cancelled contracts with the US. And from 
his understanding with dealing with the US, this is one of the 
first times this has ever happened and this had just happened 
last week. 
 
So I guess my question to you, Mr. Minister: will there be a 
constant monitoring of types of things like this? Because 
businesses in this province can certainly not afford to lose US 
markets and US contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well I’m sure glad to hear that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go into your department a little bit, 
being that this . . . I think you may be the sixth or seventh 
minister in the last three years for this department. And I 
noticed in the Estimates that funding increase for your 
department is up over $200,000, and I just wondered if you 
could give me an overall explanation of where this money will 
be spent and what the extra money was needed for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the two components 
of the increase that I’m responsible for as minister is the 
flow-through dollars that come from the casinos to the First 
Nations Fund and the increase to dollars to enable our treaty 
land entitlement initiatives to proceed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, then maybe we’re not talking 
about the same budgets that I’m asking the question on. I’m 
asking the question on intergovernment relations, and am I 
under the right department here and the right estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — It’s under intergovernmental and 
Aboriginal Affairs. 
 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I’ll go 
into federal-provincial relations. I see the budget for that 
department, or that part of your department, is up $11,000. Can 
you explain to us what the extra $11,000 will be covering? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Sure. There’s an increase over 
2002-2003 of $11,000 and that is attributed to increases in 
salaries. There is an increase of $11,000 in operating . . . no . . . 
oh I guess that’s it, the increases in salaries in federal-provincial 
relations. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well then, 
international relations. Could you give us an explanation of the 
$54,000 increase and how that funding will be used, and will 
that all go to administration and wages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Okay. There are two areas here. 
There’s $10,000 increase in terms of SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union) out-of-scope 
mandated salary adjustments, and there’s $44,000 for 
reinstatement of funding for international officer’s salary. The 
previous incumbent was on an extended sick leave. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then we 
go to trade policy. And maybe you give us an explanation of 
where this money is spent and what actually that department’s 
purpose is, what dollars are spent for in that department, along 
with the $73,000 increase. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll just read — this 
deals with trade policy — and this part of the administration 
develops policies and represents the province’s position on 
trade and investment policy issues at various international and 
internal trade negotiations under various forums and 
agreements, and it also manages Saskatchewan’s participation 
in the resolution of trade disputes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And we go 
on down the list here to immigration. I see there’s also a 
$59,000 increase for immigration. And I was also wondering 
with that question, Mr. Minister, how we have input into people 
that we get to come to Saskatchewan and, you know, do we 
have a quota each year for the province itself, compared to what 
the overall immigration is for the country, and how that works. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — What I should describe here, the 
changes in the trade policy component, and the changes there 
are $14,000 as it related to mandated salary adjustments. There 
are funding for the province’s share of the legal fees in the 
softwood lumber dispute that we have with Canada, and the 
Canada-US wheat dispute — that’s an amount of $59,000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, do you have an ongoing 
negotiations with the federal government over immigration? Do 
you have input, as I asked in an earlier question? Maybe I didn’t 
explain it clear enough, but do you have ongoing negotiations 
with the federal government over immigration that comes to 
Saskatchewan? And you know, numbers, how many people we 
would like to see to come to the province through immigration. 
Especially being that our population is dropping every year, I 
think it’s very important that we try and hold our population at 
least where it is and we would like to see it dramatically grow, 
Mr. Minister. 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We have, you know, just as a 
matter of course, we have discussions as it relates to 
immigration policy. And provinces do have input. Our officials 
meet on a fairly regular basis, you know, and I think it’s fair to 
say that — not in all cases — the federal government listen to 
and work with the province. Kyoto was clearly an example 
where they haven’t. 
 
But I think it’s fair to say that on immigration policy they have 
been very responsive to some of the thoughts and some of the 
ideas. You know, I think it’s fair to say as well that 
Saskatchewan has been a province that’s been built on 
immigrants. It’s been built, you know, on immigration. 
 
Our First Nations clearly were the base and had an established 
society here, and since people started coming to North America 
the face of Saskatchewan has changed somewhat. And . . . you 
know, and it’s due to immigration. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say as well, we’ve got a province with a 
wealth of resources, a wealth of opportunities and certainly can 
be and should be a good place for immigrants to look at. We 
have . . . and we’ve been working with some groups in the 
province here in terms of sharing Saskatchewan and knowledge 
about Saskatchewan in European countries, and Asian . . . you 
know, and eastern European countries. You know, it’s part of 
what we do and part of what the government does, working 
with some of the different groups. 
 
So immigration is important. We haven’t been, as a province, 
large recipients of immigration because immigrants tend to 
come to Canada and join with communities that they’re familiar 
with, and a lot of it is based in the larger centres. The larger 
centres will have an Asian community, and so when immigrants 
come they . . . rather than to experience a dramatic culture 
shock, in a lot of cases they’ll go to a community that they’re 
comfortable with. 
 
So I think there’s a lot more room in terms of immigration for 
us, and we need to continue to work to explore those policies. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, do . . . when the federal government . . . someone 
applies to be accepted as an immigrant in Canada, does the 
federal government then say okay, you can go to Saskatchewan, 
you can go to Alberta, Manitoba, wherever? Is there any 
designation of where they have to go or can they go just 
anywhere they like in the country? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m told by the officials that landed 
immigrants have the right — and this has been determined by 
courts — to settle in any area of the country that they would 
wish. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, just 
an announcement was made by the federal government just 
recently here on . . . through the Prime Minister’s office and he 
announced injection of million of dollars into a national 
initiative . . . We’ll see an increased focus on bilingualism 
across the country. 
 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

 

Are you aware of this announcement and the details in this 
initiative? And could you outline the basics for us today if you 
do know what this is about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I am aware of the 
announcement, but this falls under the purview of the Provincial 
Secretary. And so I think questions in that regard would be 
better addressed to her when her estimates are up. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, there is an area of great concern when it comes to 
international trade that is probably a little more near and dear to 
your and I heart than to many members in this House, and that 
is certainly the softwood lumber trade dispute that our country 
and our province is going through at this time. 
 
And I know that in the past, Intergovernmental Affairs has been 
working on the side to try and stay on top of the issue that is 
being dealt with by the federal government, and to have an 
appropriate input so that Saskatchewan is represented at the 
table; that the federal government understands clearly the 
repercussions of this trade dispute. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could just give the House a brief 
update, if you please, as to the standing of the trade dispute at 
this time and how much progress has been made in the past 
year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I want to say to the member 
that given the area that we both represent, this is . . . we’re well 
aware of the impact that the softwood lumber dispute has had 
on industries in our community, which is why in this budget we 
put more dollars — as I indicated to one of your colleagues — 
to assisting us in terms of the legal fees that Canada has 
embarked upon to litigate against the US duties, which is 
clearly part of what we’re doing as a province, part of what 
we’re doing as a country. 
 
We don’t have a seat at the table as a province; that’s a federal 
responsibility. But our officials are very much in contact with 
their federal counterparts; they’ve attended to many of these 
trade hearings in Washington and other places where they’ve 
been held. What we’re attempting to do is support our national 
government in finding a long-term solution. We’ve been 
through this time and time and time again. And as you will 
know, Canada will invariably win in the courts. I think our 
position is right and I think that the Americans are wrong in this 
regard. 
 
It’s, you know, it’s part of the protectionism that we see in the 
softwood lumber industry, and it’s based on an incredibly huge 
lobby that the American politicians face. I don’t think that the 
economic argument that they mount can hold up, and I think 
you’ll agree with me on that. 
 
And so we’re going to continue to work with the other 
provinces and our federal counterparts and put what resources 
are required to hopefully find a resolve to this unfair action by 
our American friends. 
 
You know we talked a little earlier about trade and the 
implications of Iraq and the American involvement, and we do 
have trade disputes with our friends. Whether we have policy 

differences as it relates to the Iraqi war, we have some disputes 
as it relates to the amount of subsidy that they’re putting 
towards their agricultural community when our farmers, 
without support from our federal government, are sitting here at 
very much of a disadvantage. Those are the kinds of things that 
we as a department attempt to work together with our federal 
counterparts to solve. 
 
And the softwood lumber is one that I would like to see 
resolved earlier rather than later, because you and I both know 
the impact on our economy. I mean, if you look at the rollout of 
the expansion of our forest industry, in the last short while 
we’ve created 8,000 jobs in the forest industry. We’ve had 
people looking at the possibility of putting a newsprint mill here 
in our province, which could mean 7, 800, up to close to $1 
billion of investment. 
 
But that investment can’t happen until we have the saw-wood 
capacity, the sawlog capacity, and the saw mill capacity to 
produce the residue to make that happen. And it’s very difficult, 
with the softwood lumber dispute on now, to attract investors 
into the saw mill industry. So it really does have a chain 
reaction. 
 
In spite of that, we’ve been very, very successful in our rollout 
of the expansion of the forest industry — almost $1 billion of 
investment by private sector investors here in the province, 
8,000 new jobs. And we know we can do more. 
 
But this is why it’s really critical that we involve, not only with 
financial support, but with people and knowledge so that they 
understand Saskatchewan’s position within our national trading 
team, our national negotiating team as they go into these 
negotiations. So we’re very much involved and we’ll continue 
to be so. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You raised an 
interesting spectre here that we have learned about, of course — 
many of us on both sides of the House — and that’s, you know, 
in the area of international trade with our American friends. 
And of course one of the, one of the areas the United States of 
America always likes to pride itself on, Mr. Minister, is the 
whole concept of, in the area of free trade, is we need to let, we 
need to let the marketplace determine prices. 
 
Certainly in North America right now we’re at a overcapacity 
for the ability to provide raw material for the building industry. 
If my memory serves me correctly, it’s in, roughly, in that 5 
billion cubic feet of overcapacity right now. 
 
So certainly as much as we’d like to see expansion, Mr. 
Minister, in the area of softwood in Saskatchewan, the problem 
is we’re having a little trouble selling it. In situations such as 
that, we prefer to have the marketplace be able to settle where 
the prices should be and where the raw product will be 
determined to be coming from so that those who are in the 
building industry would be able to provide a quality product at a 
reasonable price to the consumer. These sort of trade disputes 
though, Mr. Minister, distort the marketplace. They’re 
distorting it, the marketplace, in Canada and they’re distorting 
the marketplace in the United States. 
 
Mr. Minister, the federal government undertook a program last 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

year — and I’m sure you’re aware of this — where they were 
doing an advertising campaign in the United States to the 
American consumer, Mr. Minister, in regards to the distortion 
of housing costs in relationship to the softwood lumber dispute 
and the extra tariff that was being applied because of that 
dispute. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could apprise the House at this 
time as to the success of that program. Is the federal 
government going to want to continue that program? And is 
there an onus on the provinces to be a part, a contributing 
factor, to that program to inform the American consumer the 
cost of having this softwood lumber tariff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair 
to say that the intervention that the Americans have taken is a 
market distortion, very much. It’s distorting and changing the 
nature of their whole saw mill industry. I would make an 
argument, and I think we could make an argument, that they are 
protecting what are some very inefficient forestry operations in 
the United States. 
 
It’s having some very dramatic impact on the some of the 
marginal saw mills here in Canada. We’ve seen saw mills shut 
down. And I think ultimately what will happen is you’ll see a 
saw mill industry here in Saskatchewan and here in Canada 
that’s very competitive and they will be ready to face an open 
market situation, a free market situation. 
 
The Americans as I understand it are not upgrading. They’re 
mainly harvesting, running inefficient mills. And I might be 
oversimplifying this and I probably am because I don’t know 
. . . pretend to know the industry that well. 
 
But I can tell you that we’ve been working very, very closely 
with our softwood lumber industry here in the province, 
through their association, through individual companies and 
meetings with individual companies. And it’s part of how we 
develop our position as we go into, as we go into these 
negotiations and discussions because Saskatchewan’s forest 
industry is different of course than British Columbia’s, and we 
have different issues here and we have different circumstances 
as relates to the cost of lumber, through the FMAs (forest 
management agreement), through the operators. So we have 
some differences and we have to ensure that we’re putting the 
best face forward. 
 
I can say that my deputy informs me that the marketing 
campaign was very much a part of what we pursued at 
federal-provincial meetings. We felt it was the right approach to 
take, and these actions are very much as a result of the work 
that the department has done at the officials’ level and at the 
former minister’s level. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
raised the point of the differences in how . . . the softwood 
lumber dispute and the distortion tariffs that have been brought 
on to the industry in Saskatchewan. You also raised the point 
though of how it’s affecting different provinces. And it’s 
affecting all the provinces differently, and I’m aware of that and 
I appreciate that point. 
 
Has your department, Mr. Minister, been able to work in 

somewhat of a collaborative manner with the four Western 
provinces and, on a bigger scale, all the provinces to develop 
the strategies that are necessary to work towards resolution of 
the trade dispute and getting Saskatchewan and Western 
Canada’s point across as to the extreme need to get this trade 
dispute ended as soon as possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can say to the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers that we’ve been very much 
involved with the 10 provinces and territories in 
federal-provincial meetings. And the goal is to — not only the 
Western provinces but all of the provinces and territories — is 
to help our nation go to the negotiating table with a common 
goal and a common front and a common approach. 
 
These meetings take place on a regular basis. They’re held in 
different provinces around our country, and I think they’re very 
helpful in that we need to take a unified approach to the issue 
and I think we’ve been somewhat successful in taking a unified 
approach. What we haven’t been able to do is convince the 
Americans that our unified approach is the right approach. So 
we’re going to continue to work on that. 
 
And we will as well continue our litigation against the US 
duties and hopefully we can come together with a negotiated 
strategy that will serve us over the long haul. Because, I mean, 
this just keeps coming back and back and back as you will 
know, and it’s time to find a long-term solution. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the softwood . . . 
Because of the softwood lumber dispute, we’re assuming — 
and maybe you can help us out on this side of the House and for 
everyone in Saskatchewan — the impact the trade dispute has 
had upon . . . in Saskatchewan. What kind of job losses or lack 
of job creation has taken place within the last 18 to . . . 12 to 18 
months because of this issue, Mr. Minister? And has your 
department received any notification, received any word from 
the industry at all, Mr. Minister, as to what the effects of the 
softwood lumber dispute is? Are there any pending closures of 
saw mills in Saskatchewan that are rising directly, Mr. Minister, 
because of the softwood lumber dispute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We, within this department, don’t 
have the employment numbers. That data is compiled within the 
Department of Industry and Resources so we don’t have those 
here. But I can say to you that our discussions with the 
softwood lumber industry would tell me that they have done 
everything that they can in terms of maintaining jobs. 
 
(15:45) 
 
We’ve certainly seen some temporary shutdowns — 
Wapawekka saw mill as you will know, the Zelensky saw mill 
in La Ronge — but what we haven’t had, thank goodness, are 
permanent closures of mines . . . of saw mills because of 
inefficiency. 
 
We have a relatively new industry here in Saskatchewan as you 
will know. The Big River saw mill, state-of-the-art saw mill — 
brand new. Weyerhaeuser invested hundreds of thousands of 
dollars and they’re just . . . or millions of dollars, sorry, just 
recently. The Wapawekka saw mill is a brand new mill. The 
Zelensky mill has had new money put into it and there are 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

 

others that don’t come to the top of my mind. 
 
But I don’t have the numbers. But quite clearly, it’s had some 
impact because even the temporary layoffs will impact on the 
economy and will impact on the job numbers. But those 
numbers, you could probably get from estimates through 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The relevance of my 
asking these questions or these last couple of questions, Mr. 
Minister, has been I think to help us understand your 
department’s position, Mr. Minister, in working with our 
federal counterparts, the provincial counterparts in Western 
Canada, right across Canada so that everyone understands 
outside the boundaries of Saskatchewan the extreme importance 
of the forestry industry to Saskatchewan. Even though the mill 
closures that you mentioned are certainly deemed as temporary 
and that certainly there would be some sort of a change, Mr. 
Minister, in the trade dispute or an upturn in the economy on a 
worldwide scale, that certainly these mills will be up and 
running again and producing the product that the people of the 
world are needing. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I think it’s relevant from your department to 
be able to express to our friends in the South and to our friends 
in Canada who are dealing with this trade dispute that they 
understand clearly the negative impact, even of temporary 
closures, but the negative impact that it’s having on our 
province so that especially the federal government is able to go 
to the table with the appropriate resolve to end this dispute, Mr. 
Minister, because of the negative impact it’s having on our 
economy. But we also trusted, you know, that it’s also 
happening to our neighbours to the east and west of us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the 
member for his comments and his question. 
 
You know, much of the work that is done within government is 
sort of unseen. It’s probably not widely known that we have 
retained legal counsel, both here in Regina and in Washington, 
as it relates to the softwood lumber dispute. Mr. Osborne is our 
chief negotiator and he has teams of officials who work in his 
branch of this department who advise him on a regular basis. 
There is a council of ministers who are monitoring this, 
working with the different departments, from Industry and 
Resources, from Saskatchewan energy . . . or Environment, 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), and from my department. There are too many 
acronyms here today. 
 
But you know there’s a lot of work that takes place. And a lot of 
the advice that comes from a ministerial level, based on what 
we believe to be the right approach, frankly has come in the 
form of promotion that we’re doing in the United States. 
 
So we’re represented with good legal counsel, we think strong 
legal counsel. We’ve got a good negotiating team. We’re 
certain we’ve got some very competent senior civil servants that 
are working for the province in this regard. And hopefully this, 
over a period of time, will result in some good, positive trade 
experiences with the Americans as it relates to softwood 
lumber. 
 

You know, the importance of forestry, as you will know, is 
becoming larger and larger as that part of our economy 
continues to grow. When we look at 11 consistent months of 
job growth here in Saskatchewan, many of them record 
job-growth months, you can attribute that to what has happened 
in terms of the private sector investment in saw mills, in the two 
new OSB (oriented strand board) plants, and in the new saw 
mill in Big River, the expansion to the saw mill in La Ronge, 
the new Wapawekka mill, to the billion dollars of investment 
that’s taken place in the forestry sector. 
 
So it’s clear that we need to find a long-term resolve. It’s also 
clear that because we have been able to develop stronger 
economies outside of what once was primarily agriculture, that 
we’ve got an economy that continues to grow, GDP (gross 
domestic product) growth year over year. We’re now looking at 
our job numbers that have shown 11 consecutive months now 
— many of them record months — of job growth, even in spite 
of the fact that we’ve just come off of two years of a terrible 
drought. 
 
And you and I both know, having some farm land north of 
Prince Albert, the crop circumstances there is devastating. We 
also know that nature plays some tricks on us in terms of the 
amount of forest fire suppression dollars that we have to put in, 
but it’s a valuable resource and that’s why we’re putting money 
in to protect it. 
 
But the key has got to be to enhance our trade opportunities — 
whether it’s in forestry or whether it’s in value-added 
agricultural products or whether it’s in farm equipment and 
short-line manufacturing equipment that we do so well here in 
this province. These are all part of what it takes to make our 
economy hum. 
 
But if we don’t have some fair-trade rules and if we don’t have 
the kind of trade that the Americans, and frankly Brian 
Mulroney, envisioned when they were pushing through the Free 
Trade Agreement, then initiated by Prime Minister Chrétien, 
that we want to trade and that we need to trade. 
 
And those are the kinds of things that we need to have as 
opposed to unfair trade distortions that our American 
counterparts are involved in as it relates to softwood lumber. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There should be one 
final question here I have and then I’m going to turn it over to 
the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Minister, you explained to . . . in earlier in your response to 
this last question the work that your department is doing — and 
certainly we appreciate that on this side of the House, just to let 
you know, as much as you do — but I think we need to 
understand, if we could just get on the record, Mr. Minister, 
does the federal government understand the importance of the 
forestry industry in Saskatchewan? Is your department able to 
help the federal minister, the federal trade minister clearly 
understand the importance of the devastation the trade dispute 
has had on Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I would want to say to the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers, one of my first experiences 
as a cabinet minister, many years ago — and it wasn’t a good 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

experience I have to tell you and I’m not going to name the 
federal bureaucrat — but I was at a federal-provincial minister’s 
meeting. I think at that time I was the minister of Natural 
Resources and we were doing a little small talk. And she asked 
where I came from and I said Prince Albert, it’s sort of in the 
middle part of the province. And she said, well that’s good. And 
she said, well what do you do up there? And I said, well we 
farm, and you know we have some cattle operations in our 
community, and we have a good strong forest industry. Oh, you 
have a forest industry in the province. 
 
And so this is part of what we have to do is to continue to 
educate our friends in Eastern Canada and some of the Central 
Canada bureaucrats who don’t have a good understanding of the 
diversity of this economy. 
 
And so in one way the trade actions that the Americans have 
taken has very negative connotations. But on the other hand it 
gives us an opportunity to share the importance of a growing 
forestry industry here in our province and have the federal civil 
service understand that Saskatchewan is agriculture — sure it is 
— but it’s also forestry and it’s also manufacturing and 
processing; it’s also oil and gas, it’s also potash, it’s also 
uranium which, by the way, is part of why we’ve embarked 
working with the private sector on the Wide Open Future 
campaign because there is a misunderstanding about the 
strength of this province and the things that have been 
happening here, and the changes that have been happening in 
terms of a stronger and more diversified economy. 
 
And I think so . . . these are all the kinds of things that give us 
exposure to people outside of this province, to tell them about 
how great a province it is and how strong this economy has 
been, and how we’re going to pursue more opportunities for 
Canadian people — people who want to come to this province 
to work and to do business and invest. And so that’s why we’re 
marketing through the Wide Open Future campaign. 
 
And so in spite of the fact that we don’t want to see these kinds 
of trade disputes that bring us to discussing these kinds of 
issues, it does give us a chance to expose the good things that 
are happening as it relates to the forestry industry here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, or I beg your pardon, 
Mr. Chair of Committees. You know we’ve been listening as 
best I could to both the questions and the answers and they 
revolve, quite rightly, around trade, trade issues. And obviously 
we have several very important trade issues in the province of 
Saskatchewan today that the minister will be working on and 
his department will have budgeted for, and so I think it’s meet 
and right that those issues be discussed here today. 
 
But there is sort of an overriding concern right now, I think — 
and I heard the minister downplay it a bit as perhaps anecdotal 
or non-existent — this overriding concern that the Americans 
are very aware of what position was taken by Canada and also 
what position was taken by our provinces in terms of this 
current . . . of the war with Iraq and with respect to the 
coalition. 
 
And I wonder if the . . . I have several questions. The first one 
. . . and just by way of an explanation, the first one will be 

whether or not the minister, in his new capacity, would have 
counselled the Premier before the Premier took the opportunity 
to stand in the Assembly and basically tie our foreign policy to 
the UN, much as the Prime Minister has done, without looking 
as to whether the action that was being taken around the world 
was just or not just? If he had a chance to counsel the Premier? 
 
And then I would ask, in addition to that, since we’re ending 
we’ll ask the quick questions here, I would also ask if the 
minister could highlight for us what his department plans to do 
from here on in to try to repair, to try to rebuild a relationship? 
You know one province in our dominion, the province of 
Alberta, looked at this issue that we’re talking about today and 
they decided to take a different position than the federal 
government. And certainly that was the option of this 
government too. 
 
And they sent notice to the ambassador, the American 
ambassador to Canada, they let him know that Alberta stood 
with the Americans. We chose not to do that. So I wonder what 
specific measures the minister is going to take? Has he 
communicated with the consulate in Calgary, or the 
ambassador? Has he at least expressed our condolences for the 
losses of American people, or has the Government of 
Saskatchewan done that? 
 
I know it will be difficult for this government to do that because 
of their anti-American stripe that runs through the Canadian left 
and through this party, through the party in power, through the 
NDP. They are far more comfortable beating on our Americans 
and engaging in rhetoric against the Americans, and oh by the 
way, quietly accepting the benefits of the Free Trade 
Agreement, quietly accepting the benefits of a $7 billion trade 
with the Americans. They’re happy to do that but they take 
every chance they can to rhetorically beat on those trading 
partners and those friends. 
 
So I wonder if the minister, who seems to be taking all of this 
quite lightly, the position his Premier took, I wonder if he’s 
prepared to stand in the Assembly today and inform the 
members of this committee what it is that you are intending to 
do as a Saskatchewan government to send a message to the 
United States to try to repair and rebuild the absolutely vital 
economic and social relationship, frankly, that we have with our 
American friends? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to 
thank the member for the enthusiasm with which he delivers his 
questions and I’m going to attempt to deliver my response with 
the same degree of enthusiasm. 
 
And the simple answer to did I counsel the Premier, the answer 
is yes; our cabinet and our caucus had discussions as it relates 
to the foreign policy position that the federal government took. 
And we did that as a group, as a collective group. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite: you are masters of fear 
and of gloom and of doom — you are. You thrive on it, it’s 
what makes you tick, it’s what makes you operate as a political 
party, and it’s why you’ll never sit on this side of the House. 
 
I want to say that the member from Swift Current should 
understand that we’re selling the same amount of oil and gas to 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

 

our friends in the United States as we were before the federal 
government took this initiative. My officials tell me that there’s 
been no impact on trade and there’s been no evidence. I’ve had 
no reaction from industry asking for us to intervene in any 
particular area. So quite clearly, you and your counterparts take 
the position as it relates to the federal government’s position. 
 
(16:00) 
 
But I want to tell you in terms of sincerity, no one should 
question the sincerity of this Premier — no one. No one, no one 
on your side has the right to, sir. And I want to tell you why, I 
want to tell you why. Because he was the only Premier to lay a 
wreath at the foot of the American Embassy after September 11, 
and it wasn’t your friend from Alberta, Ralph Klein. It was the 
Premier of this province who was first to lay a wreath in 
support of the Americans after the September 11 initiative. 
 
So you can come in here and you can use all of the anecdotal 
evidence that you want, but I tell you what, we on this side will 
deal with fact. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to deal with fact, and 
the fact that there’s been 11 straight months of job growth that 
you and the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party haven’t even got 
the courage to come out and talk about. 
 
You know we went through months and months of drought, and 
we had some tough job numbers. And the Leader of 
Saskatchewan Party poked his nose out of his door every Friday 
morning when the numbers were released and he says, woe is 
me, this economy is falling apart. And do you want to know 
something? No one has seen hide nor hair of him in the last 11 
months as we have had record job numbers increase, as we have 
had record numbers of people going to work. The Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party hides in his office and won’t come out and 
say a word. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Chairman, that is why I say to the member 
from Swift Current that you have not got the right to preach 
gloom and doom around this province because people, first of 
all, believe in their province. And they believe in opportunities 
for their kids and they believe in opportunities for their family. 
But they also know that you have one agenda. They know that 
the Saskatchewan Party has one agenda and it’s power at any 
cost. 
 
And I want to tell you even people who may have supported 
your political movement, like Mr. Pederson from Saskatoon 
who issues a release saying: let the Progressive Conservative 
Party loose, let democracy run because it’s controlled by a 
bunch of Saskatchewan Party people. That’s what you’re about. 
And that’s what the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party is about. 
 
But I want to talk about sincerity. You ask about sincerity. This 
Premier of this province was the only premier to lay a wreath at 
the foot of the American Embassy in support of the Americans 
after the devastation of September 11. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to say one more thing 
to the member from Swift Current. You stand to support the 
people of Saskatchewan? You side with the Americans who are 
out to destroy the Canadian Wheat Board. Every one of you 

over there, every one of you are supporting the Americans in 
their initiatives to destroy the Canadian Wheat Board. That’s 
where you stand. That’s where you stand. 
 
So I tell you what. You take Ralph Klein’s position on any 
initiative that you want, sir, and if it’s not good enough for you 
to support the people of Saskatchewan and the province of 
Saskatchewan, what you want to do is move over there. That’s 
what you want to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we had agreed to 4 o’clock adjournment of 
these . . . of these . . . and I’ll . . . Oh and the member from 
Swift Current, I’m very much looking forward to continuing 
this with you but we had agreed that 4 o’clock we were going to 
move to other estimates. And I welcome your intervention. I 
really do. Because it gives us an opportunity to describe the 
Saskatchewan Party for what they really are. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I want to — or Chairman — I want 
to thank my officials for their support today. And we’ll be 
moving into the Department of Health. With that I’ll report 
progress. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
I’m pleased to have with me today Glenda Yeates, who’s the 
deputy minister, to my left. And then to her left is Kelly 
Kummerfield, the executive director of health human resource 
planning. Right behind Kelly is Rod Wiley, who is the 
executive director of finance and management services. And 
behind Glenda Yeates is Lawrence Krahn, who is the assistant 
deputy minister. Right behind me is Duncan Fisher, the 
assistant deputy minister. And to my right is Bert Linklater, 
who is the executive director of district management services. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair . . . Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. First of all, welcome to the minister and 
officials. This is the first of our opportunities to meet in regard 
to the Health estimates, so I would like to welcome you all here 
and wish that this process goes very well over the next . . . 
longer than today; I’m sure we’ll just get started. 
 
Minister, I want to indicate that I just sent over the global kind 
of information that we usually request each year, and so that 
information or the request for that information is passed on to 
your department. And I would like to ask if there is . . . if you 
have any indication or what the timeline may be. In terms of 
prior experience, I believe the globals are very similar to prior 
years. What kind of timeline will be required in order for you to 
complete them and return them to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We’ll take a look at it, and I agree that it 
is similar to what’s there for previous years. And I anticipate 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

that it will be done expeditiously and hopefully you’ll have it in 
time before one of your next periods of questioning. I’m not 
sure that the absolute next one, but in a couple anyway. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. Minister, 
first of all, the Department of Health of course is the largest 
department in the affairs of government and there are many 
subvotes and sections that need to be talked about. 
 
I would like to focus on primarily one area today, at least in 
part. I don’t know if we’ll get through it but I want to focus on 
it because it is first of all, very important and second of all, I 
think timely, and that is the whole issue surrounding the family 
physicians, the College of Medicine, the issue surrounding 
doctors’ remuneration, contractual progress as going on. So in 
that whole general area is where I would like to begin today 
because I think it is certainly timely and it is very important. 
 
Mr. Minister, I appreciate the fact that negotiations are going on 
between your department and the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association regarding a new contract between the physicians of 
the province and the Department of Health, and I certainly do 
not expect you to, you know, compromise any of the 
negotiating positions and discussions that are going on. But can 
you update the House and the province as to the status of the 
negotiations with the physicians? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think the good news 
is that we’re basically on schedule for the negotiations. The 
contract just expired 10 days ago and often the discussions 
didn’t start until the contract expired. This year we did start a 
little bit earlier but we’re still in the discussion stage. There are 
meetings set over the next couple of weeks and the parties are 
working at positions and trying to figure out some new 
solutions, Saskatchewan solutions, for the whole contract. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, Dr. 
James Fritz, president of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, has indicated in comments made and reported in 
the press that one of the very grave concerns that they have is 
that this contract has to address issues not only of remuneration, 
but the ability to recruit and retain and attract doctors to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Minister, I’m wondering if in preparation for these negotiations 
if you have prepared and could share some of the statistics in 
terms of the number of doctors, the age categories that they’re 
in, and you know, what the projections are for retirements and 
things of that nature, so that you may have some sense of, 
looking forward, what the severity or the critical needs are 
going to be for retaining or recruiting family physicians and 
doctors in general? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate the question from the member 
around this particular issue. One of the challenges clearly is to 
look at the total complement of physicians in the province. And 
basically, through the College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
there are two ways to measure the number of people who are 
working. And I have the figures for the last six years, up until 
the end of March this year, around licensed physicians and 
active physicians, because that’s not always the same thing. 
 
But I would say that as of the end of March this year, 2003, 

there were 900 family practitioners licensed and 729 specialists 
licensed, for a total of 1,629 physicians. And if you go back last 
year, that’s seven more than last year. If you go back six years, 
it’s about 101 more than we had six years ago. 
 
Now on the active side, which is another count that we get, 
there are family practitioners — 716 who are in active practice, 
and specialists there are 503, for a total of 1,219. And that’s the 
number that’s more appropriate because they’re actually 
providing service. That number is 21 more than last year as a 
total. And if you go back to March of ’98, it’s about 100, 
approximately 150, more than there was at that point. 
 
(16:15) 
 
But embedded in your question was also the issue around the 
age of doctors and the need for doctors over the longer term. I 
don’t think it matters how we look at it in any way. Doctors are 
the same baby boom supply issue as lawyers, nurses, teachers, 
every other group, and they’re . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Politicians, if we can put it that way, would be fine. And so 
practically, we have to make sure we’ve got planning that looks 
at a continual increase in supply. 
 
I think one of the interesting statistics, which I don’t have here 
but I know that some of the doctors sometimes explain is, 
because we’ve had a medical school in Saskatchewan, there’s a 
much higher percentage of Saskatchewan-trained physicians 
each year because basically we have much more of a supply 
here. We still have many that come from other places and 
that’s, I think, a real value to our system, but we also are doing 
a much better job of training people here. And clearly our goal 
in the long term is to train many people here, but still welcome 
people from all over the world. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, the 
information you shared answered a good part of my question. 
The part that I didn’t hear you answer is, going forward do you 
have projections as to the number of doctors that we’re going to 
lose due to normal retirement, that are going to reach the age of 
retirement? 
 
You’ve indicated that we have actually increased the number of 
doctors in the province. I’m wondering if we’re looking 
forward to say . . . We’re currently providing funded 
educational seats, the College of Medicine I believe, of 60 seats. 
If we retained 100 per cent of them, is that going to fill 100 per 
cent of our projected needs or 50 per cent of our needs? 
 
I’m wondering what information you have that looks forward in 
terms of the retirement age and things of that nature to try to get 
a sense, is our College of Medicine going to be equipped to 
meet the anticipated losses due to natural retirements, etc., in 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the best way to answer your 
question is to start out and say that this is a national issue that’s 
discussed by all of the ministers of Health, all of the health . . . 
provincial and territorial Health departments and Health Canada 
on a regular basis because we have a national issue around 
supply of physicians. Canada has always been in a position 
where they don’t train 100 per cent of the physicians in the 
country. And our challenges in that area are about the same as 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

 

they are across the country. Some of the . . . some provinces 
attract more doctors to their particular area depending on the 
decade and things like that. 
 
One of the things that we are trying to do is increase the seats in 
medical schools across the country and we increased ours by 
five kind of in . . . at the same time as other schools increased 
by a similar percentage. We’re continuing to look at that issue 
as we move forward. 
 
The other thing is that there is about a 10 per cent turnover in 
the numbers of doctors in the province on an annual basis and 
that is replaced by graduates, obviously — new graduates from 
Saskatchewan, from other parts of Canada, from other parts of 
the world — but also doctors who move here from other places. 
That’s been a part of our system for a long time. It’s always a 
challenge. 
 
One of the . . . Some of the programs that we’ve introduced in 
the last few years as a result of negotiations with the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association) have included many 
retention programs that make it very positive for doctors to plan 
to have their whole career in Saskatchewan. And that’s the 
kinds of things that are part of the negotiations with the SMA at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. From what I 
heard you say is that at a 10 per cent turnover and the statistics 
you outlined earlier, that’s about 170 physicians, 160, 
somewhere in that magnitude, would be in transition every year. 
 
Minister, I understand in talking to the dean of the College of 
Medicine that there is this collaboration across medical schools 
in Canada. And he was talking that that similar statistic exists 
right across the country, as you rightly outlined, and that the . . . 
there is a . . . perhaps the word is a growing consensus among 
the people in charge of colleges of medicine that there has to be 
a more significant increase across the country if we’re going to 
get closer to having enough educated physicians, educated in 
Canada to meet Canadian needs. And as you rightly say, we’ve 
counted on countries in the past like Ireland and England and 
South Africa and things of that nature. And I don’t want to get 
into the ethical kind of dilemma of attracting physicians that are 
trained in other countries to Canada. 
 
And I’m just concerned, I guess, Minister, that in the past we’ve 
been able to rely on these other countries and that there has 
been adequate supply in terms of meeting the Canadian 
requirements by relying on these other countries. And I’m just 
wondering how long that’s going to go on because I would 
suspect that countries like South Africa or those other 
jurisdictions are saying, just a minute; we better start thinking 
of how we can make sure we retain the people that we’re 
training in our own countries. Because I suspect that they don’t 
have a surplus really as well. And one day we may wake up and 
find out that the opportunity to attract offshore doctors is very 
limited. 
 
Minister, you mentioned as well that there’s some things that 
are going on that hopefully will improve the situation and the 
ability for us to, you know, accommodate foreign doctors. And 
I know that there’s a program for example that is called the 
international medical graduate pilot project that is, I believe, 

being sponsored by the College of Physicians and Surgeons and 
the Department of Health. 
 
And the object of this program is to try to find ways of 
standardizing or satisfying the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons that the standards of education in other jurisdictions 
and other countries are indeed in keeping with the standards 
that are expected in Saskatchewan and in Canada, and having 
some period of time whereby a physician from another country 
can work in Saskatchewan under the supervision and 
collaboration of Saskatchewan family physicians or physicians 
to see if the standards of practice and scope of practice, etc., of 
that individual are compliant and consistent with the standards 
that we would expect here, and to note any deficiencies and 
things of that nature. 
 
Minister, I believe that there is one or two physicians this year 
in this program and that there is a budget on a pilot basis — I 
guess I’d like to hear from you exactly what the department’s 
take on this is — that there is a budget that is provided that 
provides for some remuneration for the supervising physicians, 
that provides for monies for evaluation and follow-up and 
things of that nature. 
 
Minister, would you outline from your perspective how this 
program works and what the objective of the department is in 
this particular pilot project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m pleased to answer that question 
because it is a challenge for all of Canada to figure out how to 
have doctors who are trained in a system that’s different than 
what we’re used to in North America or in Great Britain for 
physicians. 
 
What we have done this year is, working together with the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, we’ve provided them with 
$85,000 which allows them to hire supervisors who work with 
these foreign-trained doctors. And we have two physicians that 
have . . . are in the program. I think one is just completed; the 
other is still in the program. And it would be our intention that 
we would continue this. 
 
That relates to family physicians. Our registrar of the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, Dr. Kendall, is on a national 
committee that’s working on a similar program for specialists 
because often there are people who come with specialties, who 
would like to practise those specialties in Canada, and they need 
to be evaluated. 
 
And so we anticipate that we will be part of that national 
program even though we’re quite a small province and don’t 
have as . . . maybe as many of the specialties for training as 
some of the other places. 
 
So our goal is to participate in this as well as we can. Clearly, 
Ontario has taken some steps in this area and British Columbia I 
think as well, but we’re participating in this on a national basis 
and we’re pleased to have two physicians . . . family physicians 
who have been working with this, this year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, of that 
$85,000, do you have a breakdown in the terms of what is going 
to the supervising physicians and what is going to the other 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

budgetary components of the $85,000 program budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think your question related to how was 
the $85,000 spent. Well the $85,000 goes to the College of 
Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan. The College of 
Physicians and Surgeons where Dr. Kendall works, that’s, I 
think, they cover those kinds of expenses in their own operation 
because it’s part of something that Saskatchewan sees as a good 
. . . as something that needs to be done. So the 85,000 goes to 
the College of Medicine and then it’s allocated through their 
methods of compensating supervising positions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One of the comments 
that I’ve heard in discussions with physicians involved with this 
is that they are concerned that too much of the $85,000 budget 
is going to evaluation work rather than actual program 
spending, if you like. 
 
And there would be the hope that there could be some review of 
the ratios of money that’s being spent for actually helping the 
physicians be supervised as opposed to the money that’s set 
aside for evaluation; the feeling being that maybe for the same 
amount of money that it might be able to supervise four 
physicians instead of two physicians. Or for very minimal 
increases, an increased number of physicians could be helped 
through this program. 
 
The other part of it is, is that I guess I would hope that the 
opportunity is to look at if there are certain specific deficiencies 
that are curriculum-based or things of that nature that may be 
identified in this evaluation, that there might be some ability — 
and maybe there is, and if there is please share that with us, 
Minister — to provide specific bursaries or something of that 
nature to help the physician that is being evaluated to improve 
their credentials or to meet the minimum standards so that this 
can happen. Because I think for many of these individuals that 
come across over here and they may have very modest means 
and may not be able to easily fund some of the increased costs 
that might be expected. 
 
So I guess the suggestion is, is that I would hope that the 
department looks at this program to see if there’s ways that can 
be implemented, and adjustments to the program that can be 
made, that would allow instead of two physicians to be 
evaluated, perhaps four or six or whatever, to increase the 
possibilities of this program. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that suggestion about 
taking a look at that. And in fact I think that’s what will take 
place because this is the first year of this program and so what 
we think is that now that it seems like it works, then there will 
be a possibility of using a similar amount of money for more 
people. But we will raise this issue with the college and assist 
them in the evaluation so that we can do some of those things. 
 
Some of the challenges around assisting the individual doctors 
who are going through the assessment, I know that’s another 
concern that we’re looking at. At this point, I don’t think we 
have any specific dollars available for that and it’s always a 
challenge. We’re trying to get bursaries to Saskatchewan 
students at the medical school and how you put all these 

together. But it’s clearly a good suggestion that we’ll look at as 
well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One other component 
to that that I would suggest to the minister is make sure your 
lines of communications with the supervising physicians are 
also very well established. Because I believe that these 
supervising physicians are motivated by a great desire to see to 
it that there are more qualified physicians available to the 
province and they do this at some considerable sacrifice of their 
time and energies. 
 
And so I would encourage you to make sure that you don’t 
overlook telling them more than once or twice that what they’re 
doing is important and valued and appreciated because certainly 
from my perspective, I think it’s a program that has some merit 
and that the people that are involved in it — the physicians that 
are being evaluated as well as the supervising physicians — 
should be encouraged to make this program successful. So 
thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Pass that on as well. 
 
Minister, to a little bit of a different topic is . . . Last year the 
cancer clinics in Saskatoon and Regina were both concerned 
about the availability of oncologists and were taking steps to fill 
the requirements of the cancer clinics in order to get the 
required number of oncologists. And I’m wondering if you 
could update us as to the status of the cancer clinic and if 
they’ve filled the oncology positions that they were needing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for the change in direction. 
And as it relates to the cancer clinics, I think I have some 
relatively good news on that front. In Saskatoon, by July it’s 
anticipated that all of the oncology positions will be filled. And 
that’s the first time in three years and I think it reflects the . . . 
some good recruiting and some other things but also there’s 
more of a supply available. 
 
Regina, they’re not . . . I think there’s one or . . . well there’s a 
couple of vacancies at least in Regina that at this point we don’t 
think will be filled by the summer, but they’re still working on 
that. 
 
But for Saskatoon, they’ve had three or four years with some 
challenges on recruiting and it looks like by this summer they 
will have their full complement. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s reassuring 
to hear because I think the whole area surrounding cancer is an 
area that is very concerning for people. And it’s an area where 
timeliness is also very critical, so I would encourage the 
department to assist the cancer clinics in any way they can to 
make sure that the vacancies that still exist are indeed filled. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I look at the sub-program votes on medical 
services, I note that the amounts are increased about 4 per cent 
in the fee-for-service and in the non fee-for-service areas. 
Minister, I guess there’d be two components as to why that 
might be. One would be an increase in the actual fee structure 
that might result out of the negotiations going on. But the other 
component at least possibly could be that there’s anticipated 
that there will be more, more services provided, or the number 
of services would increase for any number of reasons — the 
demographics or whatever. 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

 

Do you have a breakdown about what was the ratio of increased 
services as opposed to increased fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think around this particular area it’s 
always a challenge. It’s an attempt to set out a budget of what’s 
anticipated both on . . . as it relates to a negotiated increase on 
the fee for service and on the utilization of the service. 
 
And I think that’s the . . . really the question. I think practically 
there are a couple of other factors that are involved as well in 
the number that shows as a year over year increase. Sometimes, 
I mean we do have not dramatic changes but slight ups and 
downs around utilization. 
 
One of the other factors here for this year and why that number 
might be 4 per cent as opposed to 7, or whatever it is, relates to 
the fact that more and more physicians are going on to a 
different method of payment and so their payments go under an 
alternate method that goes often through the health authority 
budgets as opposed through this budget. And so with more 
physicians we . . . And we have to try to estimate how much of 
that might happen in a particular year, and so that’s a factor as 
well. 
 
So it’s utilization, it’s fees, but it’s also changing ways of 
paying. And it also does relate to the total physician 
compensation issue in the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, on April 14 to 18 
the accreditation team was at the University of Saskatchewan at 
the College of Medicine and as a result on November 1, 2002 
wrote a letter to the president of the university talking about the 
accreditation of the College of Medicine. 
 
And in this document that they provided, they talked about the 
fact that there were I believe 10 specific categories and 
recommendations that were . . . seemed to be in non-compliance 
or in . . . identified as being deficiencies. And on the basis they 
voted or decided as a accreditation committee and a team to, 
and I quote: 
 

After reviewing the report of the survey team, the LCME 
voted to place the program on probation. 

 
And then they listed the reasons why this probationary status 
was going to be applied to the College of Medicine. 
 
Mr. Minister, as a result of that concern I believe that the 
College of Medicine has identified that 8 of the 10 deficiencies 
they could address through organization and, you know, 
structural kind of readjustments and that there were two areas 
that were particularly of concern that had monetary 
consequences. And those two areas were in the clinical status 
and in the library. 
 
Minister, I wonder if you would comment on the department’s 
response to this, and particularly response to the fact that the 
department received recommendations from the Co-Chairs of 
the Saskatchewan Academic Health Sciences Network which 
were looking at these issues and were proposing specific 
recommendations, particularly in these two deficiencies that 
had monetary and budgetary issues surrounding them, and that 
in a letter dated February 25 to the deputy minister of Learning 

and the deputy minister of Health they passed this information 
on. 
 
The Finance minister said he hadn’t seen any of this 
information in the budget preparation, and I would like to give 
you the opportunity to indicate from the Department of Health 
standpoint where the breakdown between this whole process 
and the Finance minister occurred. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the member’s referring to a letter 
which was effectively a letter for discussion. If you read the last 
line it says, I would be pleased to meet with you to further 
discuss these requirements. And it was a draft letter. 
 
Subsequent to that letter there was a meeting of the Academic 
Health Sciences Network Board. They looked at these particular 
issues. There are two task groups — one of them that deals with 
the library; one of them that deals with the clinical facility 
needs. 
 
The initial information needs a lot of work. The people are 
working on these various items. And the task group’s job is to 
further analyze and discuss what the requirements are, and bring 
back those particular recommendations to the Academic Health 
Sciences Board. This is an ongoing process. It’s one that has 
been worked on even before the accreditation process started 
because we knew there was some challenges. 
 
I think what the accreditation does is allow for some focus in 
some particular areas and, as you’ve said, 8 out of 10 they can 
deal with without extra resources. These ones require some 
resources but they need quite a bit of further clarity before any 
particular answer can be given. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Minister, I guess we can quibble 
about what this letter meant. It said that a details resource is 
required, and in the letter that was included with the letter to the 
deputy minister of Health and of Learning, there is the letter 
that was directed from the health sciences network to the 
president of the University of Saskatchewan. And they had 
outlined exactly what their work had totalled and also included 
a schedule of very specific dollar expenditures and the way 
these dollars would be expended, including the staffing 
full-time equivalents and the money in the clinical department 
for heads, faculty positions, part-time, full-time, and 
administrative support. 
 
Minister, certainly from the reports from the University of 
Saskatchewan it would seem very clear to me and to anybody 
objectively following this, is that the University of 
Saskatchewan expected much more than some ongoing 
discussions, that they expected a commitment. Because as I 
outlined, this report on the accreditation was tabled almost a 
year ago and the accreditation probation is for a two-year 
period. And I know in speaking to the dean of the College of 
Medicine, his hope was . . . is that this issue could be resolved 
entirely as soon as possible because it potentially has 
implications for people applying to enter the College of 
Medicine with this probationary status hanging over its head. 
 
So, Minister, I want you to please indicate to the House and for 
the record, what your expectations are in the terms of a timeline 
for this to be dealt with and for the Department of Health to be 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2003 

 

making the commitment that is expected in order to facilitate 
the College of Medicine getting off its probationary status. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think I’ll start out this by saying 
that it’s absolutely clear that the government will support the 
College of Medicine and the university to make sure that it has 
a long-term future for the province. There’s just no question 
about that. That assurance has been given to the president of the 
university, to the dean of the College of Medicine, and to other 
individuals. There’s no question about that. 
 
The document that you refer to — which is a draft letter for 
discussion purpose which I don’t think has ever been finalized 
because there was a lot of concern around the estimates in the 
numbers — that’s what’s now being worked at so that there can 
be some official request that actually fits in with all of the 
information that people have. That process is ongoing now. 
 
The accreditation people need to know a response around these 
things by September. Our goal is clearly to look at getting 
things in place before that. But we’re going to do it in an 
appropriate way, making sure that both the Department of 
Health and the Department of Learning, working together with 
the university, together with the Saskatoon Health Authority 
and the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority and others who 
are part of this Academic Health Sciences Network, that all of 
us are moving along at the same pace. 
 
But there’s absolutely no concern that this government will not 
be behind setting up the appropriate ways to make sure that the 
College of Medicine is there for the long term. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, you indicated that you’re working 
on it, but you didn’t indicate if you have a timeline in terms of 
when you expect that this will be . . . find resolution. And 
certainly, in the accreditation committee’s report, they note and 
I quote that they’re concerned about actually . . . And I quote 
under . . . I don’t know if you have the exact same document 
that I have. Under page 4, after the 10 recommendations are 
listed, there’s one, two, three further areas that are noted. And 
the third area notes the concern of the committee that if . . . And 
I quote: 
 

. . . that a sharp decline in recent years in the number of 
applicants to the medical school from within the province is 
a worrisome trend. 

 
So, Minister, that’s why I guess I’m addressing this concern to 
you because the dean of the College of Medicine was very 
concerned that if this probation issue is not lifted from the 
College of Medicine in a timely way, it really does nothing to 
address the concern that was expressed about the declining 
number of applicants from within the province for the College 
of Medicine. 
 
And so I guess I’m trying to give you the opportunity in the 
strongest possible way to make a definite timeline commitment 
so that the College of Medicine has something specific to work 
from and to know that in real terms — I appreciate the verbal 
commitment to the college — but they want to know a timeline 
when they can expect to have the resources needed to 

specifically address these accreditation deficiencies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that the member maybe 
didn’t hear me talk about the timeline. September is when the 
accreditation committee needs to get some of this information. 
We’re working together with the dean of the College of 
Medicine and the people in there. We’re working together with 
the president of the university and his senior administration. 
We’re working together with the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority, Regina Qu’Appelle Regional Health Authority; and 
in fact the total provincial health system as it relates to this 
particular issue. 
 
All of these things are being worked at through Saskatchewan 
Health and Saskatchewan Learning and we’re working together 
with the people that are involved. We will be making sure — 
and I think the assurances are already there — working with 
those people about how this can be done. And I think it doesn’t 
serve the whole of the community well when there’s . . . there 
are allegations that somehow this is not going to be done. 
 
But I think that the key point here is that the College of 
Medicine has a new dean who is a good leader, who has 
identified a number of shortcomings before the . . . or around 
the times of the accreditation. He’s working on those things. 
The university has some support there. And so practically what 
we all need to do is affirm the key role that the college plays in 
the total provincial health system. And that will be the position 
of the government and the departments of Health and Learning, 
and we’ll continue to work with that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One short final 
question in this regard. I recognize and you’ve inferred that 
there are implications for these recommendations for both the 
Department of Health and the Department of Learning. There 
are also in these two recommendations at least implications in 
this document that there is financial implications as well. 
 
Can the minister tell the Assembly, has he provided in his 
Health budget? Has he have enough contingency funds or 
where funds might be taken out of the Health budget to meet 
the Department of Health’s responsibility in terms of its share 
of what the financial implications of implementing these 
recommendations are? Or is it expected that there’ll have to be 
special warrants to address this need? Because I don’t think that 
was clearly outlined. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think what I can say is that all of the 
various parties that I’ve mentioned — the college, the 
university, the regional health authority, Sask Learning, Sask 
Health — are addressing exactly the core of the kind of issue 
that you raised. Because some of the positions may be funded 
out of the fee-for-service kind of situation that you asked about 
earlier. Some may come from the regional health authority’s 
budget around salaried positions. Some may come from the 
university budget through Sask Learning. And we have various 
amounts in all of these places which will help us address this. 
 
At this stage we think that we can work together with them and 
get all of these kinds of things done. And it’s also . . . Another 
factor is that it’s going to be going over quite a number of 
budget years as we do the improvement, because the 
commitments often, for example a tenured faculty, relate to well 



April 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

 

what kind of a commitment do you have over a 5- or 10-year 
period. 
 
So there are many, many answers to that. I feel assured in 
saying that the government is strongly behind the College of 
Medicine and the . . . which is I think a great asset for the whole 
province. And we’re going to make sure that this all works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
see that the time has passed that’s been allocated us today and I 
would like to close by thanking the officials for their attendance 
today and look forward to our future opportunities to discuss 
the health budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’d like to thank the member 
for some very good questions. I’d like to thank all the officials 
who have been here to help me provide the information for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:57. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................499 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................499 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................499 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................499 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................499 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................499 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................499 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................499 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................500 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................500 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................500 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................500 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................500 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................500 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Workers’ Compensation Protection for Firefighters 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................501 
 University of Saskatchewan Huskie Salute Awards Banquet 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................501 
 International Special Librarians Day 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................501 
 Larry Janzen Obituary 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................501 
 Regina Housing Starts Double 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................502 
 Swift Current Youth Achievements 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................502 
 National Aboriginal Achievement Awards 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................502 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Mega Bingo 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................503 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................503 
 Ethanol Industry 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................504 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................504 
 Funding for North Battleford Sewer and Water Infrastructure 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................505 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................505 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................506 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................506 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 18 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................507 
 Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2003 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................507 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................507 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................507 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 18 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................507 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................508 
 Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry Act 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................509 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................510 



 

 

 Bill No. 7 — The Occupational Therapists Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................510 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................511 
 Bill No. 14 — The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................511 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................512 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs — Vote 30 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................512 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................512 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................514 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................515 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................517 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................520 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................521 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................521 
 


