















































Hansard: June 17, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1749 
 June 17, 2003 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the member from Regina 
Elphinstone on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave of the committee, to introduce 
guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
committee and the members of this Assembly two guests seated 
in your gallery, Mr. Chairman. One, Charlie Penson. If you 
could please stand, Charlie. And his son, Darren. 
 
Charlie is the Alliance MP (Member of Parliament) for Peace 
River out in Alberta and the Canadian Alliance Finance critic, 
Mr. Speaker. So if all members could give them a warm 
welcome, it’s a warm evening, so that would be entirely in 
keeping, so please give them a welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and a special welcome to 
our guests, to Charlie and his son, Darren. 
 
Mr. Minister, before we adjourned or recessed for the supper 
hour, we were talking about tanks and how we were addressing 
it. You mentioned that the city of Moose Jaw came to the 
department with a proposal whereby if . . . and I need to get this 
clarified. 
 
Were they asking the department to come out and determine 
what it might take, the cost to clean up a site, whereby the city 
of Moose Jaw then if they would take over the site, they would 
clean it up, and the department would give a clean bill of health 
and then get on with life? Or exactly what were you implying 
when you mentioned about the proposal Moose Jaw had, and 
would this type of arrangement work in other communities in 
regards to cleaning up some of these waste sites and turning 
them into a place of economic activity again whereby the 
community or the city is not just having a liability on its hands 
as a result of taxes that just continue to go in arrears? 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Just to point out that . . . I just wanted to clarify that we didn’t 
give the city of Moose Jaw any money. 
 
And what’s the most amazing thing about the partnership 
approach that we talk to people in Saskatchewan about is that 
people genuinely get excited about the opportunity to do their 
part. And we want to capitalize of course as a government on 
some of the excitement and that not . . . the only player in the 
province is not the provincial government, but many other 
stewards, natural stewards. And cities and municipalities in 
general, large and small, play a very important role. 
 
And in this instance, what happened was the city came up to . . . 
you know, with the concept that if they assumed ownership of 
an abandoned service station in Moose Jaw . . . The service 
station was sitting there. There was no activity on the site; it 
was within the city. It was a valuable area that they could 
possibly have a land sale on. 
 
But what they were worried about that in the event that they 
assumed ownership of the property through tax arrears, then 
once they assumed the ownership of the property and claimed it 
through tax arrears, then they done a bunch of digging up that 
they’d find there would be huge liability there which they could 
not afford. And what they did not want to do at the end of the 
day is to be owners of property that was too expensive to 
reclaim and thus putting the municipality itself at a financial 
risk. 
 
So what we’ve done is we negotiated in good faith an 
arrangement where it would not force them to clean it up if the 
damage was extensive to a point where it was just simply 
unaffordable for the city. And in this instance it worked out 
where the properties in question — I believe there was three of 
them — when they did finally assume, after we assured them 
we wouldn’t hold them personally liable, assumed ownership of 
the properties through tax arrears and tax enforcement action 
that they found out that the contamination wasn’t as great as 
they originally thought. And so as a result of their cleanup 
effort they were able to resell the properties and continue 
cleaning up areas throughout Moose Jaw from the sale of the 
particular properties that I made reference to. 
 
Following that, SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) then did a change to our Environmental 
Management and Protection Act that would take into account 
the Moose Jaw example when we met with other cities, where 
we’d allow the city to assume ownership of a property and 
determine the extent of contamination, and then we work on our 
resolution from there and not hold them personally liable. 
 
So what you have is a very good relationship between Moose 
Jaw and SERM, and in a sense that we are making sure that 
they do their part and they’re making sure that we don’t hold 
them liable. And at the end of the day three sites in Moose Jaw 
were cleaned up and sold for a tidy little profit. 
 
And they cleaned up other areas and we used the example to 
make rules and changes in EMPA (The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act, 2002) to ensure that we have 
the similar benefit with other communities. So it was a 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

win-win-win situation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, so what you’re saying, 
Mr. Minister, then is this is something that you would give 
consideration with other communities. 
 
And just to indicate, I wasn’t asking for funds. The people I’ve 
talked to, they haven’t talked about funds. They’ve just talked 
about the fact if it became a major cleanup that they couldn’t 
afford, then they’re stuck with it if they assumed it, were to 
assume ownership and try to clean it up. 
 
I guess the question I would have, Mr. Minister, — and I’ve got 
a couple here — is number one, is there a simple process of 
determining what type of cleanup costs might be involved if a 
site may be fairly contaminated that might be fairly costly? Or 
you could determine no, this site it wouldn’t take it very much 
to clean it up but it would appear that say, it’s a minimal 
amount. 
 
You could say to the town, we’ve done some tests; this is what 
our tests are showing. And then the town would say, okay, well 
based on those tests then, we’ll certainly . . . maybe proceed; 
we’d be willing to proceed with an arrangement to clean up the 
property. 
 
And so I guess one question I have, have you come up with 
some kind of a test that would . . . rather than starting to dig and 
then just closing it in because oh, it’s going to be more than 
you, more than you’d like to bargain for? 
 
Secondly, you mentioned I think 110 communities have used 
centenary money and maybe you could give me an idea of 
exactly what communities have done. Have they made an 
application, and roughly how much money have they received 
towards this type of environmental cleanup? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just want to just clarify first of all, one of the premises that we 
undertake when we look at the whole notion of helping some of 
these communities address some of the service stations that may 
be in tax arrears, may be closed down, may have been 
abandoned, is fairly simple. We have the . . . we operate under 
the principle of polluter pays. 
 
So if a municipality were to own a site and the . . . or a private 
business were to own a site then we would help try and track 
down that private business to hold them accountable for some 
of the pollution on that particular land. And so when a 
community, it takes over a property we’ll work very closely 
with them to do a couple of things, is look under the scenario of 
polluter pays and make sure we can’t track down the original 
owner. 
 
And secondly we’ll also assist them with identifying what we 
would call phase 1 or phase 2 testing of the actual site. And 
some of the costs run in the range of 3,000 to 5,000 to 8,000. Or 
we’ll do an assessment of the site and we can certainly work 
very closely with them on that to determine the extent of the 
contamination. 
 
What we are doing in the event that we can’t track down the 
original owner for odd reasons, the owner has passed away or 

some other good reason, then what we would consider that site 
to be is a abandoned site. 
 
And this is where again we’ll work with the community to 
identify the site. You know, as I mentioned previously, we sat 
down with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and we worked through the process of 
identifying some of these sites. 
 
So when you made reference to the 110 communities, I want to 
clarify. It wasn’t 110 communities; it was 110 abandoned 
service stations that we cleaned up. And these service stations 
dot the entire province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So again to clarify, if a community wants to take part in the 
program they can certainly assume the ownership; they can — 
through tax arrears. They can do a phase 1 or phase 2 
assessment. 
 
We can help track down the original owner and if that original 
owner is still available then we try and hold him accountable. If 
he’s not available then we use the abandoned service station 
funding to help them clean this up. 
 
Some of the initial testing costs run from 3 to 5 to 8 million . . . 
Sorry, thousand. And I would also point out that we spent 
something like $3.6 million over four years to help clean up 
some of these 110 sites. 
 
So we’re certainly doing our part and we’ll continue working 
very closely with the community. And if you have any 
communities that want to bring forward some of the concerns, 
then we would urge them to contact our department, and we’ll 
work very, very closely with them trying to solve this problem 
for them. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, the idea of contacting or 
looking at the, trying to find the original owner, some of these 
sites have been . . . Some of the owners are gone. But the fact 
that you are going back, you know, things have changed even 
since 50 years ago, and I find it appalling. It’s easy to sit in 
offices in Regina and start . . . or Ottawa for that matter. 
 
We look at it at the whole agricultural scene right now. We’ve 
got a federal minister who hasn’t got a clue when it comes to 
agriculture and the needs of Western Canadians. And we’ve got 
a deputy minister who is totally out of his league, and I have no 
idea why he’s up there. The concern I have, and Mr. Minister, I 
was there in ’89 when we had a minister who started the 
process and then left. And I think part of it, he got a lot of heat 
in his own caucus, and that was Mr. Hodgins who was minister 
at that time. And he started discussing some of these issues 
because there didn’t seem to be any common sense as to how 
we arrive at solutions here. 
 
And what I am saying, Mr. Minister, is it’s time we used some 
common sense. It’s time we started to work with communities. 
You’ve indicated that there’s an avenue to follow so that we can 
start addressing some of these sites where people are willing 
and would like to, say, purchase a site where that site could be a 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

 

productive issue such as you’ve got in the Moose Jaw area. 
 
And so rather than pursing it tonight, I realize and talked to the 
Deputy House Leader and we kind of agreed to a time tonight, 
but we will not vote if off tonight because we may have to get 
into debate later on. I would like to move on to another issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, and first of all maybe I could ask you a question. 
Is there . . . and you can give this . . . is there a specific contact 
in the Department of Environment that a community group or a 
business or a couple of businesses . . . say a business wants to 
buy out a property that’s been sitting vacant. Is there a contact 
in the department that could be contacted to sit down and 
address this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much for the 
question. And certainly I think what I want to also stress from 
our perspective is that obviously common sense is needed in 
whole regard. And the most amazing thing that we have found 
out is that industry is now is starting to come forward and 
saying look, listen; we sold the products 20, 30 years ago, and 
we feel like we want to be part of the solution. So CPI, which is 
the Canadian Petroleum Institute, and I believe Federated Co-op 
are some of the leaders that have come out of the woodwork in 
saying, look, listen, we all created this particular problem. It’s 
our products that . . . you know, may not be in some instances 
but they want to be leaders in this regard. 
 
And a lot of communities are also saying, look, we want these 
sites cleaned up because they could threaten our water supply. 
And certainly you look at other of the environmental groups 
that are coming forward and saying, look what happened 20, 30 
years ago; we’ve got to clean that up. And certainly from our 
perspective, we realize that. 
 
So I believe we’re taking a common sense approach. This is not 
us hunting down people that may have passed away 10, 15 
years ago or hunting down somebody that was responsible in 
their activity. What we want to do is try and find as many 
players as we can to resolve the mistakes and issues in the 
non-knowledge, I guess I can say, the lack of knowledge around 
some of the dangers that these abandoned service stations could 
really actually do to the environment. 
 
So the common sense approach that we’re taking is that we’re 
looking at following the leadership of people that are involved 
with the industry, the communities, the environmental groups 
saying, look, we need to address this. We’re going to continue 
moving forward in this direction. We’re doing our part as well, 
and we’re all doing it under the premise of co-operation. So we 
are taking a practical, common sense approach, a prudent 
approach, to try and resolve the matter. 
 
And we look at all the 400-plus sites we’ve had through the 
province, cleaned up 110, and I can tell you now there’s 110 
service stations that were abandoned that were making some 
dramatic problems for the area. Well they are now cleaned up. 
And you see some of the knowledge that we’ve gained from 
that and some of the current practices. History can teach us a lot 
of lessons. So I guess from our perspective, we have taken a 
common sense approach. We’ll continue moving down that 
path. 
 

And for any community group or mayor or reeve or people that 
might want to get active with a particular file and have a 
concern, they can call the environmental protection branch. The 
number there is 787-6178. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess 
that’s what we’re asking is basically the common sense and 
working together with. And I’ll pass this information on, and 
hopefully it’s an . . . as a result of part of our discussion tonight, 
we might be able to arrive at a resolve on that particular case. 
And no doubt there’ll be other cases too. And I think, Mr. 
Minister, if we do take a common sense approach and work 
together with, we can accomplish a lot more and address these 
sites. 
 
I’d like to move on to another area, Mr. Minister, and it’s 
regarding grazing. And in this case it’s Moose Mountain 
Provincial Park as it’s an area, it’s . . . Well it’s not in my 
constituency any more, but certainly a number of producers in 
the area have grazed their livestock in the park for a number of 
years. And over the years, in the last few years there’s been 
some concerns that there’s going to be a major cutback. 
 
But one of the issues that was raised this year, and I know I’ve 
talked with officials before, officials in the past, and with 
department . . . with Environment ministers, and we have a 
grazing association down around the park that, where the 
members have worked very diligently to come up with some 
common sense grazing programs and ideas whereby they utilize 
and use the park properly and make sure that it’s not overgrazed 
in one area and not in another area. And the other thing is they 
police themselves as well. Because they realize if one 
individual is not obeying the rules, then it all comes back to 
haunt them. 
 
And the concern right now, Mr. Minister, is there seems to be a 
sense of a lack of understanding with . . . I don’t know if we 
have a new official down at the park. But my understanding 
was that the grazing association had suggested when cattle 
come in that they be brought in at different locations so that 
they’re dispersed through the park. So that you get just a nice 
equal access to the park and grazing all over and there’s a bit of 
grazing rather than overgrazing. 
 
And the impression that I was left with is that the new director 
wants all the livestock to come in one area. And I’m not that 
familiar; I wasn’t able to get all the . . . as much information as 
I’d like. 
 
But I’m wondering if park policy has changed or if we’re just 
not making sure we’re communicating and that when directors 
change they have a sound understanding of what a grazing 
policy is in a particular park. It may vary from one park to the 
other. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Most of the questions that we’ve answered on these occasions, 
whether it’s grazing or certainly issues on the abandoned mine, 
or abandoned service station cleanup and some of the rules, 
we’ve certainly gone through some of these questions and 
answers through various estimates, but we’ll continue moving 
forward some of the answers. It may sound like a broken record 
here but I’ll continue moving forward. 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

In reference to the grazing issue at the Moose Mountain park, 
you’ll be pleased to know that we’ve sent one of our officers in 
there, by the name of Greg Johnson. And Mr. Johnson met with 
the executive membership of the Moose Mountain grazers 
association. I believe the executive there that was Bob Brickley, 
and they certainly were talking about the access point for 
grazing. 
 
There’s a misunderstanding on the three locations that was to be 
considered. We can now tell you that there’s going to be a 
second meeting within the next several weeks to resolve the 
matter. There’s a few issues of the access point for grazing. 
There’s also the issue about the monitoring of how many 
animals are in a given area because that’s also very important as 
part of our vegetation management techniques. 
 
But I’m very confident that Mr. Johnson and Mr. Brickley and 
the association can come up with a successful resolution to the 
problem that they had, and we’ll certainly encourage them to 
seek that happy medium so that the problem would go away. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I thank you for that and 
I know that the association down there has worked very, very 
diligently with managers through the years. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, to suggest that because you’ve answered 
somebody else’s grazing question this one isn’t important is not 
really forthcoming, because we’ve talked about grazing, 
because we’ve talked about oil sites . . . one of my other 
colleagues has. 
 
Some of your officials were here back a number of years ago 
and they sat for hours, not just a few minutes at a time, in 
estimates. Now some of the new . . . the deputy minister hasn’t 
been here in estimates, wasn’t back in the late ’80s, I know that. 
So we can get into some significant debate if you’d like to get 
into an extended debate on the issue. 
 
But at the same time, Mr. Minister, what we’ve attempted to do, 
and I appreciate the fact that back then and even through the 
past number of years we’ve had officials have begun to really 
recognize the importance of working together with groups and 
associations. It’s better to build bonds that work rather than 
confrontational modes. 
 
And unfortunately, you and your department sometimes don’t 
always have control over who you put out in the field. Different 
people have different mentalities when it comes to dealing with 
the public. So it takes . . . And I guess that’s why the questions 
come to me and then I’m talking to you and we’re trying to 
resolve that, so I appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to address a couple of questions — I 
know a colleague is just itching to get in on some debate as well 
— but regarding the SARRC (Saskatchewan Association for 
Resource Recovery Corporation) program, how much money is 
collected through the environmental tax on bottles and cans and 
what have you? And how much money is actually put in to the 
recycle . . . back into the SARCAN program? And have we 
begun to include other than voluntarily bringing our milk 
containers forward, are we . . . have we a program that 
addresses that to encourage more people to bring their milk, 
recycle their milk containers? 

(19:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would point out that the environmental handling charge, the 
revenue collected 2002-2003, $12,291,505.26; contractual 
payment to SARCAN, $9,259,230. It’s an overall beverage 
container recovery rate is 88.79 per cent which is a very 
impressive rate. And again this is in reference to the 
environmental handling charge. And certainly I want to 
commend SARCAN for doing a tremendous job in this regard. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials tonight. I do have quite a few 
questions to ask but I’d like to start with questioning and it 
circles around critical habitat wildlife land. 
 
And my line of questioning starts with some years ago back in 
1995. The Hon. Lorne Scott, who was the minister of 
Environment at that time, or SERM at that time, I guess, 
brought in an Act that deemed certain lands critical habitat 
wildlife land. 
 
That land was supposed to be in perpetuity for the preservation 
of wildlife and environment, and whatever have you. And the 
Wildlife Federation was also in favour of that and many people, 
active hunters, whatever, were also very favourable in fact that 
you did that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, how much land to date is still deemed 
critical habitat wildlife land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I think some of the wildlife habitat lands that you make 
reference to is that certainly some of the leadership efforts of 
Minister Scott are still being felt today within SERM. There’s 
no question that he’s moved the yardsticks on many fronts . . . 
(inaudible) . . . or in this instance the habitat lands, so we 
certainly want to publicly recognize him for his contribution 
and point out that his contribution during his tenure as minister 
we felt positively for many, many years. 
 
When Minister Scott began that process, we were at 3.4 million 
acres of land. We’ll continue remaining roughly in that same 
area. We are always constantly adjusting our volume of land 
that we’ve set aside. There’s also exchanges, there’s also 
identification of new lands. 
 
So I can report that after a number of years after some of his 
work, that the amount that we’re at is roughly the same, and to 
point out that it is not legislatively required to do so; we’re 
doing this under a spirit and the intent to try and protect lands. 
So we were very cognizant of some of his earlier work. And 
you want to stay around that 3.5, 3.4 to 3.5 range to make sure 
that we follow through with some of his commitments. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the answer. To 
date, has there been any land deemed critical habitat wildlife 
land that has been sold? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well I can certainly advise the member 
that over the last . . . Again he made reference to 1995, and I 
believe since 1995 some of the earlier work of Minister Scott, 
roughly 97,000 acres have been withdrawn from The Wildlife 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

 

Habitat Protection Act. And the 97,000 acres of land was 
bought for TLE (treaty land entitlement) purposes in which 
some of the negotiators for the TLE folks . . . There’s capital 
improvements made on this wildlife habitat protection land and 
there’s some capital dollars spent by the lessees. So in the 
transfer from the lessees to TLE lands there was costs 
associated with that. 
 
So we took care of the lessees and then of course the land 
became TLE land and the TLE land had management 
agreements which many of the Indian bands want to continue to 
retain the wildlife habitat lands in their natural state. So it’s 
really a good transition from a lessee to a TLE band in the sense 
that the wildlife habitat protection land is recognized by both 
those groups and the transition has been minimal. 
 
We continue looking at ways to keep the 3.4, $3.5 million 
range. We’ll access more land, and we’ll identify more land, 
and we’ll add it on again. Legislatively it’s the spirit and the 
intent behind the wildlife habitat protection land that we want to 
push forward on that front. So overall it’s a good balance, it’s a 
good fit, and so far there’s been very few complaints. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to your 
answer, there has been land that’s been turned over through the 
TLE process, which was deemed critical habitat wildlife land. 
 
I believe under the jurisdiction of the Act that the Hon. Lorne 
Scott had brought out that land was not supposed to be sold or 
transferred. It was supposed to be in perpetuity, stay as and 
deemed critical habitat wildlife land. Nobody could own it or 
buy that land. With your answer you have gone that the fact that 
some of the land has been turned over through the TLE process, 
which raises many, many concerns. 
 
In the area of the RM (rural municipality) of Meeting Lake 
there is a section of land which houses . . . (inaudible) . . . elk 
and that elk was brought in there through a lot of the Witchekan 
Wildlife Federation who at that time paid for all the 
transportation of this elk into that area to establish an area for 
elk where there could be at some time a hunting season. 
 
Now back in the early ’90s there was some hunting seasons on 
that land. Has that land which is in the Meeting Lake RM, 
which is Crown land deemed critical habitat wildlife land, has 
that been turned over to the Mosquito Band? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I don’t have the particulars of that area 
that you spoke of and we’ll certainly take it under advisement 
and get an answer directly to you. 
 
What we have done, as you probably are aware — and I could 
be corrected on these figures but I’m fairly confident in them — 
is that we’re trying to undertake, under a best efforts clause 
under the TLE Agreement, to try and achieve a treaty land 
entitlement settlement from 1 per cent of the land mass in 
Saskatchewan to 2 per cent. It’s from 1 to 2 per cent of the land 
mass under the TLE and we had to undertake as a province 
every reasonable effort and every best effort to try and achieve 
that 1 per cent jump. 
 
So I want to point out some of the things that we have indeed 
sat down with many of the Indian bands on, is to identify lands 

that they wish they could select as TLE. There are time frames 
associated with the TLE process and certainly at the request of 
many Indian bands, they’ve identified lands that may be under 
the critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And what I would 
point out is that TLE sale would be allowed in that instance as 
part of our best efforts to achieve the TLE Agreement that we 
sign as a province. 
 
And so I would point out that one of the other things we do 
when an Indian band selects an area that has some wildlife 
protection Act issues on it is we would ensure that they’ve met 
with some of the stakeholders, pasture operators, landowners, to 
make sure that they are able to co-operate and coordinate in that 
area. 
 
Once it’s selected as a First Nations land, then our influence 
there dramatically decreases. But a lot of these issues, we talk to 
the First Nations band about access and management in the 
continued . . . trying to retain this area in its natural state as 
much as possible. And many Indian bands certainly say yes, 
that is our intent. And we feel that as a partner with the First 
Nations on some of the protection of land and resources and 
wildlife and so on and so forth, it’s something that we want to 
continue building upon. 
 
So I think the people of Saskatchewan could be well served and 
assured that through these agreements that the management of 
lands and the resources and the protection of critical wildlife 
lands, whether they’re under TLE or whether they’re under a 
lessee or whether they’re under Ag and Food or whether they’re 
under SERM or some other program, that all the players and 
partners involved have an understanding and a genuine concern 
of the importance to protect wildlife habitat. And that kind of 
respect and that kind of relationship certainly goes a long ways 
in making sure as many partners are engaged as possible and 
that will pay off dividends for us in the future. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I really 
would appreciate an answer within the next days regarding the 
ownership of that said land in the Meeting Lake RM. And the 
reason I wanted to know that, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, is 
because this land that is under the pretence that Mosquito owns 
it. Now if they don’t own the land, then they can’t get an 
outfitting licence. 
 
Well last year there was an outfitting licence supposedly 
purchased by this band to outfit off that land. Is this land in 
question, does it have an outfitting licence? And did that 
outfitting licence come from the provincial government or 
would it come from the federal government? 
 
The Chair: — Order. I just wanted to remind hon. members, 
and one in particular, that computers are to be operated silently. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I’ll point out that on agricultural leased lands it’s a 
layered approach because the land is basically administered by 
the Department of Agriculture. They would in essence be the 
one that would issue the elk herding permit on that particular 
area, and we would issue the tag because we would be 
concerned about the sustainability of the deer population or the 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

elk population, and of course they would have jurisdiction on 
this leased land. 
 
In the event that it is transferred over to the TLE then it would 
become a federally administered process, and certainly the 
bands, because it’s under the TLE they would have a lot of 
influence as well. 
 
So I would point out that clearly that there’s some good 
collaboration. We monitor what’s going on there. And it is 
without question that the whole notion of getting active and 
involved, the First Nations have often maintained that when it 
comes to issues like elk trading or management of wildlife or 
benefits from resources that they want to be part of the benefits 
and we certainly want to be able to do that. And that’s one of 
the reason why a land base through TLE and protection of the 
environment are things that we always negotiate upon. And so 
far the system has worked quite well. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So in answer to 
that then, the land has not been turned over to the Mosquito 
Band? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again, on this particular instance I 
don’t have the details of the Mosquito Band and the land in 
question, so I won’t be able to tell you about whether the land 
has been transferred to the band or not. And what happens on 
TLE when they identify areas that they would like to purchase 
to fulfill that 1 per cent to 2 per cent of the land mass of 
Saskatchewan, well then they can identify that. And there’s 
other third party stakeholders on a particular piece of land. For 
example if there was an outfitter that was there outfitting, then 
they would negotiate the sale of the outfitting business as well 
as, of course, the area of land for TLE purposes. 
 
There’s always the buyer willing, seller willing scenario under 
the TLE, just to be fair to everybody, and these are all 
negotiated in a timely fashion and moved forward. As I 
mentioned we have a 10-year time frame in which we have to 
move as quickly as we can, and so far the progress has been 
good. And I would further point out that the details on the 
Mosquito Band allocation you’ve asked for, I don’t have them 
in front of me, but I can certainly get them to you as to where 
the process is at and how many acres that they’re after and so 
on and so forth. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With that then, I 
take it that at . . . to the point right now they do not own the 
land. And if that’s the case then how can they obtain an 
outfitting licence to operate off that land if they don’t own it? 
 
Just to give you a background of the story of this land, this land 
was leased by a neighbour out at the farm. His personal land or 
his private land was sold, and with this lease that he held — 
which was in critical habitat wildlife land — he could never, 
ever own it; he could never, ever purchase it because it was 
deemed critical habitat wildlife land. 
 
Now the fact comes if he could not purchase that land — 
because it had to stay critical habitat wildlife land — how in the 
world does a government allow another group of people to own 
that land? And then if they own the land through TLE 
agreements, how can they outfit off that land? 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well as the member knows, again, I 
don’t have all the details of the Mosquito land acquisition under 
TLE and we’ll get that information to you as soon as we can. 
 
But what I would point out is, the first thing is you don’t have 
to own the land to run an outfitter business. Land ownership is 
not necessary to be an outfitter. 
 
What you’re after in that area of course is the allocation of 
animals in a sense of being permitted to hunt six deer or seven 
elk. We would determine from a sustainable argument how 
many animals that person would be able to . . . would be legally 
allowed to harvest. And certainly again, emphasize that point is 
that you don’t have to own the land to run an outfitter business. 
 
And the second thing is, under TLE we have to make our best 
efforts to achieve the 1 to 2 per cent scenario. So as a result of 
that, critical wildlife habitat lands in which we are going to 
make sure we maintain that balance is eligible for TLE 
purposes. Many of the Indian bands have identified some of 
those lands. 
 
And as I mentioned, 97,000 acres have been vetted through the 
TLE process. And to point out that we are now identifying other 
areas to maintain that 4.4, 4.5 . . . sorry, 2.4 to 3.5 million acres 
of land that’s deemed critical wildlife habitat. So that balance 
has always been met. 
 
And again while the TLE settlements are moving forward, the 
interests and the size of the wildlife habitat lands are being 
maintained. So you can see the good balance that’s occurring. 
And again, and I don’t have particular details about the 
Mosquito Band but I can tell you that it is our effort as a 
government to try and ensure that we settle the TLE agreement 
that we’re signatories to. 
 
And this has been a long-awaited process and there’s still a 
long, long ways to go. So we are making every effort to try and 
achieve that. And this is at the insistence of the First Nations. 
They’re really pushing for it which is . . . They should be 
commended and certainly be recognized for that. 
 
So we will certainly undertake, as we are legally allowed to do 
so now, some of the wildlife protection lands be settled under 
TLE designation and that process, of course, takes time. And 
there’s always the issue of buyer willing, seller willing scenario, 
and those discussions and negotiations are always paramount to 
any settlement of TLE lands. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for the 
answer. Does that land, that land in question that the Mosquito 
Band supposedly or not supposedly have as their land through 
the TLE agreement, was there an outfitting licence given to that 
land through the Mosquito Reserve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The obvious answer, I still don’t have 
the particulars of the Mosquito land settlement so I don’t know 
that question. But typically when land is being transferred TLE 
purposes, we sit down with the Indian band in question and we 
ask them for the management of certain lands. We can sign 
agreements with them. Many of them have come forward and 
have signed agreements with us, and we certainly take them at 
their intent and their word. 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

 

As I mentioned before, some of the influence we have over that 
land, once it’s TLE land, is dramatically diminished once the 
settlement is done. But certainly I think the partnership 
approach we’ve had with many Indian bands is that they want 
to see some of the wildlife habitat protected, sustainability of 
the animals in the wildlife, and the resources is there. So they 
clearly advise us that’s what they want to do and we certainly 
take their word for it because it’s important to all of us. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I’ve asked the question as who owns that land, 
whether it is in a TLE process through Mosquito Reserve, and 
you haven’t given me an answer. I’ve asked the question 
regarding an outfitting licence on that said land through 
Mosquito Reserve and I still haven’t got an answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, that land is not very far from my brother’s land 
where we hunt. And we were on that land last year hunting, Mr. 
Minister, and we were chased off there because the Mosquito 
Band owns that land and they have an outfitting licence. But 
you, Mr. Minister, do not know that there is an outfitting 
licence on there. So if your department doesn’t know there’s an 
outfitting licence on that land, who does and who is giving us 
the right information as who owns the outfitting licence on 
there if there is an outfitting licence? Are they on there illegally 
outfitting, or do they have a licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — First of all, again, I want to point out 
that when you ask the questions I’ve said three or four times we 
don’t have the details of this particular land that was settled as 
you’ve said in terms of the TLE purposes. We simply don’t 
have the information here. But what I would point out is in the 
. . . suppose this process of TLE allocation is complete or on its 
way to being complete, and that the Mosquito Indian Band has 
identified this area as an area that they would like to have and 
that the process approved the TLE selection and settlement. 
 
And they settled . . . the lessee, they settled with . . . if there was 
an outfitter on the land before, they settled with that individual. 
And they certainly met with us to talk about the management of 
the land after it becomes First Nations territory. If it becomes 
First Nations territory — if it becomes TLE lands — then the 
Indian bands themselves will issue the outfitting licence 
through their federal connection, in terms of them having the 
jurisdiction on that First Nations land. 
 
So again, I don’t have the details of the Mosquito Band transfer, 
but if they have identified lands through TLE and the process of 
dealing with the lessee is complete, the process of being . . . of 
dealing with any third party interest on that land is complete, 
and the process is seen that the land is being transferred to the 
Mosquito Indian Band, then technically you are correct in the 
sense of saying the Mosquito Indian Band owns the land, then 
they will determine through their own band bylaw who their 
local outfitter would be. 
 
And there’s about 40 bands in the province right now that have 
put in place Indian band bylaws in reference to the whole notion 
of outfitting. And clearly these are First Nations land, so we 
can’t impose to them who can be an outfitter in that area. They 
reserve and retain the right to determine who their band-based 
outfitter is. 
 

So in the case of the Mosquito, I don’t have the details of that 
particular file. But if you’re asking a question, if it is under TLE 
lands and it’s approved, who has the outfitting licence and who 
has the right to issue the outfitting licence, the answer is the 
First Nations on First Nations land have the right to issue an 
outfitter licence, and certainly not SERM. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to 
your answer you just give me — and I understand where you’re 
coming from — if it is under the TLE process, the outfitting 
licence has to come from the federal government. In regards to 
last year, and the current year last year, did your department 
issue an outfitting licence to Mosquito Band? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again as I mentioned, we wouldn’t 
have jurisdiction to issue an outfitting licence on this 
agriculturally leased land; and Agriculture would be the ones 
that would issue the licence. Where we would have influence is 
on the sustainability argument in reference to how many 
animals that particular outfitter could harvest. 
 
The licence, it’s a layered approach. The licence would be 
issued by Ag and Food, and we would determine the amount of 
harvest that that outfitter could take from the sustainability 
argument. And clearly again these are questions you can ask 
more specifically of the Minister of Ag and Food in reference to 
the ag lease lands in which he has jurisdiction on issuing 
outfitting licences. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With that, Mr. 
Minister, I take it that Sask Ag is the one that’s responsible for 
giving out outfitting licences? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — On agriculturally leased land, yes they 
do. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister; I learned 
something tonight. And I definitely will be asking the Minister 
of Ag in regards to outfitting licences if they have an outfitting 
licence on there. 
 
Mr. Minister, a while back when I said that the Witchekan 
Wildlife Federation was responsible for putting a lot of elk into 
that area, was to build up for hunt which would be obtained by 
Saskatchewan hunters. Last year there was a licence in zone 47, 
and there was 50 licences for elk to be issued out, which were. 
And shortly before the season was to begin, somebody 
somewhere somehow determined that there was going to be no 
licences for hunting issued in that area. Was that true? And 
what happened to that area, zone 47, where the elk licences 
were taken away from the hunting people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Certainly from that question, we don’t 
have no knowledge of anybody not issuing 50 elk licence for 
that area. We’ll take your question under advisement. The 
officials that we have here aren’t aware of that particular 
decision. And certainly if you’ll give us the details, we’ll get an 
answer to you very quickly. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s ironic 
that you don’t know what is going on in your department 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

regarding the seasons because in fact Monday morning of that 
season, when the day was first open for hunting season, the 
officials from SERM, from Spiritwood, were down there 
checking for holders of said licences and they were there for 
two days without knowing that there was no season. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Yes, one of the things I think is very 
important here is that, as the member may know, is we have a 
tremendous job within Saskatchewan Environment to balance 
the many interests and demands on the resources and the land 
base of Saskatchewan. And we have many partnerships and 
certainly many processes that we have to go through to ensure 
that as many stakeholders are advised of some of the 
sustainability arguments that we use in terms of conservation 
and taking it easy on the wildlife, and so on and so forth. 
 
And that’s why the question that you presented today is 
confusing. Because what happens when we set seasons, our 
season setting system has us going through committees. And 
the committees, you know, they’ll set up some of these dates 
several months beforehand to determine some of the dates in 
question. 
 
And I’d also point out that if we are aware of a TLE land 
settlement within a specific area we incorporate that into the 
process. 
 
So these things are managed or they’re integrated. There’s 
certainly there’s many stakeholders that we consult with. 
 
And while we’re very proud of our system, we’re just not going 
to say that mistakes and overlaps do occur. But, you know, in 
terms of this particular instance, we’re perplexed as to how this 
thing would be able to work its way through despite the process 
we have in place. 
 
But we’ll undertake to get detailed information as to where that 
particular information that you presented, where that may have 
come from and we’ll advise you accordingly. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I find it 
ironic that your department doesn’t know anything about this. I 
find that really ironic. 
 
In regards to the 50 hunters that had licences there, they were 
only notified just days before the season that they were not 
allowed to hunt because the season was dropped. The season 
was dropped, Mr. Minister, for the simple reason that there was 
an outfitting band, outfitting off that said land that controlled a 
huge number of those said elk. 
 
And it’s ironic that through the efforts of the Wildlife 
Federation, especially Witchekan Wildlife Federation of 
Spiritwood, that put so much money to get elk in there to draw 
a season, and then all of a sudden bingo, some group comes in 
and they have the power over the government to take away the 
hunting right of individuals that paid for licences to hunt elk in 
that area and yet your department doesn’t know anything about 
it. I find this ironic and the people in that area find this ironic; 
and probably the people of Saskatchewan find this ironic. 
 
So my questions today that I have asked of you, I find this 
ironic that I haven’t got an answer. It’s just unbelievable. 

The land in question was first of all given up through a 
landowner that wanted to sell his land and this band wanted that 
said land. And it was deemed critical habitat wildlife land. And 
the Hon. Mr. Lorne Scott went to efforts to put in there that this 
land would never be transferred, would never be sold. And yet 
it’s turned around. 
 
Why is your department doing that to critical habitat wildlife 
land to settle TLE agreements? There’s lots of land around that 
that could be given out. Why is critical habitat wildlife land 
brought into this situation to be allowed to be sold or 
transferred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well the simple answer is that we’re 
going to undertake our best effort to settle TLE claims. We 
made that commitment as a government. We’re going to 
continue moving forward in that regard. 
 
And we’ve mentioned time and time again here, the fact of the 
matter is is we are going from 1 per cent of the land mass of 
Saskatchewan to 2 per cent of the land mass of Saskatchewan 
— from 1 per cent to 2 per cent — in which we have an 
obligation as a province and as a government to settle TLE land 
purposes for TLE land purposes. 
 
We’ll continue undertaking that very important task, and that is 
not to say we’re putting other Saskatchewan people’s interest 
second. Absolutely not. We’ve confirmed and we have affirmed 
today once again that the spirit and intent behind Mr. Scott’s 
work to protect wildlife habitat lands to the tune of 3.4 million 
acres throughout this province . . . and between 3.5 million 
acres of land. We’ll continue moving forward on that front. 
 
So we’re not compromising Saskatchewan people of . . . 
(inaudible) . . . and we’ll continue moving forward with the flag 
that the TLE settlement that we have undertaken as a province 
and as a government will be achieved. We’ll undertake our best 
practices to make sure that happens. 
 
And I think it’s important that we become abundantly clear in 
this Assembly that we believe, including you, sir, that you 
believe that TLE purposes and TLE land issues and the shores 
of that land should be settled. 
 
And I think when you can be abundantly clear that you believe 
as I believe that the First Nations people in this province have a 
right to participate in the economy associated with lands and 
resources, and I believe as you should believe that the First 
Nations will take care of the land and the resources on that land 
as adequately and as professionally and certainly as committed 
as much as they can, as the rest of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s the purpose that we’ve allowed wildlife habitat 
protection lands to be part of the TLE process. And once 
they’re under TLE purposes, once they’re under a band-owned 
scenario, then we have every confidence that that band will do 
the right thing to manage the resources and to manage the 
wildlife. 
 
Now what I’d like you to do if you can is to stand up and say, as 
a party and as a member of this Assembly, you support the TLE 
settlement that we’ve been working towards. You support the 
notion that the First Nations people should be a part of the 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

 

economy associated with land and resources. That you support 
the notion that the First Nations are responsible citizens of 
Saskatchewan when it comes to management of that land and 
respect for the environment and certainly maintaining a healthy, 
a healthy animal count and making sure that the wildlife are 
taken of. On this side of the Assembly, we believe that. 
 
And the responsible, prudent thing to do is to settle a 
long-standing TLE issue and going from 1 per cent the land 
mass to 2 per cent. 
 
And then we have settlement of wildlife habitat protection 
lands. And we say we’ll exchange that land for other land. So 
the spirit and intent that you’re talking about is not 
compromised. And that doesn’t seem to be good enough for 
you, sir. 
 
And that’s why I say to you today, shame on you for that 
position that you’re taking because that’s not responsible to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And that we make every effort on this 
side of the House to find a compromise for all of our residents. 
And what you’re trying to find is the problem. And that’s the 
difference between this side and that side. This side we find 
solutions; that side you find compromises that hurt people. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank, Mr. Minister, for your rant. It 
was very good. I would like to inform you . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — . . . that the real person sitting in the chair 
that you’re occupying now, the Premier, when he decides to call 
an election and you become members on this side, you will 
have all the ample time you want to ask questions of us as 
government. 
 
In regards to critical habitat wildlife land, Mr. Minister, you 
said that through the TLE process, that’s the way you want to 
go — to give First Nations the chance to purchase TLE land . . . 
or, pardon me, not TLE land, critical habitat wildlife land. 
 
The question I want to ask you now, Mr. Minister: can the 
member from Rosthern or the member from Indian Head or 
myself purchase critical habitat wildlife land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would point out again that it’s very, very important for us to 
stress that one of the reasons that we’re working towards 
settling the TLE lands is to give it our best efforts as a province 
to achieve that 1 per cent to 2 per cent, and the very clear 
answer here is we’re going from 1 per cent to 2 per cent. 
 
And much of the land that we’re talking about is occupied land; 
people that have settled this great province for many, many 
years; families that have owned land through this province for 
many, many, many years, many generations. Much of that land 
is occupied. 
 
And the First Nations need to find the TLE lands, the 
entitlement that they’re allowed, and we as a government have 
got to be able to try and accommodate that and work with the 
First Nations to assert that they have a right to some of the 
benefits associated with lands and resources in this province. 

And we believe that wholeheartedly, as the majority of 
Saskatchewan people believe that. 
 
So where do we go as a province? We go to areas that aren’t 
occupied or areas that are leased or areas that don’t have any 
encumbrances on that land, and many times that’s difficult to 
find but we still have to make the effort to try and find that. And 
this is why the provision that we made . . . the provision we 
made on wildlife habitat protection land would be available for 
TLE purposes to accommodate that 1 per cent to 2 per cent. 
 
And when I was going to school, getting 98 per cent on a 
spelling test was pretty impressive. Ninety-eight per cent of 
land right now in Saskatchewan is non-First Nations owned. 
 
So I would say today, I would say today that I think it’s 
incumbent upon us to not find problems, but find solutions in 
which we could settle First Nations TLE claims. I think it’s 
incumbent upon us to try and find that. A responsible 
government would do that without compromising the rest of the 
province, and trying to find that happy medium. And that’s 
why, that is the specific reason why Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Act lands are available for TLE purposes is to get to that 2 per 
cent. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Two per cent. Two per cent. That’s what we’re trying to 
achieve. And I’ll tell you, when we talk about fairness and 
sharing, there is the genuine need on this side to recognize that, 
and the urgency of First Nations talking about fairness and 
sharing. And we’re going from 1 per cent to 2 per cent and 
you’ve got a major problem with that. There is no question, 
there is no question that on this side of the House we will 
undertake every effort to try and achieve a deal in which we’re 
signatories to in reference to TLE. 
 
This is not about divide and conquer. This is about not 
diminishing other people’s needs. This is about recognizing and 
asserting First Nations TLE claims. And we will do everything 
we can to achieve that objective, all the while balancing all of 
Saskatchewan people’s interests. To me I believe that’s 
leadership. And I would suggest to you, sir, that leadership is 
necessary on this particular file. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to 
your answer, it amazes me . . . is every time you stand and 
speak regarding issues dealing with First Nations you have the 
assumption that we are against TLE agreements. And we on this 
side of the House are not. But all we want in the process is that 
there’s equal and . . . fairness on all possibilities regarding TLE 
land. And I have no problem going from 1 per cent to 2 per cent 
as far as TLE. 
 
But in regards to the question I asked previously: if First 
Nations band members are allowed to own TLE or critical 
habitat wildlife land, can the members and my colleagues on 
this side and myself own critical habitat wildlife land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well if you guys believe in the TLE 
purposes as you say you are, why don’t you get up and say one 
of these days, well my dear friends, understand this, is that 
we’re going from 1 per cent to 2 per cent on TLE. 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

And the other question you can ask, you can tell the folks that 
are questioning you about this TLE processes, instead of not 
defending it, not trying to explain it, if you’re part of the 
solution, why don’t you stand up and explain what we’ve been 
explaining for years, is that TLE entitlement is something that’s 
a long-standing issue with Saskatchewan. 
 
We are trying to find some solutions to this. And if you say you 
support it, then don’t say you support it in here and do as your 
leader does — say something in front of the First Nations 
leadership and come here and do the exact opposite. 
 
You do that outside there as well. Do it out in some of the 
travels, in some of the public meetings, in some of the 
correspondence that you write. Explain that treaties are a fact of 
life. Treaty land entitlement is something that we signed many, 
many years to share in the benefits and resources of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If you believe it, explain to the people that you’re sitting with 
that this is part of Saskatchewan. If you believe it, then don’t 
criticize the deals, don’t criticize the TLE settlements we have. 
Embrace the First Nations’ right to share in some of those 
resources. Accept the First Nations’ role in management of the 
wildlife and the resources on that land. And if you can’t lead, at 
least follow and not be critical of the process. That is my lesson. 
 
And when people say to me, well we support this, we support 
this, and I say to you that talk is cheap and action really 
accounts for some of the things that is necessary. So I would 
challenge you today, if you say you support this and your 
colleagues support this, let us not try and find trouble, let us 
find solution. And if you can’t find that solution, then get out of 
the way because we’re going to lead this file, and we’re going 
to make it happen because it’s only the right and the fair thing 
to do. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, thank you. You used the 
words it’s the right thing to do. Is it the right thing to do to be 
fair with everybody in this province or is it the right thing to do 
to be fair with just a certain group? My question was to you, 
can anybody else own critical habitat wildlife land? And you’ve 
alluded to the question. 
 
What makes me say from that answer, Mr. Minister, is that no, 
we cannot own critical habitat wildlife land. And why shouldn’t 
we? Why shouldn’t we? If you want fairness and equality in 
this province, which we on this side of the House stand behind 
that and agree with you, then let’s have an even playing field. 
As the member from Prince Albert’s saying level, well let’s 
have a level and even playing field. But let’s have an even 
playing field. 
 
So my question to you again, Mr. Minister: can we own critical 
habitat wildlife land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well what I think is very, very clear 
here is that as you look to the history of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan embraced many folks from many parts of the 
world to come to Saskatchewan and certainly settle in this great 
province and add to the great mosaic of people that we have in 
the province. 
 

And guess what? At the end of the day 98 per cent of the land, 
as I mentioned to you, in Saskatchewan is owned by non-First 
Nations interests — 98 per cent, 98 per cent. And now you 
come along and you say, can me and the member from 
Rosthern be part of the 2 per cent that’s left over. Like what 
kind of logic is that? 
 
The bottom line here is very clear. Ninety-eight per cent of the 
land mass in Saskatchewan is owned by non-First Nations — 
non-First Nations. We’re trying to get 2 per cent for the First 
Nations — 2 per cent. And you get up in your seat and you say, 
well can I have part of that 2 per cent? That doesn’t make any 
sense at all. That doesn’t make any sense at all. 
 
And the only allocation of land that we have available right now 
is the wildlife habitat protection land and we’re making that 
land available to the First Nations for TLE purposes and you 
say, well no I want some of that land too. Now how does that 
look for Saskatchewan people? 
 
That’s not an issue of fairness. That’s not even close to fairness. 
The whole notion here is you got 2 per cent of the land mass 
you’re trying to achieve. We’re using wildlife habitat protection 
lands to try and accomplish that and you don’t like it. The 
answer I ask is why? Why don’t you like it? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, like 
I told you before, you have all the ample time after the election 
to sit on this side as opposition and ask all the questions you 
want. In regards to the critical habitat wildlife land that I’m 
asking questions about, it also pertains to the Crown land 
leases, which the member from Cypress Hills and myself and 
many other members on this side have asked the minister from 
Ag, and also to the minister if you’ve been regarding Crown 
land leases and where you’re going with TLE agreements with 
that said land. 
 
And I take it from this that the answer is that it’s going to be 
turned over to satisfy TLE process. And all I’m saying to you, 
Mr. Minister of SERM, is that the fair way of doing things? Is 
there fairness in the process that you’re doing? I have no 
problem with the TLE agreements going forward. We said that; 
my leader has also said that. 
 
The process though that you as a government are following is 
the fact that we should go overboard to do that. And all we’re 
asking is fairness in all respects that everybody has equal 
opportunity to this land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Obviously 
we’re going to have to sit here all night and talk about some of 
the problems that that member has with TLE, but I’ll let the 
folks out there judge from their perspective. 
 
I would say this is that it is our effort within SERM to bring the 
many stakeholders to talk about very important items, whether 
it is resource management, wildlife management, exchange of 
land, grazing purposes, TLE settlement. 
 
We will engage as many stakeholders as we can in trying to 
make sure that we share the benefits and the decision making in 
the management of all the lands of Saskatchewan. And we have 
had some great success, Mr. Chairman, great success in 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

 

engaging what we call to a power through partnership. And this 
power through partnership really goes on a premise of each 
stakeholder has an important role to play in the management, 
the resources, and lands throughout Saskatchewan. We will 
continue going down that path and making sure that we hear all 
the stakeholders and we’re fair and we’re open and we’re 
accountable. And we’re going to do all we can to settle some of 
the challenges we have, whether it’s TLE or resource 
management and so on and so forth, by engaging stakeholders 
and being respectful to all the parties involved. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. My other 
members have a few questions. We’re only allowed one 
apparently, so I want to turn it over to my . . . the member from 
Rosthern. 
 
But I would appreciate the information and questions that I’ve 
asked earlier regarding the land in question, regarding Mosquito 
Band and the process that has taken place in regards to 
ownership of that land and if they do have an outfitting licence 
on there, regarding that said land. 
 
I want to thank you for the answers, Mr. Minister, and I will 
turn it over to the member from Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, a 
question relating to some of the cabins at Dore Lake. It’s a 
question that came to me, I think, about three days ago. There’s 
a group of cabins there — a couple of dozen — that have been 
using water from Dore Lake, basically not as potable water, but 
basically as water for their toilets and this sort of thing. And 
SERM apparently has told them that they can’t use that system 
any more, which means they’ll have to haul water in and you 
won’t have changed anything. And I’m wondering why that 
decision was made to cut off that water supply from those cabin 
owners. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
One of the things that’s very important that we undertake and 
that member’s aware that the . . . some of the challenges we 
have with water throughout the province. And we have 
undertaken what we believe is a very aggressive water strategy 
and to ensure that we have not only accountability from some of 
the systems that operate throughout the province, but to make 
sure everybody’s aware of some of the dangers of drinking 
untreated water. 
 
And in the instance of Dore Lake, I’m not familiar with the 
system the member makes reference of, but I would say this, is 
that SERM doesn’t arbitrarily make decisions just to aggravate 
people. There’s always reasons and logic and certainly public 
safety is paramount in some of our operations, that in the event 
that there is a problem with any campground and if there is the 
system in question, Dore Lake, if there’s any problems with that 
system, if it’s there then we obviously will advise people not to 
use it. 
 
There’s a number of reasons why we would advise people not 
to use certain water, whether it’s potable water, whether it’s for 
other purposes like washing up or washing dishes. There’s 
always reasons why we would tell people not to use water. And 
we’ll undertake to find the particulars of the Dore Lake 
situation for that member, and again to reiterate that we don’t 

do certain things for no reasons. If the system there is operating, 
if it’s not operating well, then we’ll find those answers and 
forward the answers to that member. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. The people there are not using 
this as potable water and they’re aware that you could not use 
Dore Lake as potable water because that would be unsafe. And 
as I said, they’re just using it for the washing and the flushing 
aspects, and they’re quite prepared to go ahead and sign off any 
liabilities if that’s what SERM’s going to require. 
 
If you don’t allow them that, you do as an environmental group 
or a government that’s supposed to take care of that, you’re 
taking these people then and forcing them to haul water from all 
over, creating a lot more environmental damage than using the 
water that’s there, using it for those particular purposes, not for 
potable purposes. 
 
So I appreciate the minister’s commitment to look into that. 
And when he gets down to someone that has the answer, I 
would appreciate that they look at that again because the people 
there are quite prepared to work with SERM and see if they can 
work out a system whereby they can do that. They’re not 
looking for potable water; they just want to use that water as 
they have done for years. 
 
At this time I’ll turn it over to the member from Swift Current 
that also has some questions. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. I don’t want to interrupt the minister 
if he wants to comment on what the member for Rosthern was 
saying. But I’ll just quickly ask this question regarding the 
Saskatchewan Landing Park. 
 
There will be a number of constituents from Swift Current who 
have written to the minister, all with similar concerns about 
access to the park, access to the landing. The minister will know 
and the officials will know that it’s really come a long way in 
terms of development of late and there’s more and more interest 
in utilizing the park, not just for campers and golfers and those 
who are interested in the marina, but also for the outdoorsmen 
and people who are interested in that end of things. 
 
So most of . . . All of these letters do revolve around access at 
the landing park and making sure it’s as accessible as possible. 
And the minister has written back to these people and copied us 
on the letters, which we appreciate, and indicated the reasons 
for decisions that have been taken by SERM. 
 
But I wonder if he could undertake to . . . And maybe this has 
already happened. I’ll ask that first. Have the department 
officials, in addition to the letters that have come back from the 
minister, are they looking at this, at the issue generally of access 
to the Saskatchewan Landing? 
 
(20:30) 
 
And would it be possible, if they have been or if they’re 
interested in doing that, to have a meeting, to set up a meeting 
with officials — not just the parks officials at the landing itself, 
but officials even in Regina — to discuss this issue? Because I 
think the users are reasonable, they’re good stewards, they want 
to maintain the landing park as it is and improve it if possible. 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

And I’d ask that, for the minister to comment on that if he 
would. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would point out that, first a response to the question about 
liability, we have to be very careful when we advise people. 
You can give us a waiver and a claim that you won’t sue the 
government, but that . . . it still makes us ultimately liable if we 
advise people to do something that could be a threat to them. So 
that’s always an issue that we have to address. 
 
The second question, to the member from Swift Current, 
absolutely. If you have a group of folks that want to meet with 
us we’re more than willing to meet. We’ll sit down and we’ll 
discuss the issues and the solutions we can find. Obviously the 
directive that we give our officials is that you find those 
solutions. And certainly if they’re good stewards and we are 
able to accommodate their request, we most certainly will. 
 
So I’d like to ask the . . . to thank my officials for coming out, 
and simply reporting progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I move that 
we report progress on the Department of Environment and 
Resource Management — quite a bit of progress as a matter of 
fact — and move to Department of Highways. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce Harvey Brooks, who is on my left, deputy minister of 
the Department of Highways and Transportation. On my right is 
Barry Martin, associate deputy minister, policy and programs 
with the department. Immediately behind me is Don 
Wincherauk, assistant deputy minister of corporate services. 
Fred Antunes director of operations, planning and business 
support is to my left and behind . . . or to my right and behind 
me. 
 
Let’s see. Stu Armstrong, assistant deputy minister, next to Don 
Wincherauk, responsible for operations. And Mike Makowsky. 
Mike is manager of transportation, trade and logistics and he is 
over on my far left there. And Terry Blomme, executive 
director for the southern region is directly behind Don 
Wincherauk. The staff that are with us this evening. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials. A few questions regarding highways 
in the southeast area and some of the major concerns that have 
been brought to my attention. 
 
Firstly, and we discussed last year the southeast transportation 
authority, some of the recommendations. No. 48 Highway from 
the Manitoba border through to Kipling, I think, is one of the 
priorities. 
 

Now if I’m not mistaken, Mr. Minister, I believe there’s 
supposed to be a top put on Highway 48 from the Manitoba 
border right through to No. 8. And it was my understanding 
from our debate last year that you would also maintain some . . . 
or begin some grading from No. 8 west towards Wawota. And 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give us an update as 
to where we are and exactly what will be happening on 
Highway 48 in that location. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — From border to Highway 8 is going to 
be paved this year. The contractor is ready to move in there. 
That’s going to be just over $2 million for that work. From No. 
8 west is on schedule for next year. And overall in your 
constituency this year, about 13.5 million will be spent. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, when you’re saying, when you’re 
talking of $13.5 million, can you give me an idea of where . . . 
I’m anticipating then part of that will be the additional twinning 
that’s taking place on No. 1 between Wolseley and Grenfell. 
There’s also, as I understand, some construction supposed to be 
taking place on 47 North to complete the grade up to Highway 
48. 
 
One of the issues that was just brought to my attention at an 
auction sale this weekend, however, was on the grade just north 
of Corning, that was graded last year, is a real lack of gravel on 
the top of that grade. And I just drove that way. Of course that 
area has been getting some moisture and has been making it get 
very difficult for vehicles to travel down the road with the lack 
of gravel on the top of the grade, especially with the moisture 
we’ve had in the area. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, in regards to 47, will that be a dust-free 
surface? Is there the intention to complete that as a dust-free 
surface in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, the piece of road 
north of Corning where you identified a lack of gravel, we’ve 
also . . . we’re aware of that and have been making 
arrangements with a contractor this week. As soon as the 
contractor can get in there, more gravel will be placed. 
 
With regards to the corridor 47, we’re looking at finishing the 
grading there and then assessing the whole piece and see what 
we do from that point. But really getting it, getting it built up 
structurally sound is our primary emphasis at this point. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I think 
that is certainly important. If the grade isn’t there, you’re not 
going to maintain a dust-free surface. But I think as well we 
need to really certainly give consideration to a dust-free surface 
because of the fact that that artery there, north-south for that 
part of the traffic, there’s a lot of traffic would flow up there. 
 
I just have a letter here received just from a young gentleman 
who went a couple weekends ago. He said: 
 

My girlfriend and I took a weekend to explore some of the 
province we live in and traveled from Weyburn to the south 
central part of the province. We really both enjoyed the 
weekend get away, everything about it but the roads. (And) 
Everywhere we traveled the roads were absolutely pitiful. 

 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

 

And he mentions: 
 

The next time I think . . . (about) travelling . . . 
Saskatchewan . . . (I think we’re just going to) stay home 
and watch a movie. It’s more affordable, less stressful and 
less damaging to the vehicle. 

 
And he again mentions 47. They happen to live at Grenfell and 
of course, Mr. Minister, if you look at the Melville . . . that 
Melville-Yorkton-Melville corridor, depending which way you 
want to head south, to hit a good highway you actually have to 
go 30 miles east to pick up No. 9 or a considerable distance 
west to pick up a good highway. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, we need to be very cognizant if we’re 
talking about tourism and building this province and 
encouraging not only our Saskatchewan residents . . . and as 
this letter indicates the disappointment in the highways. And I 
recognize because of the deterioration of the highways over a 
number of years it’s going to take us a while to catch up on that 
aspect. So I think it’s important that we keep that in mind as to 
how we sell our province. And I know your government has 
been really into a key mode of trying to sell the province at this 
time. 
 
Another question regarding 47, Mr. Minister, and it comes via 
the RM of Wolseley and I know there’s been some debate 
between the RM of Wolseley, the RM of Chester and the RM of 
Elcapo, and that’s that section north from 48 to No. 1. And I 
think we need to make a very legitimate effort to address that 
highway. 
 
And while the financing may not be there at this time to get 
heavily involved in completing grade as well, I noticed the 
discussion has been or entered into with RMs and a lot of the 
traffic is moving on a road that’s called the Brownhill Road. It’s 
about three miles further east of where 47 is today. 
 
One of the problems there however, Mr. Minister . . . And I’ve 
been on that road a fair bit. And there are times especially in the 
day and early evening where as a result of the heavier traffic 
moving on that road because no one wants . . . and then a lot of 
the light traffic because of the condition of 47 as it is today, 
where the dust just sits on there and it becomes very difficult to 
drive. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if it might be possible to at least 
put 47 as it is until the grade can be completed or we can work 
out a corridor or we got a dust-free surface, into a situation 
where light traffic could move on a dust-free, fairly usable 
surface, and so it takes them off of that, where the heavy haul is 
moving, and just makes it a lot safer, especially for tourist 
traffic in the area. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, in terms of that 
particular piece of road and actually we’re dealing with two 
pieces there, 347 and a corresponding road about 3 miles to the 
east. And about four years ago there was opportunity, at that 
point in fact negotiations went on to try and designate the 
second road as a heavy-haul route and at least have one 
designated, and then therefore at that point be able to maintain a 

dust-free surface on 47. 
 
There was no consensus that allowed that to happen and we’ve 
now got a necessary heavy haul on the east road, with feedlot 
and other business in there, and we also have heavy haul that 
continues up 47. And we can’t seem to . . . Working with the 
RMs, there doesn’t seem to be any kind of consensus at this 
point. 
 
So what we’re working for is to try and get agreement there to 
just finish the grade to decide which of these will be the main 
corridors to No. 1, to get the grade completed, and then as I 
mentioned earlier, once we’ve got the corridor finished then we 
can assess the possibilities of making sure that we’ve got some 
dust free. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you. Mr. Minister, I appreciate 
those comments because I’ve been having the same success 
trying to get an understanding with the three RMs. And 
certainly there is somewhat of a difference, differing opinion. 
And I know even the southeast transportation authority has been 
trying to come up with a clearly defined objective in regards to 
that north-south corridor. 
 
And I guess what we would like to see — and what I’d like to 
see as the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) as well, 
and I’m hoping to be able to sit down with the RMs and even 
hopefully the southeast transportation authority — and see if we 
can come up to that consensus. Because I know the travelling 
public are getting frustrated with the condition of the road. And 
of course the finger usually gets pointed at the department and 
then of course at their representative. And so we raise the 
question, then your department tries to respond. 
 
Mr. Minister, having said that, what would be . . . Does the 
department have sort of a long-term goal in addressing the issue 
of 47 and Highway 48? In view of the fact that . . . I realize 
today with the federal government, government coming forward 
with some money to help with the additional twinning — and 
quite frankly I think it’s a pittance when it really comes down to 
it, to the amount of tax dollars that leave the province as far as 
fuel tax dollars — it’s certainly welcome because as you’re 
aware, we talked about in our last election campaign of 
twinning No. 1. And we’re also acknowledging the fact that we 
could speed that process up if the federal government came 
through with the appropriate dollars. And most recently they’ve 
announced some funding which has given you the opportunity 
to move forward a little more aggressively because there’s 
dollars there. 
 
But when twinning is completed, I think, Mr. Minister, with the 
types of roads we have through the province — and we’ve got 
such a vast artery of a transportation network in the province — 
what is your department doing, what’s the Department of 
Highways doing as we look at the long-term approach as to how 
we continue to work to upgrade and improve highways that 
have deteriorated significantly as well as maintaining, so that 
we don’t in the future get ourselves in such a bind again with 
the fact that we’ve got so many roads have deteriorated almost 
at the same time and we just don’t have the resources to 
complete the rebuilding in one day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I appreciate the question that the 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

member asks and also the dilemma that is faced by the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
We look at the history of our relationship with the federal 
government in transportation and we see that they have had a 
tremendous impact. And unfortunately much of that has been 
negative; that unilateral decisions made by the federal 
government have cost our economy in the neighbourhood of 
$300 million a year with the withdrawal of the Crow rate. 
 
That’s only the beginning of the costs because as all rural 
members will well know that it also meant a shift from rail to 
road. We saw amalgamation of grain elevators to terminals. 
And everyone of those moves caused by the federal 
government’s decisions have cost us hundreds of millions of 
dollars. And the damage to our infrastructure has been extreme 
because of those decisions as well. 
 
So if you start from that base and you recognize that the federal 
government has been largely responsible for the dilemma that 
we face as a province, as a people, and as a people who are 
trying to get our transportation system to be up to the best 
standard that we can possibly have in this province, you know 
that the amounts . . . And we’re not just talking about the 
amount that came in through CSIP (Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program) for twinning which is important, but 
we’re also talking about the other amounts that the federal 
government has put into the works. 
 
The Prairie Grain Roads Program, for example which we are 
using to the fullest extent that we possibly can, is still relatively 
a pittance — 106 million over five years — which when you 
look at the hundreds of millions of infrastructure damage and 
how that’s accelerated because, you know, your highways break 
down a little bit, you can’t get to it, they break down severely, 
and those costs just continue to increase. Therefore the amount 
that they’re putting back in is . . . no way corresponds to the 
damage that has been caused by their decisions. 
 
So what we’re going to be working at, what we are working at 
in terms of negotiation is trying to get the federal government to 
acknowledge the costs that were involved in this and to extend 
the Prairie Grain Roads Program so that we can continue to 
build and upgrade. And the member will know that we are 
already moving kilometres, the number of kilometres, every 
year from TMS (thin membrane surface) to paved standard. 
 
And so the more that we can get the federal government to 
acknowledge their accountability for this, to take on some of the 
responsibility, the more we can accelerate our programs. 
 
The CSIP funding for twinning is helpful, but you will also 
probably know that’s all on a 50 cent-dollar basis which 
demands then that we focus for this time frame, now until 2007, 
a lot of the provincial monies on making sure that twinning 
program is completed. Okay, that’s not so bad because the 
twinning is a benefit to the whole of the province, both on 16 
and on No. 1. We hope that it will have benefits for the items 
that you were noting earlier — tourism, as well as for building 
our economy. 
 
But I think primarily when we’re looking at this, we’re looking 
at continuing to press the government for federal funding for a 

national highway system, the Western ministers, the council of 
Western ministers has been pressing for that. All of the 
ministers basically across the nation have been doing that, and 
I’m happy to say that when I went and made our presentation to 
the Standing Committee on Transportation that I was informed 
by their Chair, MP Joe Comuzzi, that the committee is 
unanimous in terms of their support for federal funding for a 
national highway system. 
 
So we have some hope that there will be a ongoing commitment 
to helping us build our highways infrastructure, but what’s 
important is that the dollars come into place and that the dollars 
do not always be set up on a match basis that pushes our focus 
to where the federal government wants it and doesn’t allow us 
to meet the needs and build the infrastructure as we see needs to 
happen in the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, just one other final 
comment before another one of my colleagues enters the debate. 
And certainly I think even if we look at . . . We’ve got this 
debate in agriculture right now and just a government, as I 
mentioned with Environment, just seems a total lack of 
knowledge of the industry out here. 
 
And we’ve had the argument about the split and possibly even a 
60/40 split on highways, if we could guarantee that every year, 
it might be something we haven’t had in the past, we’d almost 
take it for lack of what we’ve had to deal with. And I’m not just 
talking twinning. You talked about the transportation aspect and 
some of those had that heavy haul. If we had some of that share 
as a result of the shift to the heavy traffic, it certainly would 
help us address a lot of our secondary roads as well. So 
hopefully down the road, we can . . . the federal government 
will begin to recognize some of those problems and will realize 
that it’s not just a matter of a main artery through the province, 
but there are other aspects that need to be dealt with as well. 
 
One further question before other members get in. In regards to 
the twinning of No. 1, some of the communities have raised the 
issue of allowing No. 1 to be slowed and moved through, for 
example the community of Moosomin, just use the same artery 
that’s through there. And I know we argue the safety issue. 
 
Just recently we were to Calgary, and we’re quite well aware of 
the fact that while Swift Current, the speed limits are fairly, 
pretty well all highway speed through that main artery that goes 
through. But as soon as you hit Medicine Hat, you’re down to 
80; you’re down to 50; you’re down to 40. And then you’re 
back up to 80 and then down to 50. And even with Strathmore. 
So there are locations where No. 1 has continued to go through 
communities. And in the case of a community like Moosomin, 
you’ve got basically one kilometre you would be slowing that 
traffic down. 
 
And I know the argument has been the safety factor. But has the 
department entered in any discussions with communities like 
Moosomin and Whitewood in regards to where the proposed 
highway would be going and looked at avenues that could be 
explored as to how we address the disruption it may have for 
businesses along those routes? 
 
(21:00) 
 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think very clear from discussions 
that we have just had here, but also from past experience, that 
the department really does spend a lot of time meeting with 
people in communities, talking with them about what their 
needs are. Now of course safety is really of highest priority to 
us, but also high on the priority list is the life of the community, 
is the economic development that’s possible there, and all of 
that is what goes on in the discussion. 
 
We also try and take into account the experience of other 
communities and that would . . . I mean I would look at Indian 
Head as an example where they have reflected on the decisions 
that were made there and think that what was done was good 
for them as a community. 
 
When we look at many of these communities that have the 
experience of the traffic flowing through them, it’s good for the 
first couple of years when you’ve got that highway just put in 
there, but then comes the time when it’s maybe not quite as 
desirable and then the discussion starts about the 10 million, 20 
million, $50 million bypass that you have to construct because 
there’s just too much rolling through the community, the roads 
are damaged by these heavy vehicles moving in, stopping, 
moving on again. 
 
So there’s a variety of different things that come into play in 
terms of the discussion, but I can assure you that the department 
does its utmost to listen to and to respond to the needs of the 
communities and to try and make sure that these . . . that our 
highways that we’re investing heavily in are built safely and are 
built with all of those other factors in mind. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, 
and to the minister. A couple of questions, if I may, on some 
projects in the Swift Current constituency. The first one has to 
do with the Skyline Road north of Swift Current. We’ve asked 
about this on a couple of occasions. 
 
That road just north of Swift Current I think is becoming busier 
and busier. It’s an east-west road that feeds onto No. 4 and I 
believe it would be in the responsibility of the RM. But because 
of how busy that turnoff is getting . . . If you’re familiar with 
Highway 4 north of Swift Current you’ll know that except for 
the recent capital construction immediately north of Swift 
Current, it really does narrow significantly. So there are really 
no shoulders. And that is a . . . That road, the Skyline Road, is 
becoming increasingly busy. And when traffic is turning on to 
that Skyline Road it can cause . . . it causes some pretty tense 
moments on the highway and can cause some significant 
backups. 
 
Now I think in previous estimates the minister has indicated, 
with the help of officials, that the department has that as an 
item. And they’ve been prioritizing that item for the system that 
they use. The specific request is for the shoulder there to be 
widened. It’s not a huge request. It’s just a bit of a build out that 
would accommodate on that west lane, at least, the ability to 
turn on to Skyline Road. 
 
So I’m wondering if the minister could please update members 
of the committee as to the department’s intention with that 
important improvement. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — For this year, Member, the intersection 
areas and widening program is not on schedule. It will be 
reviewed annually and put into the works as a possible. If we 
have resurfacing going on there it would certainly be higher on 
the potential, not only for the possibility of doing the shoulders 
but actually for doing a broader intersection treatment. 
 
And along with that will be monitoring of the traffic counts in 
the area to see what kind of a build would be warranted there. 
I’m told also that in terms of the construction widening . . . or 
paving shoulders, is widening the shoulders a little bit is not 
necessarily a cheap fix. That can be relatively costly. But 
certainly that would be looked at if there was resurfacing 
happening right in the area because it would make it a little 
more economical having a contractor in there at the time. 
 
So the short answer is, nothing on tap for this year but it will be 
continued to be reviewed. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Minister, what is the cost of that turning lane 
project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I’m sorry we don’t have the details, 
but I will get those details for you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But the costing for the 
project has been done by the officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I’m just saying, Member, that we 
don’t have the details with us here tonight but I will get those to 
you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, thank you. I’d appreciate that, Mr. 
Minister, and I have another question. And just before I go onto 
it I would say that you know, just as an observer and someone 
who travels the highway a lot, that turning lane is increasingly 
becoming important and the request comes not only from 
residents on there but a very active Hutterite colony, the Swift 
Current colony, as well that utilizes that road significantly. 
 
And I guess I’d be very interested to find out what the costing 
for that particular project is. And we can revisit it again after 
that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I also have a question for 
the minister and the officials about another issue we’ve raised 
several times before and it has to do with the highway just south 
of the Saskatchewan Landing bridge that goes up what is a very 
dangerous hill in spring and the fall and frankly all year long 
with large trucks. But particularly in the spring and the fall 
when farm equipment is using that particular road, it can be . . . 
the traffic slows down there significantly as you can imagine 
because of the grade and because of a very sharp curve. 
 
And so the RMs and those who live at Saskatchewan Landing 
on a permanent basis now at the Sandy Ridge Cottage 
Development and the town of Stewart Valley and others in the 
constituency have written to me and to the ministers, yourself I 
believe, or at least previous ministers, asking about the 
government’s intention with respect to that particular highway, 
what the options might be, some sort of an emergency provision 
if that’s possible there in terms of vehicles being able to pass, or 
perhaps use an emergency lane if they’re having troubles on the 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

grade, or any provisions at all that could help with the safety of 
motorists, truckers, farmers who often have to use that very 
steeply graded and sharp curved piece of No. 4 Highway. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I know that there has been significant 
correspondence with the member from Swift Current and some 
other members around this particular issue. And it has been 
examined by the department to determine whether some 
treatment there is warranted. And at this point given the 
demands of the road, the costs of doing the work, it would not 
be warranted. 
 
And secondly, the other thing . . . The member has referred to 
doing a kind of possibly emergency or short fix. And I believe 
last year when the question was raised it was explained that this 
is also on the riverbanks. It’s very difficult to build and very 
expensive because a lot of that area is slide prone when you’re 
constructing there. 
 
And so in terms of hope for where we might go in the future on 
that, I would just reaffirm — as I said to the Leader of the 
Opposition I think last week — that when we go in to resurface 
there, when you’ve got crews in place, then we’ll look at the 
warrant with the change in cost because the crews are in place. 
And we will determine at that point whether or not it can go 
ahead. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees, and good evening to your officials, Mr. Minister. 
Maybe some of the comments that I heard earlier will partially 
answer a couple of questions that I had for things in my 
constituency, primarily Highway No. 16. You’ve talked quite a 
lot about the construction program for Highways No. 1 and No. 
16, particularly with a lot of federal money coming in and a 
new interest in trying to accelerate that program. 
 
A couple of questions. How does the traffic count on the 
Lloydminster-North Battleford section of Highway 16 compare 
to other areas of the province, particularly No. 1, and also with 
regards to heavy haul? I don’t know if you do a count of the 
kinds of traffic, because that’s quite important there and I think 
that’s important. 
 
The other one, the other question is: I haven’t seen any activity 
there and I’m not sure if there’s been a contract awarded yet on 
any portion of that Highway No. 16 between . . . west of 
Battleford and Maidstone. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I’ll start first, to the member 
from Lloydminster, with the traffic counts. And that is that 
between Maidstone and Lloydminster we find the heaviest 
count on 16 and that’s why that section was done first. 
 
The remaining section between Maidstone and Battleford is 
very, very close to what the west side and the east side of No. 1 
are in terms of traffic count. But when we get into commercial 
truck, you see some significant difference there. When you get 
up between Maidstone and Lloydminster, you’re looking at an 
average daily traffic count of fifty-two sixty with about a little 
less than 21 per cent commercial truck. 
 

But when you look down at No. 1, you’re looking at average 
annual daily traffic of forty-one eighty, but your commercial 
truck is up to 32.5. And on the east side you’re looking at 
average annual daily of 3,070 but your commercial truck is up 
to about 42.5. So you can see the commercial trucking is 
heavier on those No. 1 routes. 
 
Now the second part of the question you were asking is what 
about the work between Battleford and Maidstone? And right 
now the environmental work is being done. We’re preparing for 
the contracts, but that work has to be done and then the 
contracts will be tendered. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So that will . . . 
the work will be . . . Contracts will be awarded I assume this 
year and work will begin. I don’t know if it’s been decided 
whether it would begin at the east end of that area or the west. 
And if it starts at the west, have you had any . . . is there a 
decision by your department as to whether the highway will go 
through Maidstone, around Maidstone? I heard your comments 
regarding that same question from the member from Moosomin. 
 
But my office has been flooded with a lot of calls from those 
constituents; I think your office and your officials’ office as 
well. And I’m wondering if there has been a decision as to what 
to do there. And if that’s the case, is that where the highway . . . 
the first contracting will be done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With regard to — I’ll start with 
Maidstone — with regard to the community there were 
extensive discussions with the community and within the 
community and a variety of viewpoints. But we now have 
written approval to go around the community that comes both 
from the community itself, the officials in the community, and 
from the RM. So that is the plan there. 
 
And the work that we’re anticipating for this season would be 
12 kilometres between Maidstone and east of Delmas, and just 
over 12 kilometres from the end of the four-lane west of The 
Battlefords to about 5 kilometres east of Delmas. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It will be a very 
exciting day to try and get that four-lane highway. There’s been 
considerable angst in that stretch considering the danger. But 
the road surfacing that was done in the last I believe two years, 
resurfacing of the existing lane, has considerably improved the 
safety because of the rutting in that road. So that I should 
acknowledge as much appreciated. 
 
My final question is with regards to the entrance of Highway 16 
into the city of Lloydminster itself. You’ve received I’m sure 
several pieces of correspondence from the city about the section 
from the city limits to the border. Also questions about the 
bypass that may be anticipated around, I think around the south 
side of Lloydminster. 
 
So the question would be: what is planned, if there is anything 
planned, from the east side of the city limits, through the city 
itself to the border to match up with the Alberta section of the 
highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The Department of Highways for 
Saskatchewan, Alberta Transport, the community, and I believe 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

 

the RMs south have all agreed on the proposed south bypass, 
but that’s long term. We’re looking somewhere 20 years down 
the road. But basically the concept has been approved and in the 
meantime we will continue to use No. 16 through the 
community. And as far as any change to the entrance into the 
community, not at this point. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, to 
you and your officials, thank you for this opportunity to talk 
about Highways and Transportation related issues. I know it’s 
not common for members of the opposition to start their period 
of questioning with a compliment, but I would like to make an 
exception to that rule tonight. 
 
I had the pleasure of driving the newly constructed road from 
the community of Gull Lake south on No. 37 to the river hill, 
and I would have to say without question, having driven many 
miles of road in this province over the last number of years, 
that’s the finest stretch of road in the entire province. And I’d 
like to offer you that compliment and thank you. And my 
constituents are grateful too, but they think I’ve done a 
wonderful job of representing their needs so I’ll take a little bit 
of credit, if I can, on that one. 
 
But having driven that road so frequently and knowing that it is, 
you know, a fine piece of work, I was wondering if the minister 
would detail for us what it is that the department specified for 
that particular piece of road and why the surface seems so much 
better in terms of quality than some of the other more recent 
paving projects that we’ve seen around the province. Could you 
give us some indication of what the specifications for that road 
are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, first of all, Mr. Chair, I would 
like to say now after that compliment by the member from 
Cypress Hills that now I remember why I liked you as critic for 
Department of Highways and Transportation. 
 
I appreciate the compliment. I know that the department and 
contractors also appreciate when they get support for the work 
that’s done. But I think it’s important to note that this was built 
to the same standards, same specs that we use when we’re 
building AC (asphalt concrete) pavements, and we’re very 
pleased that it is a good surface and that people in the area will 
have a nice highway to drive on. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the Chair to 
the minister, the driveability of that particular stretch of road 
though seems so much better than other highways that I’ve been 
on recently. And I’m wondering if it might have something to 
do with specifications of the pavement, if there’s any possible 
change in the actual pavement specifications or the way it was 
laid or anything of that nature. And you can address that a little 
later on if you wish. 
 
But there is a quality to that particular piece of road that I 
haven’t noticed elsewhere. And I would like some explanation 
for that. I think that there must be something unique about that 
particular stretch of road. 
 
Let’s move further south on Highway 37 if we may, Mr. 
Minister. I know that the department is currently undertaking 
some work south of Shaunavon on that particular road. And I 

was wondering if you might detail for us, Mr. Minister, the 
schedule, the construction schedule, for No. 37 from Shaunavon 
to Climax, what you plan to do in what stages, and the timetable 
for that particular construction project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Just to the member, Chair, I’d like to 
reaffirm that though we are continually looking for better ways 
to build our highways, the standards used on that particular 
piece were the same standards and specs that we’re using on our 
other AC pavement. So it could come down to, there’s no place 
like home. 
 
The other question that you were asking was regarding 
Shaunavon south on 37. And Shaunavon to the Frenchman 
Valley will be completed and surfacing will be done this 
season. Grading through the valley and the start of the new 
bridge will be tendered soon and worked on this season. And 
paving for that area will be scheduled for next year and the rest 
in future planning. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — There’s several questions that arise out of your 
answer on that particular issue, Mr. Minister. And maybe we 
can pursue it in just a little more detail. 
 
The paving that will be done on the new section from 
Shaunavon to the Frenchman River hill will that be the same 
quality and standard as the pavement we saw put in place 
between Gull Lake and the Swift Current Creek? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — No. The volumes and the traffic there 
would not warrant an AC pavement. That will be a granular 
standard. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Is there also a difference in the load-bearing 
capacity of the two sections of road? I understand that the new 
pavement from Gull Lake south is built to a primary weight. 
Will the capacity of the new constructed piece south of 
Shaunavon also be built to a primary weight? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. There are actually 
differences in the weight that will be handled. The piece down 
to Shaunavon from No. 1 is designed to handle primary weights 
and does. That’s the kind of traffic that’s been running there. 
 
The piece south of Shaunavon is built to granular standard and 
we know that that is able to handle primary weights, but given 
the traffic patterns there, designed for the next 15 years, or 
expectations for approximately the next 15 years would be that 
that would just handle secondary weights. But the design of the 
road is capable of handling primary and a policy decision could 
be made at some time in the future to extend those weights to 
primary. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — If that’s the case, Mr. Minister, will people be 
allowed to access that section of road at a primary weight by 
permit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — This piece of highway will be treated 
as other secondary weight highways throughout the province 
where truckers or companies that are engaged in a trucking 
partnership program will be allowed to haul primary weights, 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2003 

 

will be permitted to. But for others, no, secondary weights will 
be the order of the day. 
 
And I think it’s also important to note that when we’re talking 
about the weight regimes and the trucking partnership 
programs, that we are also in consultation with stakeholders as 
we’re reviewing that whole program and looking at what we’re 
doing around weights, trying to make the best decisions in 
terms of the need. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate your concerns with 
the cost of building roads to a primary weight. And I assume 
that there must be substantial cost differentials, otherwise there 
would be no reason to build to a secondary weight when a 
primary weight wouldn’t be that much more money. So I can 
understand that. 
 
But I guess I’m concerned about the application of that 
restriction in that area for the simple reason that a primary 
weight road built in that stretch right now would allow 
unrestricted growth opportunities in that particular area. 
 
And we’ve got a seed processor and a cleaning plant and 
number of other enterprises that are developing south of 
Shaunavon and the Climax-Frontier area that are limited in their 
growth potential by the restriction to secondary weights. And if 
the primary weight capability is there anyway, why wouldn’t 
we allow full access to those roads at primary weight by those 
industries to allow them the opportunity to grow — not penalize 
them for where they’re at? 
 
I guess the other thing, Mr. Minister, is that No. 37 appears to 
me — and this is maybe a policy area — but it appears to me to 
be a prime candidate for a second, important access route for 
Saskatchewan products into the American market. And if we 
are thinking of expanding our opportunities in the South and the 
Southwest of the USA (United States of America), there 
wouldn’t be any better way to get there, I don’t believe, than 
Highway 37. 
 
It serves a very local purpose. It serves a certainly a long-term 
potential, and we would want to encourage traffic to go down 
there by building it to a primary weight at this point. So I guess 
I’m wondering about the wisdom of restricting it to secondary 
weights when there is growth potential at primary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think the member raises some very 
good points because we certainly are looking at trying to 
encourage economic development and growth throughout the 
province. And we know that throughout the province we’re 
hearing from a variety of different sources that a move to 
primary weights might facilitate the growth in particular areas. 
 
But I think it’s also important to note that in the Southwest we 
probably have the highest sensitivity around moving to primary 
weights. And there are a number of factors involved in that and 
part . . . So what we have been doing, recognizing those 
sensitivities, is that even for the trucking partnerships, those go 
through the area transportation planning committee because 
they’re trying to get the best management of transportation for 
the Southwest that they can. 
 
The other thing that we have to be very sensitive about there is 

that we have a short-line rail and we don’t want to . . . we don’t 
want to compromise the viability of that short-line rail by just 
simply opening up the possibility of primary weights which 
could divert traffic from the short-line rail, reducing its 
potential viability. 
 
So all of these things . . . all these decisions are vetted through 
the area transportation planning committee. We’re trying to be 
sensitive to the feedback that we’re getting from the people in 
the area as well. And so we’ll continue to engage in those 
discussions, to work with our area transportation planning 
committee, and to try and support all of the industry that’s 
there. 
 
And I think the member will acknowledge that the short-line 
certainly is trying to make major contributions to the 
development of the southwest Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate the complexity of the 
issue and I’m fully supportive of the south . . . of the short-line 
railway in the area, but I can’t justify penalizing another group 
of industries and businesses for the sake of the short-line rail. 
The short-line will succeed or fail on its own merits, and I think 
it’s up to them to make sure that they’re competitive. They’ve 
provided very good service. I don’t see any reason why they 
wouldn’t be competitive. They’ve already proven themselves to 
be up to that task. 
 
But the requirement for a primary weight road in that area south 
of Shaunavon is there for the sake of the potential growing oil 
industry. There is a fair oil field in the area just north of 
Frontier. There is probably a potential for quite a bit more 
development in that area. 
 
There is certainly, I believe, a potential for more truck traffic 
heading south into the American market. We already have a 
border crossing there that is restricted for hours of service, but it 
is a border crossing that was built with the anticipation of more 
traffic in that region since the Americans and Canadians went 
together and built a joint facility there. It’s one of the most 
modern facilities in all of Western Canada. It’s jointly operated 
and I think it’s an indication that the Americans would welcome 
more traffic in that area. 
 
So, you know, there’s a potential for increasing economic 
development in the area, certainly increased movement of 
goods, and maybe for the export market having a primary 
weight road in that stretch would make considerable amount, a 
considerable amount of sense, Mr. Minister. 
 
I mean this is a debate you and I can have for a long time and I 
won’t ask for your response again. But I guess I would just urge 
the government and the department to look seriously at 
upgrading that entire route, No. 37, as a primary access for 
Saskatchewan goods into the American market and for goods 
from the southwest part of the province to come back up into 
the central and more northernly reaches of the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I need to go to another issue if I may, and that is 
the Gull Lake maintenance facility. The facility as you know 
was the subject of quite a bit of correspondence between the 
council of the town of Gull Lake and the department, and your 
office, and through my office. And at one point in our 



June 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

 

discussions you mentioned that the ongoing viability of that 
particular maintenance facility was up for review. I’m 
wondering if you could tell us where you are at in that review 
process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well first of all I’ll respond to the 
question around Gull Lake, but I do want to also go back to our 
previous discussion because there are, I think, maybe some 
things that need to be clarified there. 
 
But with regard to the maintenance facility at Gull Lake, it is 
still under review. We are . . . we have committed to meeting 
with the community, there have been meetings with the union, 
there will be further meetings. And so we’re engaged in the 
review and hopefully we’ll find a solution that will be 
satisfactory to everyone. And we’ll look forward to arriving at 
that. 
 
Now to go back to the issue of Highway 37, I just, I want to 
point out that . . . And I may have not made it clear but the 
design and the build of the highway means that it is capable of 
handling primary weights. That’s not so much the issue. 
 
(21:45) 
 
And the issue of viability on the short-line rail is not so much 
that we’re trying to make one business viable and another not, 
but recognizing that if you’ve got a viable short-line rail, that 
takes a significant amount of traffic — heavy traffic — off of 
the roads in that area where there is a great sensitivity to that. 
 
And so we’re continuing to try and make sure that all of the 
traffic in that area is managed, and doing that in coordination 
with the area transportation planning committee and also in 
discussion with the industries in the area. 
 
And I think also you point to something which we’ll look at and 
have continued to look at and that is the ongoing north-south 
relationships and how to enhance some of the ability to move 
goods, services, and people back and forth across the borders. 
And we monitor the traffic flows and also try and anticipate the 
potential as we’re building. So I think we’ll keep that in mind. 
 
That said, I’m told we’re to the end of our time and so I would 
like to thank the member for his questions and the other 
members who have participated this evening. And I would like 
to thank my officials for their work and participation, and I’d 
like to thank the Chair for wonderful work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I’d like to thank you for your wonderful work as 
well and I’d like to move that the committee rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:49. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1749 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1749 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1749 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1752 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1759 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1759 
 General Revenue Fund — Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1760 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1760 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1763 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1764 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1765 


