















































Hansard: April 29, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 759 
 April 29, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition signed by citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
about the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation’s 
announcement that 2003 premiums charged to farmers will 
increase by up to 52 per cent and further. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Dinsmore, 
Lucky Lake, Watson, Rosetown, and Beechy. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
stand today again and read a petition on behalf of people who 
are very frustrated with the high cost of education on property: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause the reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of the citizens of Moose Jaw concerned 
about their lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of 
Moose Jaw. 
 
And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned with the destruction of the province’s 
architectural heritage. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister 
of Highways preserve the old bridges over the North 
Saskatchewan River between Battleford and North 
Battleford. 

Your petitioners come from Battleford and North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition with citizens who are concerned about the 
education portion of the property tax. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause the reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Wadena and Kuroki. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to make the necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Estevan, 
Tribune, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents of the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who are very concerned about the state of 
the highways in our constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highways 13, 35, 18, 28, 6, 34, 
334, and 36 in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency in 
order to prevent injury or loss of life and to prevent the loss 
of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Trossachs, 
Yellow Grass, and Creelman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from residents of rural Saskatchewan 
in my constituency who are extremely concerned about health 
care services. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
Rockglen and Scout Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine concerned 
with health care and in particular a hospital, hospital closures, 
and the current facility in Kindersley. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure that current specialty services are sustained to better 
the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folks from 
Flaxcombe, Kindersley, Hoosier, and Coleville, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition with 
citizens opposed to the premium increases to farmers. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Bladworth, Girvin, and 
Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have yet 
another petition to present on behalf of constituents who are 
concerned with the condition of Highway 22. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
take immediate action and make necessary repairs to 
Highway 22 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey, Fort Qu’Appelle, and Southey. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the premium 
increases to crop insurance. And as in duty bound . . . Or, 
pardon me, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Glenbush, Medstead, Leoville, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning a reversal of government’s position 
on isolated school grants; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 12, 18, 27, 35, 36, and 90. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 33 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister of Government Relations and Aboriginal 
Affairs: how many immigrants, including dependants, were 
admitted to live in Saskatchewan under the Saskatchewan 
immigrant nominee program, formerly the provincial 
nominee program, in the fiscal year 1999-2000? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the years 
2000-2001, 2001-2002, and 2002-2003. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 33 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how much money did the 
Department of Labour give the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour in the year 1999, and for what purpose? 

 
Mr. Speaker, these questions not only are for 1999 but the year 
2000, 2001, 2002. And they’re not only for the Minster of 
Labour, they’re also for the Minister of Learning, the Minister 
of Aboriginal Affairs, the Minister of Government Relations, 
and the Minister of Community Resources and Employment. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

 

shall on day no. 28 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: in 
what country was the software developed by Wascana 
Gaming for use in mega bingo developed; (2) in what 
year’s annual report for SLGA and on what page and under 
what heading were SLGA’s costs associated with the 
development of software and hardware for mega bingo 
listed; (3) what is the Prism project, its mandate, its annual 
budget, and the total cost as of this date; (4) what is the 
Lines B project, its mandate, its annual budget, and total 
cost of this date; (5) what is the licensing division project, 
its mandate, its annual budget, and total cost as of this date; 
and (6) what is the Orion project, its mandate, its annual 
budget, and total cost as of this date? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 33 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: with reference to the 6.8 per 
cent nominal growth in GDP forecast in the 2003-2004 
budget and the related revenue estimates, and utilizing the 
large-scale econometric model with 404 variables and 333 
equations, what would be the revenues generated based on 
the 2.8 per cent nominal GDP growth rate projected by the 
Finance department of the Government of Canada? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also wish to give 
notice that I shall on day no. 33 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister in charge of SaskTel: how much and to 
whom was paid for backhoe services in the North 
Battleford region in fiscal year 2002-2003? 

 
I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Yom haShoah 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, today is Yom haShoah 
V’Gevurah, what we in Saskatchewan have designated as 
Holocaust Memorial Day. 
 
The Hebrew name for this day translates into English as the day 
of catastrophe and strength. Catastrophe because how else can 
you describe the murder of 6 million, including one and a half 
million children, all because they were Jewish? 
 
But Gevurah, or strength, is also part of this day because the 
Jewish people survived the onslaught of the Nazis. And in some 
cases, despite facing overwhelming odds and horrendous 
oppression, Jewish people summoned the strength to resist and 
to fight the Nazis. 
 
Yom haShoah was chosen for the 27th of Nisan in the Jewish 
calendar, the day in 1943 that a remarkable group of Jews rose 
up in the Warsaw Ghetto to fight the concentrated might of the 
Nazis for almost a month. The horrible struggle of the ghetto 
fighters stands as an incredible symbol of resistance. It stands as 

an awesome example of the triumph of the human will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago I was living on Kibbutz Hazorea in 
the state of Israel. I had the honour of participating in memorial 
services on Erev Yom haShoah with people whose entire 
extended families had been murdered by the Nazis. On Yom 
haShoah I stood in silence with the whole of the country as the 
sirens wailed and a moment of silence was observed. 
 
I visited the Ghetto Fighters’ Museum founded by the survivors 
from Warsaw and paid my respects at Yad Vashem, and at each 
of these places I was struck by the immense sadness at the 
almost incomprehensible evidence of the depths of human 
depravity. But I was equally struck by the determination of the 
Jewish people to survive or as Emile Fackenheim put it, to not 
hand Hitler any posthumous victories. 
 
Never again, Mr. Speaker, never again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
is a sombre anniversary and I join with the member from 
Elphinstone in marking April 29 as Holocaust Remembrance 
Day. 
 
It’s been more than 50 years since the end of the Second World 
War and the revelations of the atrocities committed by the Nazi 
regime. Six million persons of predominately Jewish descent 
were murdered over the course of the reign of the Third Reich. 
We shall never forget. 
 
Canada was one of the countries that bravely fought to see the 
liberation of Germany and much of Europe and ensure that this 
sort of thing never occurs again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, family members of mine, whom I met as a boy, 
were survivors of the death camps like Auschwitz. My 
grandmother’s cousin, Hayla, visited Canada when I was 
younger. Her families were professors at the University of 
Warsaw and were among those interned by the Nazis. Mr. 
Speaker, Hayla had a tattoo placed on her arm designating her 
as a number, not a person. Fortunately the war ended before she 
faced death. Her mother, however, was not as fortunate. 
 
Although the anniversary is over 50 years, our world still sees 
incidents of ethnic cleansing and state-sponsored murder. It is 
my hope that Canada will continue to ensure that this type of 
atrocity is eradicated for the good of all humankind. 
 
I ask the members of this Assembly to take some time today to 
reflect upon the events of the Second World War, and of those 
they have known that have survived or did not survive the death 
camps. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Exemplary Corrections Service Honoured 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
to rise in this House and congratulate 40 men and women who 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

have been recognized for career achievements in the provincial 
and federal correctional services. Mr. Speaker, these people 
serve and protect our province and its citizens. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday at a service at Government House, 
Lieutenant Governor Lynda Haverstock and the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety presented these 40 individuals 
with the Corrections Exemplary Service Award. Recipients of 
this award must have demonstrated exemplary conduct and 
displayed excellence and devotion to duty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s recipients that received the Exemplary 
Service medals had at least 20 years of distinguished service 
with the corrections division of Saskatchewan Corrections and 
Public Safety or with the correctional service of Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, these people make important contributions to our 
province and communities. Corrections staff help keep our 
communities safe and deliver effective programming for 
offenders that help them to reintegrate successfully back into 
our communities. 
 
I’m sure all the members of this Assembly will join me in 
thanking and congratulating the recipients of the Corrections 
Exemplary Service Award and their contributions to our 
communities, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Davidson and District Economic Development Board 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to recognize the efforts of the business community in the 
town of Davidson. 
 
Earlier this year the Davidson and District Economic 
Development Board was formed, consisting of members of the 
Davidson Business Association and Davidson town council. 
The mandate of this new community board is to attract new 
business, manufacturing, and new families to Davidson area by 
promoting what the community has to offer, while encouraging 
its citizens to promote the town on an active basis. 
 
The formation of this board represents a major step forward in 
realizing the town of Davidson’s potential towards growing its 
economic base. Davidson location on the four-lane highway, 
No. 11, enhances that potential especially given that Davidson 
has always been considered the halfway point between the 
major centres of Regina and Saskatoon. This would make it the 
ideal location for new manufacturing companies as well as the 
expansion of existing businesses. 
 
The focus on community involvement by promoting the town as 
a great place for new families as well as the overall benefits of 
living in a growing rural community are just some of the ideas 
that the board has developed. 
 
Additional incentives include a business incentive, review the 
development of a new Web site, also new highway signage, and 
an ongoing report of the advantages of rural community living, 
a land and facilities report, a comprehensive information 
package development, a tourism strategy combined with a 

tourism booth, a community welcome group, plus ongoing 
educational programs. 
 
I would like to ask that the members join me in congratulating 
the board’s chairperson, Connie Townsend; secretary, Shelley 
Cross; treasurer, Gary Edom; and many of the other residents 
for extraordinary efforts in making the Davidson and District 
Economic Development Board a reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Theatre Fest 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m pleased to stand today to say a few words about 
the Theatre Fest 2003 held recently at the new E. A. Rawlinson 
Centre of the Arts in Prince Albert. 
 
This was the 70th anniversary of Theatre Saskatchewan’s Full 
Length Play Festival and by all accounts it was a very huge 
success with over 400 people in attendance for each of the 
seven nightly performances. 
 
The Prince Albert Community Players volunteered countless 
hours to ensure the success, as did the Theatre Saskatchewan 
president, Suzanne Malo-Miller of La Loche, and 
vice-president, Larry Schlosser of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, participants in this year’s full-length theatre 
festival were the Prince Albert Community Players, the 
Battlefords Community Players, the Chocolate Moose Theatre, 
the Meadow Lake Community Theatre, the Regina Little 
Theatre Society, the Milestone Prairie Players and the Swift 
Current Little Theatre. 
 
This year’s winning play was The Foursome performed by the 
Swift Current Little Theatre and written by Norm Foster. The 
runner-up to the winner was The Cemetery Club performed by 
the Battlefords Community Players and written by Ivan 
Menchell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members of this Assembly will join 
me in congratulating the prize winners at Theatre Fest 2003, as 
well as all of those who helped to put this great event together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Biggar Volunteer Wins Queen’s Jubilee Medal 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently Biggar 
resident Barbara-Ann de Haan was awarded the Queen 
Elizabeth Golden Jubilee Medal for volunteer work with the 
Canadian Celiac Association. de Haan, programs coordinator 
with Biggar Home Care, received the recognition recently in 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Canadian Celiac Association nominated de Haan for the 
Golden Jubilee Medal for volunteer efforts at both the national 
and local levels. She was awarded this honour in recognition of 
her lead role on the Education Committee of the Canadian 
Celiac Association. de Haan was instrumental in helping 
develop a national standard new information kit for people 
newly diagnosed with the celiac disease. 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

 

As Chair of a national task force for the Canadian Celiac 
Association, de Haan, who also suffers from the disease, was 
instrumental in improving new member resources, education, 
peer counsellors from across Canada. She also helped in 
standardizing chapter teaching materials for the Canadian 
Celiac Association. 
 
de Haan’s sincere commitment to improving the lives of those 
with celiac disease and the valuable contribution she has made 
of her time makes her a worthy recipient of the Golden Jubilee 
Medal. Please join me in congratulating Barbara-Ann de Haan 
for receiving this very worthy award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Company Wins Award 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Cronus 
Technologies Inc., a software development company at 
Innovation Place in Saskatoon, was recently presented with a 
Human Resource Technology Excellence Award at a 
conference in Chicago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the award was given in recognition of the Cronus 
company’s innovative Web-based portal software program 
called cfactor. This program has been used extensively by the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations. Various 
agencies within the province’s health regions use cfactor in a 
secure Web environment to provide management and fiscal 
accountability tools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cronus Technologies, founded by brothers Rod, 
Cary, and Shaun Schuler, has its head office in Saskatoon and 
offices in Calgary and Geneva, and is just one example of the 
competitiveness and excellence of Saskatchewan-based 
companies. 
 
I ask all hon. members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating those associated with the Cronus company on 
their recent achievement. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) has now admitted to losing nearly $8 million on mega 
bingo, without a business plan and without cabinet approval. 
The problem is the people who came up with the $8 million 
figure are the same people who told us $6.2 million just a 
month ago. 
 
Now we’re being asked to trust the same NDP minister who 
gave us the wrong information in the first place. Mr. Speaker, 
how do we know the total cost isn’t more? Why should we trust 
this minister when he’s the one who gave us the wrong figure in 
the first place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I feel 
confident that with the report, the document I tabled yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker — which, by the way, once I made it public I also 
forwarded to the Provincial Auditor, who has been auditing the 
books and the annual reports and the financial statements from 
the beginning of this entire project, Mr. Speaker — nothing’s 
been hidden from the public. 
 
And I understand that member only today corresponded with 
the Provincial Auditor. She will have the responses she’s asked 
for, Mr. Speaker. They will be accurate unless she chooses then 
again to question the auditor as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said that Wascana 
Gaming received the mega bingo contract because they were 
the low bidder. However he has never told us what the amount 
of that bid was. In fact, yesterday’s report suggests that 
Wascana Gaming ultimately received a lot more money than 
they had originally bid on the project. In total, Wascana 
Gaming was paid $1.7 million. 
 
Can the minister tell us, what was Wascana Gaming’s original 
bid to develop the mega bingo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The costs . . . The questions to date have 
focused among costs for development and implementation. The 
officials advised the Crown Corporations Committee of this 
Assembly that the linked bingo software development costs 
were approximately 1.2 for Wascana Gaming — more precisely 
they were 1.3. 
 
Nevertheless, nevertheless it was the Western Canada Lottery 
Corporation who acted on behalf of SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) as their agent to look at the 
request for proposals which I tabled earlier and the member had 
an opportunity to review. There’s nothing hidden here, Mr. 
Speaker. And when it came to the point, Wascana Gaming was 
subsequently asked through the contract, through WCLC 
(Western Canada Lottery Corporation) as well, asked to assess 
the viability of another linked game that the bingo industry was 
proposing, and paid additional money for that and development 
of software, Mr. Speaker. It’s all accounted for and the 
Provincial Auditor will confirm that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps telling us that 
Wascana Gaming won the contract because they were the low 
bidder. But that doesn’t mean much if we do not know how 
much that low bid was. Mr. Speaker, Wascana Gaming is a 
company that has strong ties with the NDP. They received $1.7 
million to work on mega bingo. 
 
To the minister: what was the amount of the original bid on this 
project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, in the business world when 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

there are fees and tenders and contracts entered into, there are 
provisions for any additional work that is done that needs to be 
paid for, Mr. Speaker. That’s in the business world. 
 
When the mega bingo game was shut down, Wascana Gaming 
was asked to help assess the viability of another linked game 
that the bingo industry was proposing. And I can, I can . . . Mr. 
Speaker, for the benefit of the member opposite that obviously 
doesn’t believe anything that’s said in this legislature, I will 
table this document to show the exercise that was gone through 
in order to assess that potential for another linked bingo game. 
 
In addition, as the request for proposal states, Wascana Gaming 
was contracted to develop and deliver both a cash and paper 
management system and a linked bingo game, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the responsibility of the 
Saskatchewan Party as the official opposition is to ask questions 
of this government and to get answers for the people of 
Saskatchewan. But what do we see day after day in this 
legislature? We see a government that is totally unaccountable 
and has total disregard for the taxpayers’ dollars of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I ask the member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
members. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, again I ask the minister 
responsible for Liquor and Gaming: how much was Wascana 
Gaming’s original bid on the mega bingo project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out when 
these questions are raised . . . Well first of all, through Public 
Accounts, through Crown Corporations, the opposition can ask 
all the questions they want, Mr. Speaker. There’s nothing 
hidden. There’s nothing to hide. The reports every year — 
financial reports, statements, annual reports — report on all the 
activities of government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the request for proposal was $1.2 million. With 
the additional work that was done at the request of WCLC, that 
contract to Wascana Gaming was $1.7 million, Mr. Speaker. 
And I just want to point out that after the initial questioning 
from the opposition subsided, I continued to ask questions, Mr. 
Speaker, of my officials, in order that we could answer to this 
House and to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is why the people of 
Saskatchewan do not trust this NDP government. They will not 
give us straight answers. The NDP misled us about SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company). They 
misled us about their Palm Springs venture. They misled us 
about their dealings in Atlanta. They misled us now about mega 
bingo. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is the NDP’s pattern — lose millions of 
dollars and then cover it up. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 
do not trust the NDP’s numbers. That is why today I have 
written the Provincial Auditor asking him to do a special 
investigation into mega bingo; asking him to figure out how 
much the NDP really lost on mega bingo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister support a special investigation 
into mega bingo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I guess the question here, Mr. Speaker, at 
this point, is who misled whom about Palm Springs? 
Nevertheless, the project — the mega bingo project, Mr. 
Speaker — was identified and referenced in several SLGA 
annual reports and the costs for the programs have been 
reflected in SLGA’s financial statements as required. SLGA’s 
officials, Mr. Speaker, have provided information in response to 
questions, various questions, from members opposite. 
 
(14:00) 
 
And those forums, those public forums through our Public 
Accounts and our Crown Corporations Committees, are the 
forum to question each and every official about all the activities 
of any organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out, that member now tells us she’s 
written a letter to the auditor. Well the auditor yesterday 
received a copy of my report that I tabled in this House, and it 
will be up to him to determine who is telling what appropriately 
in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
In February the minister told the media that if Broe industries 
didn’t have its financing in place for its portion of the ethanol 
deal by the end of March, he’d be worried. But by the end of 
March Broe still didn’t have its financing in place, Mr. Speaker. 
Yet the minister claimed things were still on track and the 
construction of the Broe . . . the Belle Plaine project would 
begin in May. 
 
Now it’s the end of April, Mr. Speaker. The minister admits 
that Broe still doesn’t have its financing in place and he said, 
and I quote: 
 

I’m concerned about that. That’s for sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister come clean with the people of 
Saskatchewan? Will he explain why Broe industries is two 
months behind arranging finances to support its end of the 
ethanol deal? And due to the delay, what is the exact date that 
the construction is now expected to take place at Belle Plaine? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well what I 
said and what other ministers before me said well before 
February, Mr. Speaker, was that what we would be most 
concerned about and what we were most concerned about was 
that Sask Party opposition, Mr. Speaker, who kept interfering 
all the way through, causing all kinds of problems, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what we said was our greatest concern. That was our 
biggest concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have ethanol development in areas that they 
represent, but what do they do on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, 
but attack it. This is jobs in rural Saskatchewan, partnering with 
the communities, and working with producers in our areas, Mr. 
Speaker. They should just get on board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP government has presented this deal with Broe industries as 
a public-private partnership and they’ve stated that Broe is 
responsible for financing 60 per cent of the three ethanol plants 
that are part of the package. But in response to a question about 
the financing Broe is trying to arrange for their share of the 
deal, the minister told the media yesterday, and I quote: 
 

We are trying to negotiate the best deal that we possibly 
can negotiate for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Broe is a private company and according to the 
information presented to the public by this NDP government so 
far, Broe is supposed to finance their part of the deal without 
other government assistance. So why is the NDP government 
part of Broe’s financing arrangements? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain this and assure the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers that the NDP government will not be 
helping Broe secure financing by providing Broe with loans or 
equity investment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m not 
sure exactly what perspective that member was asking that 
question from because it was from all over the place. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me say this again and let me be absolutely 
clear, Mr. Speaker, that we will not — I repeat, not — move 
ahead until we feel we have the best deal in place for the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what it sounds like 
they now want. 
 
They want us just to leap into the deal and start construction, 
Mr. Speaker. We will not do that, Mr. Speaker. We’ve laid out 
the rules, Mr. Speaker, and that’s exactly what we’ll do. We’ll 
get the best deal we can possibly get for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, what the Saskatchewan Party 
wants is they want that government to come clean and tell the 
truth for once. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, after the SPUDCO fiasco 
revealed the government mired in deceit and in betrayal for six 
years, this NDP government — and specifically this Premier — 
claimed that he would be forthcoming and accountable with the 
taxpayers about their business deals. Yet we have a new deal 
the NDP has signed with Broe industries to develop three plants 
in Saskatchewan and the NDP government is refusing to come 
clean on the details. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there must have been some initial costs incurred 
by CIC to launch the deal, secure the site, and begin initial work 
on the project, yet there’s absolutely no mention of the ethanol 
deal with Broe in CIC’s annual report which was tabled just this 
week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the minister explain why the ethanol project was not 
mentioned in that report if they’re so accountable and how 
much CIC has already spent on any costs related to the launch 
or the start up of the Belle Plaine plant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I guess 
the reason there’s nothing in there is I drove past there not too 
long ago and I didn’t see anything built there yet, Mr. Speaker. 
So I think when something takes place then it will be reported 
in the annual statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is that the deal said there would be a 
60/40 equity partnership, Mr. Speaker. That stands. We will get 
the best deal that we can for the people of Saskatchewan, for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people across our province are supportive of the 
ethanol industry. They want it to move ahead. But we’re going 
to get the best deal, unlike what it sounds like those members in 
the Sask Party now want us to do — to just jump into the deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, can you 
believe this? Can you believe this? The minister is saying that 
the opposition wants them to jump into a deal that’s not ready 
yet. It’s this government that had the big revival meeting in 
Belle Plaine a few months ago — the deal was done. They 
bused in school kids; the Premier bused in school kids to 
announce this deal. They gave the impression that this deal was 
done, Mr. Speaker. The fact is that the minister is not being 
square with this legislature or the people of the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to that same minister with respect to the 
investment they have made in agdealer.com, we have a few 
more questions. In 2001-2002 the NDP paid $8.1 million for 
agdealer.com. Will the minister tell the legislature how much 
money Ag Dealer has lost in 2001 and 2002, and what was the 
net value of agdealer.com’s assets when they were transferred 
to SaskTel’s subsidiary, DirectWest? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m 
going to ask . . . answer his first question first. Please tell me 
and this Assembly, anybody, what that party would have said if 
we wouldn’t have had a public announcement announcing the 
details of the ethanol deal, Mr. Speaker. Please tell me what 
they would say then. They’d say we were hiding something. 
 
So what do we do? We have a very public announcement, Mr. 
Speaker, outlining the details of the project, exactly what we 
were going to do step by step by step. 
 
Now I’d said yesterday very publicly, Mr. Speaker, that I had 
hoped that financing would be in place by now. It’s not in place 
yet, Mr. Speaker. We’re hopeful and we’re optimistic, Mr. 
Speaker, but we will not get into a deal until we think we have 
the best deal in place for the people of Saskatchewan, for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister tell the 
legislature how much money agdealer.com lost for SaskTel in 
2001-2002, and what was the net value of the assets of 
agdealer.com when it was transferred over to SaskTel’s 
subsidiary, DirectWest? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we disclosed yesterday — 
because we took over ownership of Ag Dealer in 2002 and we 
own 100 per cent of it — and we disclosed yesterday publicly 
exactly what the losses were in 2001, Mr. Speaker. In 2001 that 
company was rolled into DirectWest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this party, the Sask Party, continually criticizes all 
of the investments that we’ve made. Mr. Speaker, they refer to 
and don’t even seem to understand what book value means. Mr. 
Speaker, the value of that company, if we use the model that 
Bell Canada does, if we use the value, the model that Bell 
Canada does, based on revenues of the company, it’s probably 
worth somewhere between 130 and $150 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they would say, don’t get into the deal; don’t get 
into the deal. 
 
We’ve got something that’s worth something for the people of 
Saskatchewan that can provide great service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel paid $8.1 million for 100 
per cent of this company in 2001. Now we know also, Mr. 
Speaker, that the assets of this company were transferred to 
DirectWest in the year under review, in 2002. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question is pretty simple. We want the 
minister to confirm . . . Will the minister confirm that SaskTel 
did pay $8.1 million for agdealer.com but then transferred it — 
transferred the net assets of the company — to DirectWest for a 
grand total of $227,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to 

speak briefly on the issue of disclosure because they say we 
haven’t disclosed the information. Mr. Speaker, I want to read 
to you from the auditor’s report. It says this: 
 

In my opinion, because the accounting principles used to 
prepare these financial statements are inappropriate, these 
combined financial statements do not represent fairly the 
financial position of the government of the province of 
Saskatchewan as at (guess when?) March 31, 1991, and the 
results of its operations and the changes in its financial 
position for the year then ended. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s when they were in government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here’s what the auditor says now. Here’s what the auditor says 
now. He says, about SaskTel: 
 

In our opinion, these consolidated financial statements 
present fairly . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please, members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the Provincial 
Auditor says about SaskTel now. It says: 
 

In our opinion, these consolidated financial statements 
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position 
of the corporation as at December 31, 2002 and the results 
of the operations and its cash flows for the year then ended 
(Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the question was simple. The 
NDP paid 8.1 million for agdealer.com, but they recorded it in 
the consolidated statements of DirectWest . . . They recorded 
the assets now worth $227,000 in two short years. That’s what 
the taxpayers lost, Mr. Speaker, almost $8 million. We 
shouldn’t expect, though, that the minister would answer the 
question, or anyone on that side would. This is the government 
that decided to hold back information from the people in terms 
of SPUDCO and the bingo scandal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s try one more. Let’s try another investment the NDP 
made through SaskTel in a Vancouver-based telco called 
Navigata. In 2001, Mr. Speaker, they bought this particular 
company for 34 and they’ve invested 34 million taxpayer 
dollars. 
 
Will the minister tell us how much money the NDP has lost on 
Navigata since SaskTel bought this Vancouver telco in 2001? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, you know, this is almost 
laughable. On a daily basis they say, you don’t disclose 
anything, and on a daily basis they recite from our documents 
details, details that we have provided for the public of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They say we don’t provide 
information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We provide now, Mr. Speaker, semi-annual reports, Mr. 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

 

Speaker, out of Crown Investments Corporation. We disclose 
through significant transactions, Mr. Speaker, through Crown 
Corporations Committee, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a whole 
host of venues, Mr. Speaker, and avenues where there are, Mr. 
Speaker — is, I should say — information provided about our 
Crowns and subsidiaries to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They couldn’t even ask these questions if we didn’t provide that 
level of detail. And we should and will do more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well then, Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister 
answer the questions? Why won’t he answer any of these 
questions for the House? It shouldn’t shock anybody. This same 
minister, along with the Premier and the former minister of 
SPUDCO, travelled out to Belle Plaine a few months ago and 
left a clear impression with Saskatchewan people that these 
ethanol deals were done. They’re not done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the same government that said they had a public-private 
partnership on SPUDCO, and blew $28 million. Did they have 
a partnership? No, they didn’t. 
 
This is the same government that said, we lost only 6.2 million 
in bingo, when they actually lost $8 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s the same government that wouldn’t give us the facts on 
Retx until the information was dragged out of them. 
 
And now on Navigata, the same tactics are being used by the 
NDP. Mr. Speaker, will the minister please confirm for the 
House that 34 million taxpayers’ dollars have poured into this 
company? What is the status of the investment and how much 
has been lost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, that member attacked me, 
Mr. Speaker, a few short days ago, Mr. Speaker. That member 
stood in this House and launched into a tirade, Mr. Speaker, 
about SaskTel International’s investment in Honolulu, Mr. 
Speaker. Wasn’t even close to the truth, Mr. Speaker, wasn’t 
even close. And today and yesterday, he refers to investments in 
Palm Springs . . . (inaudible) . . . out in the rotunda, Mr. 
Speaker, that there was never any investment in Palm Springs. 
And I’ll say it again publicly — no investment. Well they yell 
from their seats, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when SaskTel first invested in Craig Wireless, it 
was contemplated — I say contemplated — by the parent 
company an investment in Palm Springs. You know what they 
did? They decided that the investment was better in Canada. 
They never did one bit of business. They moved it all back to 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now, Mr. Speaker, earlier last week, earlier last 
week the minister confirmed that taxpayers have taken it on the 

chin . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when the 
minister confirmed for taxpayers that thanks to the NDP’s 
ingenious business acumen, Mr. Speaker, taxpayers had lost 
$85 million in out-of-province investments — when he 
confirmed that — you know what he said, Mr. Speaker? He 
said, well the reason for that is that most of these investments 
are start-up ventures, Mr. Speaker. That’s what he said. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we go through the annual report, we see 
that this investment, Navigata — Navigata — is marked, is 
asterisked in the 2002 annual report as a current start-up 
venture. But, Mr. Speaker, on page 1 of Navigata’s actual 
annual report, here’s what the president of the company says, 
and I quote. An established . . . Navigata is, I quote: 
 

. . . an established entity that has operated a 
telecommunications business in Canada for 40 years. 

 
Forty years. So who is right? Is it the SaskTel annual report that 
asterisked this as a start-up venture and the minister 
highlighting this as a start-up venture, or is the president of this 
money-losing adventure actually right when he says it’s a 
40-year business? Will the minister tell the House which it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, that member knows — 
and all he’s doing is attacking our Crowns again, Mr. Speaker 
— that member knows that Navigata has fundamentally been 
completely restructured. And for all intents and purposes, it is a 
new company starting business in Alberta, Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, and continues on in BC (British 
Columbia). It’s a fundamentally new company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to go back, Mr. Speaker, though, again, and I’m 
going to close with this, Mr. Speaker. When they continue to 
attack our Crowns, I refer to the auditor’s statement, Mr. 
Speaker, of 1991 where he says that you essentially cannot — 
and he cannot, Mr. Speaker — account for the statements. They 
are absolutely inappropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, I close by saying this, Mr. Speaker. He 
says in January 28, 2003: in our opinion these consolidated 
financial statements present fairly in all material respects the 
financial position of the corporation as at December 31, 2002. 
 
I ask the people of Saskatchewan to contrast, Mr. Speaker, what 
they did in the 1980s and early 1990s compared to what we’ve 
done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’m 
extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
table a response to written question no. 150. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 150 has been submitted. 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Public Ownership of Electrical Utilities 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving a motion to 
the effect that we in this Assembly recognize it is in the best 
interests — and sometimes as an Assembly and as members we 
purport to speak in the best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan — that we believe it’s in the best interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan to have continued public ownership of 
electrical production, transmission systems, and electrical retail 
markets, and thereby and in this way limit the negative impacts 
of uncertain supply and higher prices that can result from 
electrical deregulation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps I might try — try is the right word — to 
explain deregulation if I can in the few minutes that I have here. 
But in doing so I might begin or take it from the perspective of 
explaining the system that we have in Saskatchewan now, 
where we have a regulated public system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have is a publicly owned company, a utility, 
SaskPower, which can be described as a vertically integrated 
company — a company that does a number of things in the area 
of electrical production, transmission, and supply. It is one 
company that purports to do everything in the area of 
electricity. 
 
It produces power, it generates power, Mr. Speaker, from a 
number of different sites. SaskPower operates three coal-fired 
power stations. They have seven hydroelectric stations, four 
natural gas stations, and nine wind turbines, Mr. Speaker, at 
Cypress. And in this way they have a capacity of 3,051 
megawatts of electricity and it has a further 221 megawatts of 
contracted capacity from the cogeneration plant that’s located at 
the upgrader in Lloydminster and also coming to us from the 
SunBridge wind power project near Cypress Hills. 
 
SaskPower also maintains more than 152 kilometres of power 
lines. 
 
So SaskPower produces almost all of the power that is used in 
Saskatchewan from its own plants. It’s part of one company, 
publicly owned company. 
 
Then that power is then transmitted and distributed to customers 
throughout Saskatchewan, large customers — to wholesale 
customers in the city of Saskatoon and the city of Swift Current 
and other large industrial customers throughout Saskatchewan 
— and then to retail customers throughout the province, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s another aspect of the company, that it 
transmits and distributes this power that it, the company, 
produces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally SaskPower sells the power it has to retail customers — 
whether again it’s large industrial customers or whether it’s 
individual homeowners. SaskPower is the visible face of 
electricity in Saskatchewan. For most people it sells the power. 
That’s its retail arm. 
 
So there are, if you like, three aspects — some might say four 
aspects — of SaskPower’s operation, which is a publicly owned 

company. 
 
One is electrical production, Mr. Speaker, which is almost 
exclusively produced by publicly owned facilities. The other — 
we have transmission to distribute this power from the power 
plants to the marketplace, and that transmission, those 
transmission lines, those distribution lines are also owned by 
the company, are part of public ownership. And finally, the sale 
to customers; the retail arm is again a publicly owned company. 
 
So I wanted to lay that out because when you start to talk about 
deregulation, then you start to talk about production on the one 
hand, transmission on the other hand, retail sales on the other 
hand, Mr. Speaker, and I wanted to lay that out. 
 
I also wanted to point out that when a company such as 
SaskPower, a publicly owned company, produces power and 
sells power it has to justify its prices to the people. In a 
complete competitive market prices are set by the competition 
in the marketplace. But because SaskPower doesn’t have 
competition then there’s a question of how do you set the 
prices, how will you know whether those prices are realistic 
prices that should be charged to its customers? 
 
The process that we have, and it’s a similar process in most 
jurisdictions, is that we have public control over the prices. The 
prices at the end of the day have to be set by the cabinet. Now 
the cabinet could I suppose set prices that are grossly 
unrealistic. They could set them very, very high. But at the end 
of the day the cabinet, the government has to justify that to the 
people of the province. They could also set the prices 
unrealistically low and thereby affect the bottom line, but again 
they would have to justify that to the people of the province. 
 
But there is a process when SaskPower wants to have an 
increase, and I realize that the members of the opposition are 
ideologically predisposed to a different system, Mr. Speaker, 
which is a complete and total competitive market. But the 
system that we have here is a system whereby SaskPower has to 
justify the prices that it wants for its electricity to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In recent years we’ve added another layer of review, which is 
the rate review panel, Mr. Speaker, so that the public hopefully 
can have greater confidence in the prices when they do come 
down and that are set by the government. 
 
That’s not to say that the government can control all of the 
factors that influence prices. For example, I point out again that 
we have seven hydroelectric generating stations. In a year 
where there might be low water flow and we cannot obtain as 
much hydroelectric power as we would like and we need to rely 
more on coal or natural gas — and the prices of those 
commodities tend to be high because we don’t own those 
commodities — then the price that needs to be charged to 
customers might increase. 
 
Now those are not factors that the government can control. 
There might have been a day when we could control those 
things, Mr. Speaker, because there was a time when we actually 
owned the coal that we used for our plants. There was a time 
when SaskPower owned vast natural gas reserves that could be 
tapped for its production. But we don’t and so the government 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

 

really can’t control those prices. 
 
But we can again . . . or we do demand that any increases in 
prices be justified, Mr. Speaker. So that’s the way the system 
works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then the question is, why deregulation? I think many of the 
people who are watching this will know that over the last 20 
years or so, 15 years, we’ve seen a move towards privatization 
in many aspects of government enterprise throughout North 
America and other parts of the world. We’ve seen an offloading 
of public services back to the private sector. 
 
People will remember for example proposition 13 in California 
where there is an arbitrary measure set as to the amount of 
property tax that could be charged. Municipalities looked to 
reduce their costs through loading services on to the private 
sector. It means that people then had to pay private companies 
for the service that hitherto had been paid as property tax to the 
municipalities. That didn’t necessarily benefit everyone but it 
might have benefited some large companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People will know that we’ve had deregulation in the telephone 
marketplace. And if you’re someone that never uses long 
distance, you might question whether this is in your interest to 
have this changed. But if you’re someone that uses a lot of long 
distance, well it might be in your interest to have had that 
deregulation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Canada too, we’ve seen various governments — whether it’s 
in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario — take steps in the direction of 
privatization and deregulation. Alberta for example sold off 
their government-owned liquor stores to the private sector. 
They also sold off the interest they had in the Alberta telephone 
system so that it could form a new company called TELUS. 
 
The Manitoba government, under the premiership of Gary 
Filmon, Conservative premier, sold off the Manitoba Telephone 
System to private interests. The Ontario government has moved 
or has tried to move in the direction of privatizing and 
deregulating Ontario Hydro but has pulled back somewhat 
because of opposition to these moves by the people of Ontario. 
 
(14:30) 
 
What is electrical deregulation? How does it work? Essentially, 
Mr. Speaker, it means that in a deregulated jurisdiction anyone 
can generate power and sell it for whatever price a buyer is 
prepared to pay for it. The basic idea is that like any other 
market item, supply will be produced to meet demand and 
competition will keep the prices down. The problem though, 
Mr. Speaker, is that electricity is not a product like other 
products. 
 
Recently there was a paper produced by the Competition 
Bureau of Canada in looking at the question of competition in 
electrical production in Alberta. And they make a number of 
very good points about, electricity is not something you can 
store and save up for a rainy day. Electricity is . . . If you’re in 
short supply, you can’t just instantaneously bring on new 
generation capacity instantaneously like that. You need a long 
lead time to develop new electrical plants. 
 

So there’s some real question as to whether electricity can be 
treated as a commodity like we treat other commodities, Mr. 
Speaker, that might be bought and sold in an open marketplace. 
 
What we have seen in other jurisdictions where deregulation 
has been implemented is that we have had as a result 
uncertainty of supply. We also have seen higher prices in many 
of those jurisdictions. 
 
Some would say it’s because of the uncertainty in the new 
marketplace. Some would say it’s because of too many 
additional actors in the food chain, if you like, too many 
different new private interests all that have to . . . that all have 
to do their own profit-taking, and that this has increased the 
price of those commodities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But on this point and others, I hope that we will hear more from 
my colleagues and certainly we hope to hear from the 
opposition members of the House on this important topic. They 
have been very silent, you know, Mr. Speaker, on this topic of 
deregulation. They don’t directly address where it is that they 
stand on the question of electrical deregulation. 
 
Would they for example be prepared to entertain competition in 
production for our electricity in Saskatchewan from private 
interests, and therefore have private power production, Mr. 
Speaker? Would . . . and competition with SaskPower? Or 
would they agree that production needs to be sold to and 
through SaskPower, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Where do they stand on the question of ownership of 
transmission and distribution lines throughout the province? Do 
they feel that that should continue to have public ownership, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Where do they stand on the retail market? I’m sure on that one 
they, at the end of the day, will probably agree that it’s in the 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan to continue to have 
SaskPower involved in the retail sale of electricity, but there are 
many other aspects of what SaskPower does and we’d be 
looking forward . . . we will be looking forward to hearing their 
comments in this matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, I would now move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by 
the member for Regina Northeast: 
 

That this Assembly recognize it is in the best interest of the 
people of Saskatchewan to have continued public 
ownership of electrical production, transmission systems, 
and electrical retail markets, and thereby limit the negative 
impacts of uncertainty in supply and higher prices resulting 
from electrical deregulation. 

 
And I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to second the motion put forward by 
my colleague, the member from Regina Victoria. 
 
And I think it’s a very timely motion because as we unfold in 
the process of this House . . . and it is the opportunity I suppose 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

for the opposition to put forward their position on deregulation, 
which in reality is privatization of our Crown corporations but 
in particular of SaskPower. 
 
I believe it . . . if one looks around, one will see that 
deregulation is not a brand new issue at all but it has . . . 
Deregulation of the power industry has been attempted in other 
jurisdictions such as Australia, Great Britain, and many states in 
the United States. 
 
One that comes to the forefront in my research has been the 
state of California, where if one does a little looking around and 
researching on deregulation of the power industry in California, 
one would soon come across a very extensive report done by 
David Freeman. Mr. Freeman is the chairman of the California 
consumer power conservation authority. Mr. Freeman is an 
expert in electrical production, electrical distribution, and 
deregulation. Mr. Freeman, formerly was the chief executive 
office of the New York Power Authority and before that the 
chief executive officer of the Tennessee Valley Authority. 
 
Mr. Freeman who experienced first-hand the results of 
deregulation of the power industry in California that took place 
in 1996, deregulation of its power structure. It was interesting in 
Mr. Freeman’s report that the good folks of California were led 
down the very rosy path of the belief and of the promotion of 
the promise that competition was better than a monopoly in the 
energy business — much rhetoric, much very similar rhetoric as 
we hear from the opposition benches day in and day out. 
 
The good folks of California were promised that residential 
consumers would enjoy a 20 per cent reduction in power rates. 
The reality was that the residential rates went up 40 per cent. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Centre on 
her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With apologies to the member 
speaking, with permission to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noted some 
familiar faces up there or maybe I should say notorious 
Saskatchewan faces up there in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. We 
have with us today, Jeremy Morgan, who is the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the Arts Board; Guy Vanderhaege which 
I’m sure he needs no introduction, winner of many literary 
awards and recognition; and Skip Kutz who has been a very 
active musician for years and involved in the AFM (American 
Association of Musicians) and other organizations. 
 
So I just ask everyone in the legislature to join with me today in 
welcoming them to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Public Ownership of Electrical Utilities 
(continued) 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 
some other indications of the impact upon California people of 
deregulation. It was during that same period of time, prior to the 
deregulation that took place in 1996, small-business people in 
California were promised that their rates would drop 15 to 20 
per cent. The reality was the small-business rates increased 40 
to 50 per cent. 
 
Industry and commerce accounts and operators and investors 
were promised lower power rates. The reality was that industry 
and consumer rates increased 75 per cent. On top of the increase 
in rates, particularly affecting industry and commerce, was the 
rolling brownouts as a result of the inability for their power 
utilities to provide a constant and assured supply of power. 
 
Power. Electricity is the juices of jobs. In 1996, the jobs in the 
California power industry alone was 20,000. Today, or in 2002 
when this report came out, those jobs were now 4,000. 
 
Lower power costs build the economy. Lower power costs 
attract economic development, attract investments. Lower 
power costs helps industry to be competitive in the commercial 
marketplace. But when you put your lifeblood of the economy 
and of our society in the hands of the private sector, 
for-profit-only companies, the results are power shortages and 
higher prices. This has been proven in many states in the United 
States such as California and Pennsylvania. 
 
In fact in Pennsylvania today, Pennsylvania needs less power 
because industry is moving out. Industry is moving out of that 
state simply because they can move to a state or other 
jurisdictions where they can receive cheaper power but, most 
importantly, reliable power supply. 
 
Private companies that have the responsibility to people . . . 
pardon me. The private companies that have no responsibility to 
people have no responsibility to keeping the lights on. A private 
company looks at only maximizing profits. In fact, power 
shortages is desired by the private companies. It’s an 
opportunity for them to drive the prices up. 
 
Deregulation is a dark curtain of secrecy that the private 
companies hide behind. You can’t see their books. You don’t 
have any idea if they’re cooking their books or not. You have 
no idea if they’re ripping off the consumer or not. Public 
utilities, on the other hand, have their books open. The public 
sees what is going on in a public utility. 
 
Under deregulation or privatization, power costs go up, not only 
to residents but also to small businesses. But to corporations 
and industry, rates also go up making industry less competitive 
in the commercial marketplace. 
 
Increases in power costs means local people have less money to 
spend. It means less tourism. It means industry less competitive, 
which means less jobs. 
 
It also means that government services such as hospitals, 
schools, municipalities, libraries, kids’ hockey rinks, curling 
rinks — all will incur higher electrical costs. 
 
Twenty-two states in the US (United States) have looked at 
electrical deregulation, and have shelved it because deregulation 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

 

simply does not work in the best interests of their constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we enjoy an assured supply 
of electrical services provided to us by SaskPower. But it also 
. . . what we enjoy is very competitive rates. But all of that is 
spent right here in Saskatchewan. We have competitive rates 
and assured supply, but we also have . . . in SaskPower, in 
Saskatchewan, we have several thousands of jobs of SaskPower 
workers right across this province. 
 
In Regina, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is responsible for the 
creation of over 1,000 jobs, right here in the city of Regina, 
many of them head office jobs — in fact 725 of them are head 
office jobs. That revenue is staying right here in the city of 
Regina, right here in our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Recently, Mr. Speaker, I, along with a couple of my colleagues 
— the member from Dewdney and the member from Regina 
Victoria — we had the opportunity to travel out to Alberta and 
to do some first-hand investigation as to what effect 
deregulation has had on Alberta, Alberta businesses, and 
Alberta residences. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was almost horrifying, when we had the 
opportunity to meet with the mayor of Lethbridge, when he 
related his experience of deregulation. 
 
But while in Lethbridge, we also had the opportunity to spend 
some time with the owner and a manager of the Lethbridge Iron 
Works which really had upon his business — which is a 
family-owned business, which has been in his family for over 
100 years now; in fact that company was incorporated before 
Alberta was even a province — it had a tremendous, 
tremendous negative effect on his company. And I have copies 
of letters here — and I wish time would allow me, Mr. Speaker, 
to go through them — but copies of letters that he wrote to 
Ralph Klein, the Premier of Alberta, clearly describing the very 
negative effect that deregulation had on his family corporation. 
 
(14:45) 
 
At one point in time he had to elicit the support of his workers 
so that they would work the midnight shift. They shut their 
production down during the day and did their production at 
night because that was during that period of time they could 
acquire energy at a rate that allowed them to stay profitability 
. . . and maintain profitability. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I want to just express once again to the 
Assembly what great pride I have in seconding this motion. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
this debate and I want to indicate that we’ll be moving an 
amendment to the motion. And I’d like to read it into the record 
at this time and I’ll move the motion formally at the end of the 
. . . at the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker. The 
amendment is as follows: 
 

That all words after “recognize” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 

that the NDP government, despite its rhetoric, has initiated 
the end to monopoly public ownership of electrical 
production, transmission systems, and electrical retail 
markets, and has further initiated the first steps towards 
electrical deregulation. 

 
So that the whole motion then would read, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly recognize that the NDP government, 
despite its rhetoric, has initiated the end to monopoly public 
ownership of electrical production, transmission systems, 
and electrical retail markets, and has further initiated the 
first steps towards electrical deregulation. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in support of that amendment, I want to 
make a few remarks that detail exactly how it is — how it is, 
Mr. Speaker — that the NDP has in fact initiated the end to 
monopoly public ownership of electrical production and how it 
is this NDP government that has indeed taken us down these 
first few steps towards a deregulated electrical market. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The NDP did that? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well several members are already incredulous at 
the fact that it is this NDP government whose rhetoric seems to 
say something and whose actions say something else. It’s this 
NDP government supported, when he was in cabinet I would 
remind you, Mr. Speaker, by the very member that moved the 
motion — supported by him. It’s this NDP government that has 
taken the province down the first steps towards deregulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact on June 28, 2001, the Government of 
Saskatchewan issued a press release. And here’s what it’s . . . 
here’s the slug line or the title of the press release. It says, 
“More opportunities to buy and sell power.” 
 
That’s what it says. 
 
This press release details, Mr. Speaker, how this government is 
deregulating the markets for Swift Current and Saskatoon. The 
cities of Saskatoon and the cities of Swift Current, because of 
forethought on the part of their forefathers several decades ago, 
retained the rights to their own electrical utility. These cities 
owned their own electrical utility to generate income from that 
electricity. And up until now they were restricted to the 
purchase of the bulk power, if you will, Mr. Speaker, from 
SaskPower. 
 
So the city of Swift Current light and power department and the 
city of Saskatoon light and power department went ahead and 
purchased their electricity from SaskPower; they were forced 
to. That’s a regulated market. They were forced to buy from 
SaskPower. 
 
June of . . . I beg your pardon. June 28, 2001 the government 
introduces a Bill, Bill 9, in this legislature, that we debated, that 
did what, Mr. Speaker? That deregulated the supply of 
electricity to those electrical utilities. So the city of Swift 
Current and the city of Saskatoon can now source electricity 
from some other power company other than SaskPower. And 
use what to get the electricity to Swift Current and Saskatoon, 
Mr. Speaker? To use, well, the transmission systems of 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

That’s exactly what this government did. So the members 
opposite — the members opposite — put forward this motion 
that’s full of rhetoric about deregulating the market, the 
electrical market in Saskatchewan, when it is their own 
government, Mr. Speaker, that has actually taken the first steps 
toward deregulation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member will know that IBEW recently, 
the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, have sent 
out some questionnaires to MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) and we responded to that, Mr. Speaker; we 
responded to it immediately. We sent a letter to the IBEW to let 
them know where we were on deregulation. 
 
And we laid it out quite clearly in that letter, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Saskatchewan Party in government — and that’ll happen in 
about eight months, Mr. Speaker — but the Saskatchewan Party 
in government has got no interest at all in moving beyond what 
the NDP have already done in terms of deregulating the market 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s the clear position 
of the party as communicated to the IBEW. 
 
But I think what’s less clear, Mr. Speaker, is this government’s 
intentions. What’s less clear is what the NDP are going to do in 
terms of this issue. 
 
You see they’ve also deregulated the sourcing of . . . production 
of electricity in the province of Saskatchewan, which is also 
part of the member’s motion. Because it’s the NDP government 
that is in fact now cogenerating at projects like PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) Cory. It’s this government 
that is allowing the private sector, a company called SunBridge, 
to generate electricity — a private company generating 
electricity in the province of Saskatchewan, at a wind farm in 
the member from Cypress Hills’ riding — and SaskPower buys 
it. 
 
I can’t believe the hypocrisy of this motion and of those 
members opposite who would say, Mr. Speaker, who would say 
that deregulation and the deregulating of not just the supply but 
also of the . . . removing the monopoly of producing power in 
the province is a terrible thing. They would say that, Mr. 
Speaker, when it’s the NDP government that has done all of 
those things in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that is what frankly is driving voters crazy in the province. 
They either don’t tell you information — whether it’s the bingo 
scandal or SPUDCO or their investments at SaskTel that lost 60 
million plus — they either won’t give you information, or when 
they do give you information, Mr. Speaker, it flies against 
exactly what they’re doing. They’ll say one thing and then 
they’ll do the other thing exactly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the member who just spoke, the member for Regina 
Northeast, also spoke to the importance of assuring supply so 
that SaskPower workers can continue to work here in the 
province and we could continue to generate electricity, when at 
the Crown Corporations Committee — and there’s members I 
see across the way that were there — at a recent Crown 
Corporations Committee hearing, we asked SaskPower 
officials, well what are your options in view of Kyoto? What 
are your options for supplying electricity to the province of 
Saskatchewan? 

Now remember, this is supposedly the party that’s worried 
about assuring a Saskatchewan supply and keeping 
Saskatchewan men and women working, presumably at places 
like Coronach and in the Estevan area. And do you know what 
SaskPower said that their option was, Mr. Speaker? One of the 
key options they’re considering is just buying more hydro 
power from Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they said. 
Because of course hydroelectricity is much more Kyoto friendly 
than coal-generated electricity. 
 
So apparently one of the options at SaskPower, on the part of a 
party that’s concerned about assuring supply and the welfare of 
SaskPower workers, of IBEW members, one of the options 
they’re considering would seem to be replacing, replacing 
electricity generated in Saskatchewan, electricity that employs 
IBEW and SaskPower workers here in the province, replacing 
that with electricity generated in Manitoba — generation, Mr. 
Speaker, that employs Manitoba electrical workers, IBEW 
members in Manitoba. That’s what they said in Crown 
Corporations Committee. 
 
So imagine, imagine on those three counts, Mr. Speaker, why 
anyone in the province would take this member’s motion 
seriously in this House. Because he says quite clearly that they 
oppose the end of a monopoly public ownership of electrical 
production, when their government has done that — wind 
power and cogeneration at PCS Cory. 
 
They say they oppose the end of monopoly use of transmission 
systems when their own government, SaskPower, in 2001, is 
going to allow deregulate transmission systems insofar as those 
systems supply the cities of Saskatoon and the city of Swift 
Current, Mr. Speaker, and that they are worried about electrical 
deregulation. 
 
Well if the member for Victoria and the member for Northeast 
and others that’ll speak to this are worried about deregulation, 
they ought to whisper in the ear of the minister responsible for 
SaskPower who is busy deregulating the electrical market in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s absolutely amazing that this government would propose this 
motion. They are prepared to sacrifice Saskatchewan jobs for 
Manitoba jobs in the electrical industry. They’re deregulating, 
they’re deregulating the market here in the province of 
Saskatchewan already. And they’re also ending the monopoly 
electrical production in the province. And that’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re moving this amendment, seconded by the 
member for Cannington: 
 

That all the words after “recognize” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 
that the NDP government, despite its rhetoric, has initiated 
the end to monopoly public ownership of electrical 
production, transmission systems, and electrical retail 
markets, and has further initiated the first steps towards 
electrical deregulation. 

 
And given the facts, we know, Mr. Speaker, that all members 
— government and opposition — will want to support this 
amendment. This amendment represents the truth. 
 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to agree with my colleague from Swift Current. It 
is amazing, Mr. Speaker, that the backbench members opposite 
would present this particular motion to the House condemning 
the deregulation of the power industry in Saskatchewan. It’s not 
surprising; it’s not surprising. But, Mr. Speaker, you have to 
wonder what’s going on. 
 
We have a news release here that says, Saskatchewan 
Government Executive Council. Now I can understand how 
secretive this Executive Council is; how secretive the cabinet is 
that they can’t even tell their own colleagues the information, 
let alone the truth, Mr. Speaker. So you certainly can 
understand why the backbenchers would be completely in the 
dark on this. But, Mr. Speaker, this news release of June 28, 
2001, SaskPower no. 511, it says: “More Opportunities to Buy 
& Sell Power.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re deregulating the power industry in 
Saskatchewan. So how is it, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite, the member from Regina Victoria and the member 
from Regina Northeast, don’t know about these things? Well 
it’s because their cabinet, their colleagues that sit in front of 
them in the House, keep them in the dark, Mr. Speaker, just as 
they try — they try unsuccessfully but they do try — to keep 
the public in the dark, Mr. Speaker, while presenting all the 
rhetoric about how terrible it is, Mr. Speaker, that you have to 
have continued public ownership of electrical production, 
transmission systems, and electrical retail markets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet that’s not what the cabinet and the government are 
doing, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I can certainly see that they’re not 
telling the backbenchers. Because obviously if they were telling 
the backbenchers, they would not have presented a motion such 
as this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, but I don’t know how the backbenchers can be so 
ignorant of the facts. You take a look, Mr. Speaker. Husky Oil 
at Lloydminster is involved in a cogeneration project with this 
government. And fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government 
was running out of power, running out of power until Husky 
came forward and said, we will build a generation plant and we 
will sell that power to SaskEnergy. And that’s a private 
company, Mr. Speaker — capital p, private. Even though 
Tommy Douglas was a director of that company, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s still a private company. 
 
And they’re selling power, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the province 
of Saskatchewan. It sure sounds to me like that’s privatized 
power, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps there’s some other word for it that 
the members opposite would like to use, but at the end of the 
day, Mr. Speaker, that power company pays taxes on the profits 
they generate. That’s right. They pay taxes in property. They 
pay sales taxes on their purchases. They pay income taxes to the 
province of Saskatchewan and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 
private company just in case the members opposite have never 
heard of making a profit and paying taxes. 
 
(15:00) 
 
But it’s not the only one, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have the 

Cory situation at the Cory potash mine. They’re a cogeneration. 
We have SunBridge out in the Gull Lake area, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s also a private enterprise. And it’s amazing, it’s amazing 
that all of those members opposite stand in their places to 
condemn the very things that their government is doing and 
they make it sound like they know nothing about it . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, that’s right, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the members opposite are in an information brownout. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the member from Swift Current pointed out, 
that in Crown Corporations Committee when asked what would 
happen in the case of this government’s power generation plants 
at Estevan, at Coronach, and the coal emission, the gas 
emissions from those coal plants . . . If there needed to be some 
corrections, they would buy power from Manitoba. That’s what 
their options are. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a different tack a little bit here. 
What would happen if Saskatchewan would grow? Let’s say 
Saskatchewan grew by 10 per cent over the next 10 years. You 
know it’s an amazing concept that the NDP say is statistically 
impossible to have happen. And yet we just had Agrivision 
come forward in today’s news saying that over the next 30 
years they believe the province can grow by 100 per cent — 
double in size. 
 
But let’s just say 10 per cent over 10 years. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s going to take electricity. It’s going to take 
electricity to provide services to those people and to those 
businesses that they’re going to generate in this province. What 
plans does this government have to provide that additional 
generation? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have no plan. Their only plan 
to defend jobs in Saskatchewan, to defend the businesses in 
Saskatchewan, to buy Saskatchewan products, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is to buy Manitoba hydro or wherever else they can 
get it. 
 
Are they going to buy nuclear energy from the new plant 
they’re going to put in in New Brunswick? I don’t know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but there’s no plans to generate it in 
Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker, they are 
the ones who are deregulating the electrical environment in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Their own press releases clearly outline it: that there will be 
production in Saskatchewan, there will be transmission over 
SaskPower’s lines of privatized electricity, Mr. Speaker, and 
there will be private retailing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of power in 
Swift Current and Saskatoon. Those two entities will retail 
electricity in this province outside of SaskPower, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And IPSCO, largest consumer of electricity in this province, 
also has the ability to buy electricity outside of this province. 
They may buy and they have access to the open access 
transmission tariff as well, as outlined in this news release. 
They can buy power outside of Saskatchewan, have it 
transmitted over SaskPower’s lines for their own use in this 
province. 
 
Now that put them in a very unique position since they 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

represent I believe it’s between 12 and 18 per cent of 
SaskPower’s electrical consumption. They went to SaskPower 
and said: here’s what we can buy it for on the continental 
market; what are you offering? Well SaskPower didn’t want to 
lose their largest customer so they made an agreement with 
them. 
 
Not only was IPSCO doing that, but so did TransCanada 
PipeLines. They said to SaskPower, either you give us a 
competitive rate or we’re going to put in electrical generation in 
all of our turbine stations. We’ll use natural gas to create our 
own electricity; we don’t need you. Well SaskPower gave them 
a competitive deal as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to deregulating the electrical 
environment in Saskatchewan, it’s the members opposite that 
are doing it. They don’t want anybody to know about it. They 
want to hide that under their rhetoric, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They want to hide it, like the minister of Industry and 
Commerce was doing about the SPUDCO fiasco, they want to 
keep the public in the dark. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan both has 
their eyes open and the lights turned on, and they see and know 
what the members opposite are doing, what this government is 
doing. 
 
You know if I was a member of the IBEW, I would certainly be 
talking to the members opposite. You know there’s a number of 
union leaders back there including the Minister of Labour. I’d 
want to know what their real stand is. Why are they proposing 
to buy power from Manitoba Hydro? Why? Where are the job 
protections that they keep saying that they’re providing to the 
unions? 
 
They’re hollow words, just like their hollow words when it 
comes to their rhetoric on deregulation, just like their hollow 
words when it comes to their campaign promises. And as their 
Minister of Finance said, Mr. Deputy Speaker: it’s just political 
rhetoric; you shouldn’t really believe it. Well you shouldn’t 
believe in this government either. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very, very pleased 
to enter into this debate, and I’d like to clarify a number of 
statements made by members opposite. 
 
First off I think it’s important that the members opposite realize 
that it doesn’t matter what the member from Swift Current, the 
creator of fiction, says or that what the member from 
Cannington says. The people of Saskatchewan know full well 
— they know full well — that it’s the right-wing, ideologically 
driven governments across North America, and in particular in 
Canada, have deregulated the power industry in their 
jurisdictions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know 
full well what the Conservative government of the 1980s — the 
Conservative government under which the member from 
Cannington was elected; the Conservative government that the 

member of Swift Current worked for — did to this province. I 
just want to give a couple of examples of what the right-wing 
ideology of the 1980s, that those members represent, did to this 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we saw the wholesale sell-off of the assets 
of the people of Saskatchewan. We saw Saskoil sold. We saw 
the reserves of natural gas sold off. We sold the . . . or we saw 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan sold for just mere 
pennies of what it was worth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the right-wing, ideologically driven 
governments in Canada that deregulate, sell off, and privatize 
the people’s assets. It’s not the New Democratic government in 
Saskatchewan. It’s the right-wing ideology, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the governments that 
have done it in Canada. The Alberta government, the Alberta 
government — the land of opportunity in the members’ 
opposite minds, Mr. Deputy Speaker — are the province that 
have hurt, have hurt their citizens the most. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hear the members opposite yelling 
because they don’t want to hear about what the negative things 
that right-wing ideological governments have done to hurt their 
citizens. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they believe quite frankly in 
privatizing those very assets that are important to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’d do it. They 
may not do it right immediately wholesale, but they will do it 
by undermining the capability of those assets, of those Crown 
corporations to work in the global environment in which we 
now have to work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And those members opposite can talk about how the IBEW 
members should be scared of what this government would do. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can tell you they’re very scared of 
what the members of the opposition might do if they ever 
become a government. They believe it’s a very scary future for 
them. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the 
Alberta experience and some of the things that were said before 
they deregulated. And they will sound very, very familiar as 
things that come very often from the mouths of the members 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ll talk about customers will have 
choice. We’ve heard that many times from the members 
opposite. They’ll talk about customers having choice. They will 
talk about the old system just isn’t efficient enough; it just 
doesn’t work. They’ll talk about the old regulated system being 
too costly, that the private sector can do it cheaper, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
They will talk about bringing about greater innovation, and new 
ideologies and new opportunities within the marketplace, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They’ll talk about faster growth rate and new 
generation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they’ll talk even about 
things that people want to hear, about it helping green power, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

 

Well, the reality is all those things were said in the province of 
Alberta, and the reality for the citizens of Alberta was quite 
different, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite can talk all they want about, you 
know, how the current government’s doing this and the current 
government’s doing that. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reality 
is we have a very efficient power corporation delivering very 
efficient services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the world as the members opposite see it, they want to tell 
everybody what they want to hear but their real agenda is no 
different than their agenda from the 1980s. And their agenda in 
the 1980s was to strip, equity strip from those Crown 
corporations and sell off Crown-owned assets, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
They did it because they ideologically, ideologically disagree 
with public ownership. They believe that government should 
not own assets and that people should not run their own 
corporations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I want to talk about the conclusions that came out of the 
Alberta electrical deregulation. Deregulation destroyed the 
Alberta advantage once enjoyed by electrical consumers, 
according to those very consumers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The cost to the Alberta economy is measured in billions of 
dollars — dollars that surpassed the requirements of the annual 
education budget or a good portion of the health care budget in 
the province of Alberta. There was absolutely no benefit to the 
consumers in the charade that resulted in the deregulation of 
power in the province of Alberta. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite have a 
right-wing ideology similar to their cousins in Alberta. They 
often sit and praise the province of Alberta and their right-wing 
cousins there. 
 
And we see from their own history what they did when they 
governed in this province during the 1980s where they sold off 
our assets in Saskoil, they sold off our natural gas assets, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and they sold off our potash assets. That had 
the people of Saskatchewan owned those today, we would be a 
province thriving in economic activity and those dollars being 
returned for the benefit of the public of Saskatchewan and 
reducing — reducing, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the tax burden on 
the citizens of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about what 
happened in Alberta. I have an article here saying Edmonton 
electricity the most expensive in all of Canada, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I want to talk about the impact on business, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because the party opposite says they are the protectors 
of business. They talk ideologically about business should drive 
the economy, and I agree that business should drive the 
economy but they shouldn’t drive the economy out of Alberta. 
But electrical deregulation played a role in significantly hurting 
Alberta’s business environment and climate. 
 
I want to talk about a business that myself, the member from 

Regina Northeast, and the member from Regina Victoria visited 
in the city of Lethbridge — Lethbridge Ironworks. “Electrical 
deregulation is increasing . . .” and I’m reading from a press 
release provided by that company, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Electricity deregulation is increasing costs for Lethbridge 
Iron Works to the point where the company’s continued 
existence in Alberta is becoming questionable. The 
company has been in Alberta for 102 years and was 
incorporated in the city of Regina under the Northwest 
Territories Act before the province of Alberta (even) came 
into existence. The provincial government’s ill-conceived 
move to . . . (electrical) deregulation has put . . . (this) 
company’s future in jeopardy. 

 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we met with John Davies, the 
vice-president and one of the partners in this family-owned 
company in the city of Lethbridge, Alberta. And what we heard 
from him is that this 102-year-old company that had thrived in 
the province, in southern Alberta, city of Lethbridge — had 
thrived in Alberta — nearly closed its doors as a result of the 
right-wing ideological plan of the Conservative government of 
Alberta. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they had to go from operating their plant 
in two shifts a day, two eight-hour shifts a day during the day 
and afternoon, to operating just between midnight and 8 in the 
morning because that was the only time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that they could buy electricity cheap enough to operate their 
factory in the city of Lethbridge. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that resulted in workers being laid off, it 
resulted in families having hardship, and it resulted in that 
company rethinking their position on a right-wing ideological 
government in the province of Alberta. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite can talk all they 
want about ideology and about what this government might do. 
But we know fair well that they have already done — they have 
sold off our natural gas. I want to repeat, they have sold off the 
citizens’ assets in natural gas through Saskoil. They sold off the 
Potash Corporation. And it is the same individuals, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, sitting over there who had that same ideology. 
 
And last but not least, I want to spend just a few seconds talking 
about the impact on rural Alberta because rural Alberta paid 
even a greater price because of that right-wing ideology than the 
cities did. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it cost a greater 
amount of money for that power distribution in rural Alberta 
and they have fewer options in rural Alberta, and they saw a 
significant decrease. 
 
So I’m very pleased to support the motion and oppose the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 
for me to speak on this topic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s amazing that the member from Regina Victoria has actually 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

brought forward this motion, a motion which says that it is a . . . 
negative impacts of uncertain supply and higher prices resulting 
from electrical deregulation. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very ironic. This government and the 
three members from the government side obviously are not 
aware of what its own government is doing. It’s really a matter 
of do as we say, not as we do. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
government has already started down the road of deregulation 
in the entire electrical and power industry due to its own 
actions. A news release, Mr. Speaker, from June 28, 2001, and 
it says it allows the corporations more opportunities to buy and 
sell electricity in the North American marketplace. This is a 
news release by the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it makes one wonder where these members are. Obviously 
the cabinet or maybe the chairman of the SaskPower hasn’t 
informed the cabinet and the caucus of the NDP-Liberal 
coalition about what it’s doing, what its intentions are. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney talk about 
right-wing parties that are really hell-bent on deregulation and 
the excesses and the problems that it causes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this NDP-Liberal coalition government is 
well on its way to deregulation in the electrical industry. And it 
just amazes everyone concerned that they would bring forward 
this type of motion while their own government is deregulating 
the electrical industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago the government introduced an Act 
to amend the Power Corporation, and it was Bill No. 9. Mr. 
Speaker, Bill No. 9 paved the way for deregulation of the 
electrical industry in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
amazing to hear the NDP’s own rhetoric concerning this whole 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one has to ask a question. What are the plans of 
this government? The Saskatchewan Party has a plan to grow 
this province by 10,000 people over the next 10 years — 
100,000 more people. There’s a recent proposal by Agrivision 
to double the population of this province, Mr. Speaker — 
double this province. And this government has no plan to grow 
the province in any way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you would think that the government should 
have a plan in place now to start building more power 
generation stations. But what is the government’s plan? Well 
the government’s plan is to buy electrical power from 
Manitoba. Take all those jobs and the millions of dollars of 
investment and give it to Manitoba, give it to the Manitoba 
taxpayer — hire people from Manitoba, create jobs in 
Manitoba. 
 
This government doesn’t want to do this in Saskatchewan. It 
doesn’t want to create the jobs in this province. It doesn’t want 
to create the infrastructure in this province to grow 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think this government is really misleading the taxpayers 
of this province. You can only look at other errors where this 
government has misled the province. You look at situations like 
SPUDCO. It took six years before this travesty was brought out 
into the public. Just recently the mega bingo deal. 

And it’s amazing that this government has hidden such 
problems that they’ve created, and now they’re trying to 
pretend in this motion that they are against deregulation when 
actually this government is pursuing deregulation in a big way, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can look at other aspects of this Bill. Well 
already the government has allowed cogeneration projects to 
take place — the Husky Upgrader, the government’s buying 
power from the Husky Upgrader. You can look at cogeneration 
projects like Cory potash mine. And you also talk about projects 
that the Saskatchewan government and SaskPower are involved 
in as concerning wind power generation that the government is 
involved with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can only . . . we need to look at places like 
California, like Ontario, and to a certain extent Alberta, where 
there has been problems and concerns related to deregulation. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government must know full well what’s 
happened in California, but they insist on starting to go down 
that road. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we need to do to grow this province is 
to keep rates as low as possible, to be competitive with other 
jurisdictions, and to really encourage investment and growth in 
this province. And again there’s no plan of this government to 
do any of that in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we see, the telephone industry is already 
deregulated in Saskatchewan and now the government’s talking 
about the electrical industry is being deregulated as well. And 
it’s very interesting that the government slid through this piece 
of legislation that will further deregulate some Saskatchewan 
industry. 
 
And they say that we don’t ask the right questions. Well 
eventually the NDP government will have to answer to the 
people of Saskatchewan, whenever the Premier actually has the 
courage and calls an election, and then this deregulating NDP 
government will be gone from the power faster than they can 
privatize another industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This deal that is signed by SaskPower called OATT — an open 
access transmission tariff — well what does it do, Mr. Speaker? 
Well it opened SaskPower transmission system to the wholesale 
energy suppliers and users — sounds like deregulations to me. 
And an open access transmission tariff, in SaskPower’s own 
words, is an open offer of transmission service. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before the members opposite stand up in 
this House and cry blue murder over deregulation, maybe they 
should call up Frank Hart or at least some of his . . . or ask him 
to the next cabinet meeting and ask him about what 
Saskatchewan is already doing concerning deregulation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As I had stated by its own news release dated back on June 28, 
2001, states that SaskPower will be allowed to buy and sell 
more power. There’s your deregulation, Mr. Speaker. It seems 
the wheeler-dealers within the Crowns are hard at it for the 
NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area where the NDP takes . . . likes to 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

 

crow about is continued public ownership. Well again it’s do as 
we say, not as we do. And that is the area of wind power as I 
mentioned before. And who set up the wind power project? A 
private company, SunBridge. So again the NDP uses the 
privatization and deregulation bogeyman but in fact the NDP is 
ahead first into the business of deregulation and privatization. 
 
Let’s not make any mistake about it, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
under this Premier and this CIC minister are on a vicious 
deregulation agenda, a sneaky plan to stand up and rant and 
rave until blue in the face, and deep down inside the NDP 
deregulation train rolls along, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not support the motion but I will support the 
amendment to the motion that reads: 
 

That the NDP government, despite its rhetoric, has initiated 
the end to monopoly public ownership of electrical 
production, transmission systems, electrical retail markets, 
and has further initiated the first steps toward electrical 
deregulation. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. 
There will now be a brief 10-minute question and comment 
period. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at one time SaskPower owned the coal used to power its 
coal-fired power stations. And at one time it owned the natural 
gas used to power its natural gas power stations. The Devine PC 
(Progressive Conservative) government of the 1980s kept 
SaskPower all right, but sold off the coal and the natural gas. 
 
To the member for Souris-Cannington who was elected as a 
Devine PC, Mr. Speaker, he had the opportunity to clearly state 
his opposition to further privatization in his motion. He did not. 
He sidetracked. Mr. Speaker, why should the people of 
Saskatchewan trust him in this matter now? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to inform 
the member opposite, there is no member for 
Souris-Cannington. It’s Cannington, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very 
proud to represent the constituency of Cannington, even though 
the members opposite do not recognize its name, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were a lot of things that were done wrong in 
the 1980s and, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite is 
copying those examples to a T. They are arrogant and out of 
touch, Mr. Speaker. And the very fact that the member who 
asked the question was not aware that it was his government 
that was carrying on the policy of deregulation, Mr. Speaker, 
only goes to show how much like the Devine Tories that 
member, who sat here in the House at that time, has become 
and how he is copying, Mr. Speaker, the very actions that he is 
condemning. He condemned his own government’s action just 
as he condemned the past. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for months now we’ve been hearing 
government members on that side spew the misinformation of, 
if the Sask Party was in power, when it gets in power, what 

they’ll do with the Crowns. 
 
I thought this would be a good opportunity for the member . . . 
And my question is for the member from Swift Current to go on 
the record to explain to the government side just what the Sask 
Party would do after the next election and when we are the 
government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the 
member for that tough but fair question. And, Mr. Speaker, 
unlike, unlike the Minister for CIC who just moments ago 
outside, he said he didn’t have to answer questions in this 
legislature if he didn’t like the opinions of those who were 
asking the questions, they’re going to find today that the 
answers are going to come forthright from this side of this 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as Saskatchewan Party in government in about 
eight months are going to refocus our Crown corporations, 
including SaskPower. We’re going to refocus them on the task 
at hand. We’ll refocus them on the markets here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. We’ll put a moratorium on all of the 
hare-brained, out-of-province investments that have cost us $85 
million-plus, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this government’s 
actions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will undertake a major review of the 
Crown corporations so that going forward, so that going 
forward we will know that those utilities are maximizing 
service to the people of the province, that they are contributing 
positively to the economy, and they are maximizing the 
taxpayers’ return on their investment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is going 
to be for the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to ask the member from Swift 
Current that . . . a very simple question. Will he assure the 
people of this province that at no point, at no point if they form 
government after the next general election, that they will not 
sell off a single asset in the distribution, the generation, and the 
transmission of electricity in this province; that they will all 
remain publicly owned for the entire period in which they’re 
government? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well first I want to 
congratulate the member for Regina Dewdney for 
understanding that the Saskatchewan Party in very short order 
will be the government of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I can also assure that member, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Saskatchewan Party in government will never say one thing 
and do the other, Mr. Speaker. They’ll never bring a motion 
into this legislature that condemns deregulation and the 
privatizing of power production on one hand while all along 
that government is deregulating and privatizing power 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

production, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People will be able to expect straight answers from this 
government in about eight months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I hope the people of 
Saskatchewan were watching this. He was asked a very 
straightforward question concerning his party’s intentions with 
respect to SaskPower. He did not answer the question. 
 
Let me ask the question again. Will you, sir — will you, sir — 
guarantee to the people of Saskatchewan that you will never, 
never sell off any of the assets of SaskPower, full stop, period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would remind all hon. members to 
put their comments to the Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now the 
member for Regina Victoria is acknowledging that the 
Saskatchewan Party will form the next government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you’re seeing something here that you’re going to 
see a lot of in the coming months in advance of a campaign. 
You’re seeing the NDP around this province telling the people 
of the province that the Saskatchewan Party has a preconceived 
plan to privatize any of the major Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every single time you hear the NDP say that, you will know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is a lie, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The platform of the Saskatchewan Party on Crown corporations 
is clear. It’s been clear since we made the case to the Regina 
Chamber of Commerce a year ago and it’s hidden away on 
something called the Internet. It’s on the Web site, Mr. Speaker. 
I invite the member opposite to check out the policy there. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
is to either the member from Regina Victoria, Regina Northeast, 
Regina Dewdney, or all three if maybe one of them have an 
answer. 
 
As we see in this motion, Mr. Speaker, they’re talking about the 
ills of deregulation. I’d like to ask one or all three of the 
members, considering the news release June 28, 2001 
concerning more opportunities to buy and sell electricity in the 
North American marketplace, I want to know why these three 
members do not know that their own government is 
deregulating the electrical industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we’re very aware of the 
issue that the member raises and I hope that the members are 
aware, the people of Saskatchewan are aware, that SaskPower 
and the people of Saskatchewan live within a North American 
marketplace; that we cannot put up walls around this province; 
that if there are times that we need to purchase power from 
other jurisdictions — because we may, in the middle of winter, 

need to have additional power supply — or if there are 
opportunities to sell power to other jurisdictions when we have 
a surplus of power, then we need to be able to enter into the 
arrangements that are set down by that marketplace outside of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This we have done, but it’s in a very limited way. We continue 
to own the transmission lines, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we 
have done. The members would seek to divert us on this but 
refuse to answer the clear questions that were put to them. 
 
Will you or will you not sell off any part of SaskPower — full 
stop, period? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question is 
for the member from Swift Current. I asked a very 
straightforward question in which he could have answered yes 
or no. I asked him on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, if, 
if — and it’s a big if — if they ever formed a government in 
this province, would they sell off any part of the transmission, 
distribution, or generation of SaskPower at any time? 
 
A very straightforward answer — yes or no, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re refusing to answer it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, again, what we’re seeing 
here is part of the NDP’s political strategy heading into the next 
election. It used to be, Mr. Speaker, that they used to scare the 
people of the province with the health scare. They used to tell 
them that anybody other than them would close down their 
hospitals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even though it was that 
government that was closing down hospitals in the province. 
 
Well now we’re seeing their latest scare tactic, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We’re seeing their scare tactic. And I want to tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we look forward to the election 
campaign when we will have an opportunity on this side of the 
House to present our Crown corporation policy and it’ll be 
clear. And every time the people hear them say there’s a 
preconceived plan on this side of the House to do something 
with the major Crowns, they’ll know that it’s not the truth. The 
election will happen and we’ll take their place on that side of 
the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The 75 minute debate has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Expansion of Child Care Services 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege and 
a pleasure for me to rise and speak to the largest expansion of 
child care services in the history of this province. Our 
government believes investing in our children is the most 
important investment that we can make. At the end of my 
remarks I will place a motion before this Assembly for debate 
on just this topic. 
 
For there can be no vision in Saskatchewan for a future that is 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

 

wide open that does not contemplate a parent’s need for safe, 
affordable child care. To enable all Saskatchewan people the 
opportunities to contribute to the economy and social life of the 
province, quality and accessible child care is essential for 
parents who are working or who are going to school. 
 
The child care announcement does not come in isolation, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, from the strategic focus for a department 
whose name clearly reflects the future work that needs to occur 
— Community Resources and Employment. With the strategic 
focus on economic independence and self-reliance, and on 
inclusion in families in communities, the budget this year is 
$606 million. It will also see initiatives that are complementary 
to the child care announcement such as affordable housing; the 
Kids First program, a program for children in vulnerable 
situations; some added dollars for people with disabilities and 
their search for employment and for other initiatives to help 
those with disabilities; the additional monies for those working 
for community-based organizations; and many of those workers 
who will be seeking the affordable child care that is presented 
in this initiative; and the initiatives around high-risk youth. 
They are the additional supports to families that are committed 
to by the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment. 
 
And with this government’s commitment to early learning and 
child care, it allows us to take full advantage of the federal 
funding dollars that will be available to the provinces. 
 
We also, as the minister responsible has pointed out to us, we 
play an important leadership role as a province in the national 
framework that’s being developed around a national early 
childhood care strategy. 
 
This is not just a one-year plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is a 
four-year plan to support attachment to the labour force and for 
early childhood development at a total cost of $5.15 million. 
The newly added capacity will see approximately 7,900 child 
care spaces supported by an annual budget of over $22 million. 
 
Now I’d like to spend a few moments on the exciting details of 
this announcement. As part of this government’s commitment 
to early childhood, early learning, and child care, we are 
continuing to invest in child care not only this year but into the 
future. Saskatchewan will be taking full advantage of the 
federal Early Learning and Child Care funding together with 
some of our dollars to develop 1,200 new child care spaces over 
the next four years. There will also be another 131 new spaces 
for the Kids First program, and this represents an 18 per cent 
increase in child care spaces for Saskatchewan families by 
2006-2007. 
 
We have particularly good news for this year, 2003-2004. 
Although for the first year the federal funding is very modest, in 
Saskatchewan we’ll be adding $1 million to enable 
development of 500 new licensed child care spaces this year. 
Many of these spaces will be available for low- and 
modest-income working families or for whom child care 
subsidies will be available. 
 
In addition there’s another $1 million available to increase child 
care subsidies an average of $20 per month per child, effective 
June 1 of this year. Now this varies of course because it’s $30 a 

month for infant care, it’s $25 a month for toddler care, $20 a 
month for preschool-aged children, and $10 a month for 
school-aged children. 
 
With this, that also means there’s an increase in the income 
levels eligible for funding. So if your family income falls within 
the requirements of the child care subsidy program, and I’d like 
to use the following example of the monthly family incomes 
that qualify for the highest amount of subsidy: $1,640 or less 
gross income, with one dependent child; $1,740 or less gross 
income, with two dependent children; and $1,840 or less gross 
income, with three dependent children. 
 
Using that, an example might be a single parent with one infant 
using a centre-based care, the monthly child care fee of $518, 
maximum subsidy increase of $30 per month, from $325 to 
$355. The previous cut-off point would have been $2,940 gross 
income per month; the new point will be $3,060 per month. 
 
Another example of this might be for a two-parent family that 
has one toddler and one preschool child. Their monthly child 
care fee is $900. The maximum subsidy increase of $45 a 
month is from $520 to $565. The previous cut-off point was 
$4,020 gross income per month. Now the new cut-off point for 
that family will be $4,300 gross income per month. 
 
The reason I highlight that, Mr. Speaker, is people talked about 
the increase in subsidy be very important. But there were many 
low-income families who stated that they just didn’t meet that 
cut-off point, and now with the changes that we’ve announced 
this year they will qualify for the subsidy level. So there’ll be 
many new families that can qualify for the increases. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I . . . (inaudible) . . . putting a personal face 
to this, and I think of all of the parent families that have young 
children in the province, and we want to say to them that the 
future is wide open. So for example, a single-parent mom or 
dad who needs to attend school, who’s going to be training to 
become actively involved in the workforce, can now look to the 
province for increased child care spaces, the number of licensed 
spaces. 
 
And of course, there are many of the spaces in child care 
locations in the licensed child cares who didn’t wait for our 
announcement. There were a number of about 250 spaces now 
that are licensed spaces that will qualify under this program. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Another part of the program of course will be because we’re 
increasing the amount of spaces. There are many child care 
locations, licensed child care facilities, that will need capital 
requirements and they’ll be able to access money for expansion 
of their services, expansion of their space. 
 
I know that there were many centres that talked to me about 
saying, we’re providing to the maximum now and, you know, 
we already had plans. Is this a welcome announcement for our 
child care facilities. 
 
The other thing I like to mention, of course, is because we’ve 
encouraged men and women to seek employment to their fullest 
potential. And we have now the need for right across the 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

spectrum of employment, men and women, two parents in the 
family — some of them needing to work and many of them 
wanting to seek employment to the fullest extent of their 
education and their abilities — are looking at these 
announcements with much favour. They are able to approach 
the workforce, become part of the Saskatchewan future is wide 
open as a career, because they’ve chosen to stay here, to live 
here, and to work here. And this announcement signals to them 
a government that’s interested in having everyone become part 
of, not only the economic fabric of the community but the 
social fabric as well. 
 
We know that . . . And I know through the new Voluntary 
Sector Initiative that we’re undertaking, that many of those 
people who are employed in the workforce also have a very 
active life to contribute to the community. And they look at 
child care as a way that they can — and the child care spaces — 
to be able to participate in a social fabric of the community as 
well. And it’s very, very important to the future of our province 
and the life of this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my past — I know some might 
know this but others might not — I was an early childhood 
educator. And I was someone who helped our community 
association establish a preschool for two- and three-year-olds. It 
was a joyful experience then, and I look back very fondly to the 
days that I was able to have an impact on the lives of very 
young people in this province. 
 
Any early childhood educator will tell you that one dollar spent 
very early on in the formative stages of a child’s life . . . Many 
of the connections that are made in impacting on the learning 
capabilities of children happens before they reach the age of 
three or four years old. And every dollar that you put into early 
childhood education initiatives, not only in this program but 
certainly in some of the steps that the Department of Learning 
have taken for early childhood, have paid off in benefits 
fivefold later on in the lives of those very young Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
So it was very joyful for me to be involved in that establishment 
of early childhood initiatives. I know of programs like the 
SCEP (Socialization, Communication and Education Program) 
Centre and the Early Learning Centre that have been involved 
for a number of years in this. And they’re also looking at this 
announcement as a very welcome step for this government, and 
they support this initiative 100 per cent because it also 
complements what they do for the lives of a community, and 
the children in our community. 
 
But the day that this announcement was made I was joined by a 
number of colleagues as we watched the Premier and the 
minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment make this announcement to our province of 
Saskatchewan. And to see the faces of the children, to hear their 
voices raised in song, to be able to sit on the floor in the 
24-hour child care and talk to the children was just a return to 
that experience in my life. 
 
Where that announcement was made you would just need to 
look in the faces of those children and hear them, but also see 
the beautiful cards that were made by the children and the staff 
to thank us for the announcements that were made. They are 

just priceless treasures that I know the Premier and the minister 
will have to take with them many, many years to come, and feel 
a sense of satisfaction that they’ve played a role in the largest 
announcement, the best announcement that we could make, for 
the future is wide open in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — If you want to see that future I would invite 
each and every one of us to look in to the face of a child. These 
young people will one day be running our businesses, making 
the decisions in government, and managing our economy. In 
those early years from conception to age six that are the most 
important in establishing a foundation for learning, it’s a 
foundation for the behaviour and the health of the rest of their 
lives. 
 
I’d also say that I watched the faces of the people who were 
employed in the child care facility, because they open their 
hearts and their lives to the young children but also provide the 
supports to the parents. The parents also are very active in — 
certainly in this child care, but many others — on the hours they 
contribute to the board to make certain that they’re run 
according to the guidelines and the safety requirements of the 
province, and will be responsible for the decisions taken to the 
addition of spaces, but also the additional help that is required 
to meet the needs of those spaces. Because there are certain 
numbers of people who need to be employed, based on the 
number of children that are in the child care. 
 
And in listening to some of the workers, I also heard them 
express the same sentiments that Lois Grylls, who’s the 
Co-Chair of the Saskatchewan Early Childcare Directors 
Association, expressed to us in an e-mail. And she states: 
 

On behalf of all the early childcare directors in 
Saskatchewan I would personally like to thank you for 
addressing childcare in the budget that is being released 
tomorrow. I have received a copy of the news release that 
happened in Regina and I am celebrating what your 
government is going to be doing for the children of 
Saskatchewan. Your government has ‘dared to care’. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that in mind, with 
the encouragement of a province who not only provides 
leadership throughout the nation not only this issue but others 
that have happened . . . I think the child benefit program, the 
first new social program in this country over 50 years was 
birthed in this province not to mention the supports to children 
and families in our province through the development of 
medicare and the fight on this side of the House to provide 
publicly funded, publicly administered health care, and many, 
many of the other initiatives we talk about. We can’t separate 
these from the kinds of things the Minister of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation is doing to have our young people fit, to get 
people involved in their communities, to have people who are 
active and vibrant, contributing leaders of the future of our 
province. 
 
And so with all of that in mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 
like to move in this Assembly: 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

 

That this Assembly recognize the achievement of this 
government for announcing the largest expansion of child 
care services in the history of the province, an 
announcement that will enable Saskatchewan children and 
parents alike the opportunity to partake fully in the 
economic and social life of this province. 

 
Moved by myself and seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very delighted to be able to second this important 
motion on child care, and recognizing what is a very important 
policy initiative by this government; namely, Mr. Speaker, that 
we are recognizing in this motion the importance of this 
government investing in our children. And the Government of 
Saskatchewan invests in children in this province in a great 
many ways, but one of the most practical ways that makes a 
difference for families in this province is an investment in 
daycare. 
 
And I want to thank the minister of Social Services and the 
Premier for supporting this investment. And I also want to 
recognize, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the role of the member 
for Regina who has just spoken, I want to recognize the 
contribution in this initiative that was made by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, who has been a long time advocate in this 
Assembly for improved funding for daycare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to, as the . . . I want to discuss the 
essence of this initiative, Mr. Speaker, which is a four-year plan 
for expanding daycare spaces in the province of Saskatchewan 
that will be led by the minister responsible for Community 
Resources and Employment. And with the expansion of spaces, 
Mr. Speaker, also comes an improvement in the subsidy that is 
available to lower income families in this province to assist 
them in accessing daycare space. 
 
And the third element of this initiative, Mr. Speaker, is a 
modest improvement in the wages that are available for daycare 
workers who deliver this very important daycare service to the 
children of our province. 
 
So those are the, in essence, those are the three key parts of the 
initiative, Mr. Speaker. And at the end of my remarks, I also 
want to make some comments, Mr. Speaker, about where I 
hope, over the long-term, the daycare policy in our province 
will go. But I want to primarily focus on the important elements 
of the announcement. 
 
And the first one, Mr. Speaker, is that our plan is to expand the 
daycare spaces in the province of Saskatchewan by a total of 
1,200 over the course of the next five years. And the biggest 
increase in the spaces, Mr. Speaker, will be in year one. We’re 
looking, Mr. Speaker, in this year at an increase of 500 daycare 
spaces in the province of Saskatchewan. And that is good news, 
Mr. Speaker, for families across our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in terms of our 

daycare funding this year, the bulk of the new funding in this 
first year is inserted by the province of Saskatchewan. And the 
province of Saskatchewan is investing a total of $1.8 million in 
our — sorry, Mr. Speaker — $2.2 million in our daycare 
package. A total of $2.2 million. 
 
But we also, Mr. Speaker, are fortunate to have a contribution 
being made by the Government of Canada in the amount of 
$800,000. And I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that in future 
years we can look to the federal government. They have 
signalled to us as part of the agreement that they have signed 
with this province that their contribution is going to increase in 
subsequent years by a significant amount, Mr. Speaker. The 
member for Kindersley is saying, by how much? And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be by $2.6 million for next year that we 
can expect from Ottawa. 
 
So with the investment of the province and the investment of 
the Government of Canada, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a 
significant injection of new money into child care that we can 
expect. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that at the end of 
the four years we can expect to have at least 8,600 daycare 
spaces, new daycare spaces, in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, with an additional 1,200 spaces being added over 
this four-year period through the child care program, and also 
additional spaces, Mr. Speaker, being added through the Kids 
First program. 
 
The member for Regina Wascana mentioned Kids First, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is a program that is focused on serving 
families with special needs — especially high needs, Mr. 
Speaker — and there’ll be 131 new spaces through the Kids 
First program that will be made available for child care in the 
province this year in addition to the 500 new spaces that’ll be 
delivered through the child care program, Mr. Speaker. So a 
total this year of 631 new spaces in our province. Now that’s 
progress, Mr. Speaker. That’s progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the second area that I want 
to touch on is the improvements in the daycare subsidy that the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment will be 
delivering. And here, Mr. Speaker, we see an average of a $20 a 
month increase in the subsidy. But the details of the increase, 
Mr. Speaker, vary a little depending on whether you’re talking 
about infants, or preschool children, or school-aged children. 
 
(16:00) 
 
So I want to provide members of the audience who will be 
listening to the debate, and members of the Assembly, with 
more details on the subsidy increases. 
 
In a child care centre, Mr. Speaker, in a licensed child care 
centre, the current maximum subsidy rate that is available to a 
family that qualifies for the full subsidy is $325 for infants. 
That’ll be going up, Mr. Speaker, as of June 1. So in one month 
it’ll be going up to $355. For toddlers, Mr. Speaker, the current 
subsidy is $285. It’ll be going up to $310. For preschool 
children, the current subsidy is $235, and it’ll be going up to 
$255. And for school-age children, Mr. Speaker, there’s a $10 a 
month increase, going up from 200 to 210. And all these figures 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

that I’ve provided are monthly subsidy figures, Mr. Speaker, for 
those who are eligible for the maximum subsidy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that there will be an 
improvement in the family’s ability to access daycare funds 
depending on their income. 
 
So again we’ve got a change in income levels that qualify for 
the subsidy, Mr. Speaker. For instance, a single parent with one 
infant using a licensed centre, Mr. Speaker, will be eligible for 
an increase in the maximum subsidy of $30 a month, from 325 
to $355 a month. 
 
Previously, Mr. Speaker, someone would have qualified for this 
subsidy if they had a gross monthly family income of $2,940. In 
the case of this single parent, the new cut-off point, Mr. 
Speaker, for qualifying for the maximum subsidy will be $3,060 
a month. So, Mr. Speaker, that is a modest improvement in 
terms of income eligibility. 
 
And similarly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made those same kinds of 
policy changes for two-parent families. The subsidy kicks in not 
on the basis of whether it’s a one-parent family or a two-parent 
family but on the basis of gross monthly income for the family 
unit as a whole. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see that we have improved the 
. . . both family’s ability to qualify for the child care subsidy 
and also the level of the child care subsidy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the increase in spaces, with over 
600 new spaces being put into effect this year. I mentioned the 
increase in subsidy which will take place as of June 1 with an 
average monthly increase of $20 a month. And the third area, 
Mr. Speaker, that I want to touch on in terms of our 
government’s initiative in child care is on improvement in grant 
funding for our licensed daycare centres across this province, 
Mr. Speaker, that will allow those centres to improve the 
salaries of child care workers who work in those centres. 
 
And we’ve made a steady improvement in this area, Mr. 
Speaker, over the last four years. In every year the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment has set aside extra 
dollars in the budget that are available to improve the salaries of 
daycare workers, and I might say, Mr. Speaker, to also improve 
the salaries of workers across this province who work in 
community-based organizations. So I’m pleased, I’m very 
pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see these improvements. And I think 
the motion rightly recognizes the achievement of the 
government in this regard. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the question, what would 
members opposite have done? And members may want to 
comment on what they would have done when they get up in 
this debate, Mr. Speaker. But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that last 
year I noted the position of the Sask Party when it came to 
social services spending. They talked, Mr. Speaker, about 
ripping out 25 to $50 million a year out of what was then the 
Department of Social Services, now called the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment. A 25 to $50 million 
dollar reduction is what they said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, they weren’t specific about it being 

targeted at daycare. They were talking across the board in terms 
of spending in Community Resources and Employment, but I 
say, Mr. Speaker, you can’t take 25 to $50 million out of the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment without 
taking money out of daycare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, is increasing the resources 
available for child care and we’re seeing extra spending, as I 
mentioned, this year alone of just provincial dollars, $2.2 
million more. 
 
The Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, are talking about cutting funding 
to the Department of Community Resources by at least $25 
million, Mr. Speaker. Their precise words were 25 to $50 
million, Mr. Speaker. Maybe they’ll want to clarify in this 
debate where that’s money’s going to come out of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, we saw just about three-quarters of an 
hour ago in this Assembly, the member for Swift Current 
refusing to even answer a straightforward question about what 
their position was on whether or not they would privatize parts 
of SaskPower. And any member of the television audience 
who’s been watching over the last hour, Mr. Speaker, will know 
that the member for Swift Current didn’t answer the question 
that was posed about whether or not he’d privatize SaskPower. 
And I doubt, Mr. Speaker, that members will be any more 
forthcoming about what the details are of their 25 to $50 million 
planned cut to the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to close my comments by saying that 
we recognize that in the Assembly, in this motion, that this is a 
very significant step forward in terms of our investment in child 
care. And we also recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the plan is not 
complete; that there’s still more to do — more to do in terms of 
increasing the subsidy, Mr. Speaker; more to do in terms of 
increasing the number of spaces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s my hope that one day in Saskatchewan 
we’ll move towards the kind of model that they have in Quebec, 
Mr. Speaker — which is what I see as the ideal in Canada in 
terms of daycare — where they offer a $5-a-day child care 
program, Mr. Speaker, that’s widely available to the citizens of 
the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know that we are making in this year’s 
budget, in this province, very significant advances in terms of 
the level of the subsidy, the number of spaces, and some 
improvement in terms of salary for daycare workers. And I look 
forward to the day, Mr. Speaker, when even more 
improvements will be made in this regard, and members of the 
public and families could be confident that they will see from 
this government every year — in a re-elected NDP government 
— an increase in the number of daycare spaces in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, year by year over the next three years in addition 
to the increases this year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think members of the public can be 
absolutely certain that if they elect members opposite, members 
of the official opposition in the Sask Party to government, that 
we will see from the department that provides the funding for 
daycare, they would see a reduction of 25 to $50 million in total 
funding for that department. I’m not saying it will all come out 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

 

of daycare; I don’t know where it will come from, Mr. Speaker. 
But clearly there’s a huge ideological difference on this issue 
between members opposite and members on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m proud to be on this side of the House, and I’m proud to be 
supporting a motion, Mr. Speaker, that backs a major 
investment in child care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. It’s 
certainly a pleasure to stand in this Assembly today and speak 
to this motion that’s been brought forward, a motion that calls 
for and basically recognizes government expenditure in the area 
of daycare spaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ve listened to the member from Regina Wascana Plains 
and the member from Saskatoon Greystone, and both of them 
are just really . . . what they’re basically saying is they . . . their 
recognition of the provincial involvement and the increases in 
daycare spaces in the province of Saskatchewan. And in many 
ways they’re endeavouring to take all of the credit for the 
daycare spaces that are going to be made available. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, that’s somewhat a little bit misleading 
because I would suggest to you that if it wasn’t for the federal 
dollars that have been put forward at this time — if it wasn’t for 
the federal dollars being put forward at this time — this 
government would not have the ability to brag about the 
number of spaces. They would probably have increased spaces 
somewhat but they would be majorly limited in the number of 
spaces available because the federal money wouldn’t be there. 
 
And it’s very interesting as I watch the current government. 
And a number of the initiatives, even in the most recent budget 
and Throne Speech that were announced, were initiatives where 
money had already been expended and wasn’t really new 
money. And yet to hear the Minister of Finance and to hear the 
Premier in his Throne Speech talking about initiatives the 
government was taking, it was as if it was totally new funded 
dollars. 
 
And in regards to the daycare spaces, Mr. Deputy Deputy 
Speaker . . . And we acknowledge that there are needs in the 
province of Saskatchewan for young families, especially 
low-income families, to have access to daycare spots because of 
the fact that they’re trying to make a living; they’re trying to 
provide a home atmosphere, an environment for their children; 
they’re trying to provide some of the comforts of life. 
 
And unfortunately as a result of the stagnant economy and the 
economy that . . . We just see in today’s paper, the headline 
reads, “Saskatchewan economy finishes last.” When you look at 
the economic engine of this province, and I believe the current 
Minister of Justice, former minister of Finance is now blaming 
the drought for the provincial economy . . . The facts are, Mr. 
Deputy Deputy Speaker, as a result of the economy that we’re 
living in today and that young people are living in today, young 
parents are living in today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, young couples 
have no other alternative but to look to programming that would 
help them overcome some of the difficulties in providing for the 
daycare that they’re looking for and providing for. 

And when we’re talking daycare, we’re talking quality 
programs. We’re talking quality opportunities for these young 
families so that their children are growing up in an environment 
that is positive and certainly supportive to helping these young 
individuals grow up with having a healthy view of life and of 
living and of learning to get along and co-operate with their 
fellow men. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Deputy Deputy Speaker, as I 
listened to the member from Cumberland, if the member would 
pay attention a little bit he would get, he would actually find out 
a little bit and it may not hurt him to listen. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, we’ll just take his 
words. And his monologue that he’s entering into the debate 
will allow him to have that debate right now and continue to 
talk to himself while we address the question before us. 
 
Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone talked about reducing the funding in the new 
Department of Community Resources and Employment. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly there are avenues if we take a . . . 
and endeavour to address these issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you for 
just giving me the opportunity to speak without having to try 
and think over the other debate that’s taking place in this 
Assembly. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important for the members 
opposite to listen a little bit and to pay attention to some of the 
concerns that are coming from people outside of this Legislative 
Assembly, outside of this city, and certainly in other areas of 
the province. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Greystone talked about the 
Saskatchewan Party and looking at reducing funding to the 
Community Resources and Employment. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would assure you, will assure you that as our party 
puts forward its plan to grow the province of Saskatchewan and 
puts forward its plan and we begin to see a growth in the 
province of Saskatchewan, rather than an economy that 
continues to finish last across this nation, an economy that 
begins to grow, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will see job 
opportunities for young families in this province that will give 
them the ability to move from the welfare rolls into the 
employment field. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will mean that governments will 
have to put less and less into the Community Resources and 
Employment because our goal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not just 
to create more daycare spaces because of the lack of job 
opportunities. Our goal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to create 
employment opportunities that will bring quality job 
opportunities to the people of Saskatchewan so that they can 
provide for their families and provide for their children on their 
own rather than always looking to government. 
 
And if the government members were listening to the young 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

families of this province, they would hear that young men and 
women across this province are more interested in building their 
family relationships on their own rather than always having to 
look out for someone else to provide for the daycare 
opportunities. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, we are not 
opposed to creation of more daycare spaces where they are 
needed. And in today’s economy and today’s society and with 
the demands being put on young parents’ lives, unfortunately 
more and more young parents are having to look to daycare 
spaces. And a lot of the reason they’re looking for subsidized 
daycare spaces is because their income opportunities are so low 
they don’t have a lot of dollars left over to actually find daycare 
space opportunities in the private sector, even though there are 
many out there. 
 
And I guess as my colleague had said as well, the view of this 
current government in place, in power, is to provide for people 
rather than . . . and to look after people rather than giving them 
the ability to provide for themselves. It’s, I guess, the old 
socialist philosophy of looking after people because we know 
what’s best for you. 
 
And basically I think that’s what the two members who spoke, 
as they were speaking today, were telling us, that they know 
what’s best for young families. They know the best way or the 
ways in which they can provide for the young children of this 
province better than young parents in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the young men and women and 
the mothers and fathers of this province should be given every 
opportunity to provide the family environment, the home 
environment, and the ability to raise their children in a positive 
and a productive and a loving and caring environment rather 
than governments providing that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so when the member from Saskatoon Greystone says, well 
we are . . . accuses this party of reducing funding, Mr. Speaker, 
our goal is to build this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if this government was paying attention to 
building this province, they wouldn’t be bragging today about 
the extra dollars they’re putting into daycare opportunities 
because they would be looking at the $28 million that they lost 
in the SPUDCO endeavour, and they were saying, well, man, 
what could we have done with that $28 million to provide job 
opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or what about the . . . what about the $7.9 million they just lost 
in the mega bingo, Mr. Speaker? And, Mr. Speaker, if the 
member from Regina Northwest keeps harping from his seat, 
I’m afraid we’re going to lose more money in our Highways 
budget and, Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford, we cannot afford to 
do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important for people of Saskatchewan to know 
that they need a government that will create an economic and 
political environment that will open up the door for quality job 
opportunities, so that young men and women can make the 
choice of whether or not that parent, one of the parents would 
like to choose to stay at home and provide that home 

environment for that young child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m a firm believer in the fact that if 
a young couple decides that . . . and if a mother would chose — 
in many cases it tends to be the mother — makes that choice, 
would like to stay at home and provide that home environment 
and that loving and caring environment for that child at least up 
until the age until they begin school, that young couple should 
be able to make that choice. However, as a result of the 
economy, the activity in this province, very few couples have 
that opportunity any more. 
 
And we realize, Mr. Speaker, that there are couples even who 
do have the means and choose to continue to work and choose 
to put their children in a daycare space, but as a result . . . I’m 
not saying as a result of. They make that choice and they pay 
for it. 
 
What we’re saying, what this program is doing is at least 
acknowledging that it’s . . . this program is acknowledging that 
it’s the low-income families that are being provided for in the 
daycare program. And if you’re on a low-income wage, you’ve 
got the ability to apply for subsidized daycare programs. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we have certainly indicated that we are not 
opposed to helping those who are less fortunate provide for 
themselves. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is a difference between the 
Saskatchewan Party and the current government. 
 
We need to take a serious look at where we spend the dollars 
and what this government has done over the past few years and 
where it spent money outside of the province. If they would 
have taken the time, Mr. Speaker, to give as much thought to 
building the economy of the province of Saskatchewan rather 
than just throwing money away outside of the province, they 
would have created the job opportunities that would allow the 
young families of this province to not only look at coming back 
and living in the province of Saskatchewan but making the 
choices that they would like to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the most recent release of the 
Crown corporations’ annual reports and we see that in 2002 the 
taxpayers funded out-of-province investments by the Crown 
corporations of this province, we’re taking a bath in red ink to 
the tune of some $85 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what do you think that we could have done in this 
province with $85 million in investment opportunities? Or what 
do you think we could have taken . . . done in regards to 
addressing, in addressing debt, on the general revenue portion 
of the debt in this province if there was that $85 million actually 
invested in the province rather than outside of the province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder that young families are forced to 
find and try to live on two incomes, and in many cases they’re 
low-income earners and as a result they find it very difficult to 
pay for babysitting services. 
 
And I’ve talked to young families, Mr. Speaker, who have . . . 
when they’ve sat down and looked at what they were bringing 
in for income into their home, by having that second, second 
income — in many cases they didn’t because they didn’t have 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

 

access to a subsidized daycare program — they were asking 
themselves, exactly what do we have left by the time they’ve 
paid for their daycare services, by adding that additional 
income. 
 
And in some cases, Mr. Speaker, these young families have 
decided they would try and make it on that one income rather 
than the other partner, spouse working and with their income 
finding out that they had very little left after they paid for their 
daycare program. So in situations of this nature where we have 
young couples trying to survive on low-income job 
opportunities, the subsidized daycare program will certainly 
give them an avenue that allows them to create more economic 
activity for their home environment so that they can try and 
endeavour to meet the needs of their growing children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the investments that the Crown 
corporations have made in the province of Saskatchewan and 
outside of the province of Saskatchewan, we look at the losses 
that we have seen in these Crown corporations. SaskTel, we 
see, was the biggest money loser with at least 6 to $7 million in 
lost . . . in out-of-province investments, including a $40 million 
writedown on its Australian telecommunications company, 
Austar, and an $11 million loss on a BC telecommunications 
company called Navigata. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at the investments that the Crown 
corporations have invested in and the investments that they 
have invested in outside of the province and we look at the 
losses that they have incurred, and one has to ask, what could 
have the Crown corporations done in regards to economic 
activity when in most cases the economic engine for the Crown 
corporations has been the province of Saskatchewan, has been 
right here within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In many cases, Mr. Speaker, they have done very well. They 
have made . . . had good profits. Unfortunately they’ve had to 
. . . their profits had been cut back because they’ve had to write 
off losses that have incurred as a result of their investments 
outside of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we look at the motion before us and what 
we’re basically saying, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 
motion before us — we can brag all we want about 
achievements in addressing the need for child care services — 
but what we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is the need for child care 
services may not be as large if the economy of the province was 
growing and if we were investing. 
 
If, rather than investing outside of the province, if the Crown 
corporations were making their investments in the province, 
creating quality job opportunities, we may not need as many 
child daycare spaces that government is bragging about. 
 
But we’re recognizing the fact that there is a need out there. We 
recognize that fact, that there is a need for these child care 
spaces. 
 
And as a result of that need and as a result of a lagging 
economy, Mr. Speaker — and as I indicated earlier, the 
headlines today talking about the economy in this province dead 
last; certainly, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 
economy finishing last, there’s no doubt that we have — the 

government’s forced to again go begging to the federal 
government for some funds to invest in this province so that 
they can meet the needs of the people of this province and 
especially the young families who are trying to get their feet on 
the ground. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about people, young couples 
and children and providing job opportunities, one of the things 
that we’re all aware of is that many young families or young 
couples as they begin looking, begin building for the future, in 
many cases some of these young couples are facing significant 
university tuition fees and, Mr. Speaker, they’re also facing 
large debt loads as a result of student loans. 
 
And so when they begin their workplace environment, 
sometimes the work environment or the job opportunity that 
may be available to them is a fairly low-income job 
opportunity. And they’re trying to pay for home rent, house rent 
or make house payments, or payments on a vehicle, and they’re 
starting a family and so they’ve got those payments to make, 
Mr. Speaker, as they provide for their young family, as well as 
trying to pay down their student loan debt. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of pressures on young 
couples today as they begin to build for their future. And as a 
result of their needs, they’re . . . in many cases they’re always 
. . . they are forced to look for daycare spots. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that fact. We recognize that 
fact. But, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s . . . We need to start 
looking at beyond just providing for the daycare needs of 
low-income families in the province of Saskatchewan. We need 
to start looking at ways of how we can grow the economy so 
that these young couples have access to those job opportunities. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve been pointing out as well 
is the fact that if the government spent its money wisely and if it 
would be very careful on how it enters into its investments, and 
if it would create an economic climate in the province of 
Saskatchewan that would allow much of the private sector to 
certainly invest in the province of Saskatchewan, we would 
have the job opportunities for young families to enter into that 
would open up the doors for them to build for their futures and 
the futures of their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many other avenues that we could go 
in and discuss as we debate this issue regarding daycare 
spending in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the privilege of going into and 
looking at a . . . It’s not really a daycare program. What it is, 
Mr. Speaker, is a support program for young parents and young 
mothers. And it’s actually is hosted by . . . in the basement of 
the education wing of the United Church in the community of 
Moosomin. 
 
And I went down there yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and it was 
really . . . What was really interesting, there were, if I’m not 
mistaken, about eight young mothers there looking after a 
number of children. I’m guessing right now in the 
neighbourhood of 25 to 30 if not more. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you would walk down into an 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

environment of that nature, you would expect that you’re going 
to hear — especially when you’re looking at from toddlers up to 
probably in the ages of three and four — that there’d be a lot of 
noise. And in many cases you might expect a lot of children 
who might not be getting along with each other and screaming 
and crying. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I walked down into that area yesterday of 
the education building in Moosomin, it was interesting to just 
see how the children were playing together, were interacting 
together, and there just was a sense of real support. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And what the program does, Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . A couple of 
individuals decided they needed to provide an environment 
where young mothers could come and bring their children and 
they could be a support for each other. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve all been through that. 
We’ve been through that, and in many cases, as I’ve said, 
maybe as husbands sometimes we don’t always take the time to 
appreciate what our wives went through when they were at 
home with toddlers. And maybe a toddler isn’t feeling well, or a 
toddler is acting up, and as a young mother it can become very 
frustrating. 
 
And what these young women have done is decided we’re 
going to provide a support mechanism where two days a week 
young mothers can come and we can sit down with each other, 
and our children can learn to play together and learn to 
appreciate other individuals and how to get along in a 
community environment. And as mothers, as our children are 
playing together and learning to get along together, we can 
discuss some of the avenues whereby . . . as to how we meet the 
needs of our growing family and as we offer encouragement to 
other young mothers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was very enlightening to walk into that 
environment and just see the peaceful atmosphere within the 
facility and how these children were working . . . were playing 
together and how each individual parent was being a support to 
the other parent and just offering words of encouragement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to do a little more of that in 
this province as well, whereby parents themselves put together 
support programs and support initiatives so they become a 
support mechanism that they can each draw on when they find 
that there are times in their day when it becomes somewhat 
discouraging and they think that they’re — especially for young 
mothers — they think they may be all alone, nobody really 
cares. And yet when they sit down and start talking to other 
individuals who have little children and other young mothers, 
they find, oh, there’s a real support mechanism out there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what that program is doing is actually 
addressing a need in that community — a support program for 
young mothers. And while it isn’t a subsidized daycare 
program, Mr. Speaker, what it is doing is it’s meeting a need in 
the community. And I think it’s a need that could certainly be 
expanded outside of that community to other communities 
where . . . especially for young mothers who have decided to 
stay at home because they want to be there. 

They want to be there when that, whether a young son or 
daughter, starts to take their first steps or when their young son 
or daughter starts to say the first words. They don’t want the 
daycare supplier or a person to hear their young son say a few 
words, his few words, or take his few steps. They want to be 
there and to observe that and be a part of it and help that young 
child as they begin to develop and as they begin to become 
individuals in their community. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated earlier, while we’re 
supportive of the fact that there is a need for some daycare spots 
in the province, subsidized daycare spots in the province of 
Saskatchewan, we also I think need to give some thought and 
support to the parents who choose, where once . . . choose to 
and have made the decision and the choice where one spouse 
will stay at home for a while to provide care for the child while 
the other spouse is working, and thereby providing the care. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what they’re doing is they’re actually 
passing on their principles to that child. And they want . . . 
What they’re saying is, we want to be here for you so that you 
can learn what it is to have a parent at home rather than 
somebody else being that parent. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we recognize in some ways where the 
government is going in this motion. 
 
We also want people to realize that a large portion of this 
funding is coming from the federal level. And while the 
government is endeavouring to take all the credit, a fair bit of 
the credit certainly would go to the federal government for their 
support and the transfer of payments to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But also, Mr. Speaker, we need to go beyond just providing 
daycare, subsidized daycare spaces. We need to start to build 
the province of Saskatchewan. And that’s what a Saskatchewan 
Party would endeavour to do, is to build this province so that 
job opportunities are there, and not just low-income job 
opportunities but very well-meaning and paying job 
opportunities that would allow young families to make some of 
the choices that they would like to make. And if they choose not 
to look for a daycare program, that’s a choice they’re able to 
make because that quality job is there. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Kindersley: 
 

That all the words after “recognize” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 
the importance of government-funded services such as 
child care, and therefore regrets the NDP’s habitual 
propensity for wasting taxpayer dollars on ill-fated schemes 
such as SPUDCO, mega bingo, and a myriad of foreign 
fiascos. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to enter into the 
debate this afternoon on this important issue of child daycare. 
 
I want to start by saying I was speaking against the motion and 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

 

in favour of the amendment. I’m speaking against the motion by 
large and part because of the amount of fluff contained within 
it. It seems to be a bragging about something that in some ways 
doesn’t really add up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that over the next 10 years is 
planning for 35,000 fewer students in the K to 12 (kindergarten 
to grade 12) system, and yet at the same time they are 
expanding the daycare, subsidized daycare mind you, by 1,800 
spots over the next couple of years. 
 
If we extrapolate what these numbers mean, it means that about 
two and a half per cent of the population is going to be on lower 
income, looking at needing subsidized daycare. And this is 
shameful and it’s part of the record of this government that the 
economy that they have produced and are responsible for has 
not kept up with the rest of Canada. 
 
We are at the lowest levels. And because of this we have more 
people living in poverty, and in turn we have more children 
living in poverty or we have children of parents who are 
working hard to make ends meet and needing to use daycare 
facilities and barely squeaking by. 
 
To start with, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to commend some of what 
the member from Saskatoon Greystone said when he talked 
about the actual impact for the individuals receiving these 
subsidies. And he went through a number of the numbers and I 
thought it was an intelligent discussion. 
 
The reality for persons receiving these subsidies is, it’s often 
they’re working one or two jobs and it is very hard to make 
ends meet. The member from Saskatoon Greystone talked about 
the extra $20 a month increase in subsidy for child care for the 
different ages, and that this comes to those persons as very 
important. Where I differ from that member, however, is in why 
this is happening. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan has been blessed with an 
abundance of natural resources and human resources and yet we 
are the poorest GDP (gross domestic product) for economic 
growth in the country. And this is shameful and this falls 
directly on the members opposite and the way that they have 
mismanaged this economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that Saskatchewan can be so 
much more. Our party, Mr. Speaker, has a plan to grow this 
province and we’re going to grow the province with a 
population of 100,000 over the next 10 years. Further to this, 
Mr. Speaker, there were members in the gallery yesterday from 
Agrivision that are talking about growing this province by a 
million people over the next 20 years . . . or 30 years rather. 
And there is no reason that this can’t happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that . . . I’ve met with a number 
of our daycare workers in Kindersley. They had a whole 
number of concerns. The member from Saskatoon Greystone 
said that over the last four years there has been a constant 
increase in the funding that licensed daycare workers were 
receiving and this unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, is completely not 
the case from the individuals that I have spoken with. 
 
I asked a number of written questions earlier on in the session, 

Mr. Speaker, about where monies over the last five years had 
actually gone. And the lion’s share had gone to the programs of 
Early Childhood Intervention Program, the Head Start program, 
the pre-kindergarten program, kindergarten programs, Kids 
First program, and the child care subsidy. 
 
The fact of the matter is is that the licensed child care workers 
face many, many challenges and that they really haven’t seen an 
increase of pay over the last number of years. There’s some 
systemic problems as well that the government hadn’t 
addressed. 
 
One of the real problems is in the event that a licensed daycare 
worker takes a child to watch and the parents don’t show up 
and, you know, they keep the children overnight or maybe even 
in some cases for two or three days, and at the end of that the 
parent comes and hasn’t paid the bill. Well there’s a number of 
problems involved with this. 
 
The first is that these licensed daycare workers have incurred an 
expense for all this time that they’ve diligently taken care of 
this child but the system is currently set up that there is no way 
that the licensed daycare worker is able to take this expense and 
write it off as a business expense. It is just an outright loss. And 
that is a clear problem and it results in putting extra pressure on 
our licensed daycare workers. And they have no choice, Mr. 
Speaker, because they have to . . . they have the moral 
responsibility of taking care of those children which are left 
with them. And yet at the end of the day they’re out of pocket, 
which puts further stress on the system. And it is something that 
needs to be remedied and this government hadn’t looked at at 
all. 
 
One of the suggestions that came forth from a meeting I had 
with daycare workers is not only should they be allowed to 
write off such losses, there should be a form of contract 
between the parents providing the children to the daycare 
workers and to the licensed daycares. And that these contracts 
would be the form which would demonstrate what the losses 
would actually be. 
 
Further, it was their suggestion that there be a data bank 
maintained so that when you have situations where parents and 
families are transient, they are not able to go to another town 
and kind of souse the next daycare worker. That there could be 
a data bank so that until a daycare bills in arrears were paid up, 
services wouldn’t be provided. 
 
Akin to that, if such a service were set up it would also be very 
necessary and, I think, important for family services to have 
access to that data so in the event that you had a transient family 
that had arrears in daycares no longer eligible to have daycare 
— and sometimes as I said, daycare workers have told me that 
children are dropped with them for two or three days at a time 
— that Social Services are aware of these families so that if 
they’re not being allowed to go into daycare, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’re not falling through the cracks and just being left at home 
and left completely unattended. 
 
I think these are a couple of areas the government has missed 
and that definitely need to be looked into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize, as the Saskatchewan Party, the need 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2003 

 

for more spaces for families in daycare where both parents 
work. The member from Moosomin did point out though that 
this kind of a system that’s been brought forward is leaving out 
the situation where we have families that have a mother or a 
father that wish to stay at home, for single . . . families where 
the best care could be provided by an actual parent rather than 
having to go to daycare. And I think that the overall initiative of 
the government really didn’t touch on this fact in any kind of 
meaningful way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government . . . this government is bragging 
about the economy and how well we’re doing, yet there’s so 
many people on low incomes who must rely on daycare. And 
this is a situation that needs to be turned around. There is no 
doubt that early childhood . . . monies spent on early childhood 
care is very important. What is alarming is the number of 
children in this province that are on the low end, living in 
families at the low end of the income level. And when this 
happens, their chance in life is diminished. 
 
(16:45) 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is a clear reflection on the handling of 
the economy of this government. There have been a number of 
fiascos in foreign investments where we’ve seen monies which 
could have been better spent within our province for services 
we’d all desire, exit the province to the tune of about $85 
million last year alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that all of us in this Assembly 
want to see the best province possible. Where we really differ 
and where the members opposite I think are a bit of an 
anachronism, even with regards to international leftist parties, is 
they’ve missed the boat on the economy, wanting to have a 
centrally planned economy where they run everything. And 
unfortunately it has failed miserably and continues to fail. 
 
We see, Mr. Speaker, in the third way from Great Britain and 
Prime Minister Tony Blair and the economic success they have 
there when they make a distinction between the situation that 
the economy should function independently of the government, 
whereas the government should still be in a position to be 
delivering services that everyone wants. And daycare would be 
one of these, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite haven’t come to this conclusion yet. 
Their federal counterparts in the NDP haven’t come to this 
conclusion yet. 
 
The Clinton administration, Mr. Speaker, in the United States 
had a pretty good understanding of this, and we saw great 
economic gains under the Clinton administration for the United 
States. The Dow Jones grew at a rate never before seen then or 
since, and they understood that you cannot have the government 
involved in the economy first and foremost and still deliver the 
services that everyone wants. The two just don’t work. 
 
The members opposite are the antithesis of the third way. 
They’re demonstrating completely that we can’t have either 
successfully. And not only do we have the poorest GDP rate in 
the country, Mr. Speaker, we have a unbalanced budget. We 
have $400 million of debt added to this. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have a Premier that’s adding $1 million a day. 

Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to touch on the aspect with regards 
to daycare for rural centres. One of the things that doesn’t seem 
to be addressed adequately here is the modern farm family, Mr. 
Speaker, is often mother and father. And as rural depopulation 
has increased over the last 11 years, we have fewer and fewer 
families out in the rural areas. But this also means, Mr. Speaker, 
that we have fewer extended families. In the past it was a 
tradition that working farm families would often leave child 
care to members of extended families — grandparents or aunts 
and uncles. 
 
Unfortunately as we continue to see rural depopulation under a 
mismanaged government, children are more or less . . . more 
and more often left to be in the care of overworked parents who 
are both running the farm. The situation is very serious because, 
as all members of the House would know, agriculture often 
demands very long hours under tiring circumstances and also 
under somewhat dangerous circumstances. 
 
This government I think has completely failed in their latest 
round of proposals with regards to daycare to make sure that 
farm family children are not being . . . are being taken care of 
within the licensed daycare system. Instead they are being left 
in jeopardy around various very dangerous equipment and 
under less than ideal work conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is something that . . . it’s a point for 
something in my area, Mr. Speaker. We have members in our 
area who have . . . when we have members in our area, Mr. 
Speaker, who would like to have access to daycare, we also 
have the issue of transportation. The services that seem to be 
provided in this new Bill aren’t really addressing any issues of 
transportation when we have more and more rural depopulation, 
smaller and smaller towns. 
 
Some of the farms and the farm families are farther and farther 
away from licensed daycare centres. For example, in my own 
town of Eatonia, people farming south towards the river that 
could be utilizing daycare would be 50 miles from a licensed 
daycare centre. There has been no consideration by this 
government on how these children would access that daycare on 
a regular basis, specifically during the busy periods of harvest 
and spring planting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is somewhat problematic and for all the change that will 
possibly lighten some of the load for some families utilizing 
this service, it still falls far short. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s much better places that money could have 
been spent that this government . . . And as the amendment 
reads, we have such ill-fated habitual propensity for wasting 
taxpayers’ dollars on ill-fated schemes such as SPUDCO, mega 
bingo, and many other foreign fiascos. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that we shouldn’t be spending 
money outside the province. This is not what the single mothers 
that are wanting this child care subsidy are asking for. It’s not 
what taxpayers in general are asking for. And it’s a burden and 
it’s an unfair burden to be placing on our children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a few of the figures that . . . about 
the increases that have come from over the last five years with 
regards to some of the other expenditure areas of the former 



April 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

 

Social Services department. 
 
We saw from the Early Childhood Intervention Program in 
1998-99, it had $1.773 million spent, and that was bumped up 
by 2002-2003 to $2.478 million. Pre-kindergarten, 26 different 
programs received about $2 million increase in funding at the 
same time. And the licensed child care centres in that period 
received significantly less, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The child care workers in my area have said, it’s our turn. And 
the federal initiative that has seen this Bill come forward is the 
first thing that will allow them to make sure that they get some 
of this. But what they are calling for is they are saying we have 
waited a long time, it is our turn, and that we should be 
recognized. The extension only of new spaces may not 
adequately address this and we’re not sure from what was being 
spelt out by the members whether this will be occurring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had . . . With regards to the increases, I can 
say, and I’ve said before in the House, we would like 
individuals that are receiving the subsidies, if it were possible, 
to receive more. But at the end of the day the question is left as 
where does the money come from? And from this government 
there’s no real problem with that, Mr. Speaker. They just add it 
to the debt. They added 400 million this year. They called it 
balanced — none of the other banking institutions or anyone 
else did. And of course they’re going to pay for this with a 6.8 
per cent growth increase whereas the Royal Bank of Canada, 
this morning on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
Radio, Mr. Speaker, said at best we’re going to see a 3.8 per 
cent growth rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see that we’re coming close to the end of time 
here. I’d like to move to adjourn debate. I know that the 
members opposite have been moved in great ways at the depth 
of my speech, so I would move to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:56. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................759 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................759 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................759 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................759 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................759 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................759 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................759 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................759 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................760 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................760 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................760 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................760 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................760 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................760 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................760 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................760 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................761 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Yom haShoah 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................761 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................761 
 Exemplary Corrections Service Honoured 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................762 
 Davidson and District Economic Development Board 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................762 
 Theatre Fest 2003 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................762 
 Biggar Volunteer Wins Queen’s Jubilee Medal 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................762 
 Saskatoon Company Wins Award 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................763 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Mega Bingo 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................763 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................763 
 Ethanol Industry 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................764 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................765 
 SaskTel Investments 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................765 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................766 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................767 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................767 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................770 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Public Ownership of Electrical Utilities 
  Van Mulligen.....................................................................................................................................................................768, 777 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................769 
  Wall ....................................................................................................................................................................................771, 777 
  D’Autremont .....................................................................................................................................................................773, 777 
  Yates...................................................................................................................................................................................774, 777 
  Weekes ...............................................................................................................................................................................776, 778 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................777 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 3 — Expansion of Child Care Services 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................778 



 

 

  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................781 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................786 
 


