















































Hansard: April 09, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 471 
 April 9, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 42. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Tugaske and Elbow. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens who have 
grave concerns over the condition of Highway 47 South. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Estevan as well as the rural 
area surrounding Estevan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition of citizens who are concerned about second year 
premium hikes in crop insurance. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Spiritwood and Rabbit Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
also to improve Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 

the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury and loss of life, to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by many citizens from Tugaske, Eyebrow, Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise again 
today to present a petition from citizens concerned about the 
huge Saskatchewan Crop Insurance premium rates. The petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very, very upset with the 
government’s handling of our crop insurance. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood and Duck Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 21, and no. 27. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the House, five 
students sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, that are visiting 
from Moose Jaw. Jasper Wills, Ken Hales, Brad Dodd, Danielle 
Trumbley, and Jason Trudel are here from Phoenix Academy in 
Moose Jaw. And accompanying the students are Laurie 
Crittenden and Jeff Lynnes. 
 
Now the member from Regina Elphinstone would also like me 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

to pass along a special welcome to Jeff. They are friends from 
way back, he tells me. 
 
So I’d like members in the House to please welcome the 
students and their teachers this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
this legislature, a guest from the legislature of Manitoba, the 
Hon. Scott Smith, Minister of Transportation and Government 
Services and outstanding member of the outstanding NDP (New 
Democratic Party) Government of Manitoba. 
 
I would ask all to join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

86th Anniversary of Battle of Vimy Ridge 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, April 9, 
is the 86th anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge. It is also 
the day that Canadians across the country will be asked to 
remember as Vimy Ridge Day, following the passage of a 
federal private member’s Bill in the Senate last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 9, 1917, under the leadership of 
Lieutenant General Julian Byng and General Sir Arthur Currie, 
Canadian corps attacked German defences at Vimy Ridge, a 
German stronghold. In three days the Canadians overtook a key 
strategic defensive position that neither the British nor the 
French had been able to capture in three years. 
 
It was the first Allied victory of World War I and it was also a 
major turning point for Canada. The fearless fighting of our 
troops earned our country a signature on the peace treaty and 
gave Canada a right to sit as an independent country at the 
League of Nations. In many ways, Mr. Speaker, that’s why 
Vimy Ridge is often referred to as when Canada truly became a 
nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what a terrible price was paid. We lost 10,000 
Canadian soldiers . . . or 10,000 were wounded and nearly 
4,000 had died. Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity of visiting 
Vimy Ridge. And the trenches are well preserved and the 
memorial is a proud testament to the bravery and loyalty of the 
thousands of Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to all those World War I veterans who fought so 
bravely for Canada’s freedom, and so that we may ensure that 
those that come after us will never forget what price that 
freedom will cost, I ask all members of the House to join with 
me in honouring today, April 9, as the first official Vimy Ridge 
Day in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, today marks the 86th anniversary 
of an episode in our history that was both terrible and crucial. 
Mr. Speaker, 86 years ago today, during the course of the First 

World War, Canadian soldiers began an attack that would see 
them accomplish what neither the French nor the British had 
been able to accomplish in the years before, and that was to 
capture a long, low, heavily fortified rise in France known as 
Vimy Ridge. 
 
As with every battle in every war, we need to remember that the 
victory at Vimy Ridge was achieved at a terrible cost on both 
sides. Over the six days of fighting, Canadian troops suffered 
over 10,000 casualties of whom 3,600 were killed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cost was high but for many the Battle of Vimy 
Ridge, fought and won by Canadians, marks a significant 
milestone in Canada’s coming of age as a nation. It is sad, Mr. 
Speaker, that this milestone had to be such a bloody one. But 
there’s no denying that the battle and the victory at Vimy Ridge 
was one of the defining moments in the history of this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today there will be ceremonies across the country 
to pay tribute to soldiers who fought at Vimy Ridge. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this year will be especially poignant since Mr. Charles 
Reaper, the last surviving Canadian veteran of that battle, 
passed away last month at the age of 103. 
 
On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, my grandfather’s first battle 
was Vimy Ridge. Seventeen years later on that very day, my 
father was born. And, interestingly enough, so was . . . the 
grandfather of the member for Regina Coronation Park also 
fought at Vimy Ridge. So I’m especially proud to stand in this 
Assembly to honour those who fought and died there, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cut Knife Bowlers Advance to National 
Masters Tournament 

 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
master bowlers from Cut Knife and Battlefords constituency 
advancing to nationals. The final two tournaments of the 
Masters bowling were held in Saskatoon on last weekend. The 
first two tournaments were held in November in Regina. The 
scores were taken from the best of the . . . three out of the four 
tournaments. There are two sides to the . . . of this bowling — a 
scratch, a tournament side, and a pin over average teaching side 
as well. A teaching women’s team and a teaching men’s team 
will be representing Saskatchewan at the National Masters 
bowling tournament in Ottawa in the end of June. 
 
Mark Alexander and Lyle Ramsay from Cut Knife will be 
bowling in the men’s teaching team. Len Anseth from Cut 
Knife will be bowling in the men’s tournament division and 
Tracy Anseth from Cut Knife will be bowling in the ladies’ 
division. 
 
Please join me in wishing these bowlers good luck in the 
nationals in Ottawa in June. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Casino Moose Jaw Wins Award of Excellence 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

 

Speaker, here’s a quiz for you. What city is the fastest growing 
tourist destination in Saskatchewan? Time’s up, and I’m sure 
you had the answer on the tip of your tongue. It’s Moose Jaw, 
Mr. Speaker — the city of tunnels, the city of downtown 
murals, the city of the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa, the city 
with excellent shops, museums, and restaurants. Mr. Speaker, 
that was a giveaway question if there ever was one. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw North and I 
are proud to tell the Assembly that not only do we have a new 
tourist attraction; this attraction was named rookie of the year 
by Sask Tourism. At the recent Saskatchewan Tourism Awards 
of Excellence gala, the Moose Jaw casino was given this award, 
presented to, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan tourism business, event or association that 
opened in the previous year and had an immediate impact 
on tourism activity. 

 
Now how is this for immediate, Mr. Speaker? On opening day, 
Casino Moose Jaw attracted more than 3,000 visitors. Since 
then it’s averaged 1,000 visitors a day. The casino offers 
gaming, entertainment, and it’s very pleasing to the eye — 
keeping with our Moose Jaw theme — with 18 murals inside 
and two large exterior murals. It’s connected to the mineral spa 
by a pedway. 
 
This is an important part of our Moose Jaw downtown 
redevelopment and, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to pass along our 
congratulations to Casino Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian University Curling Championship 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Assembly 
today to talk about the continuing achievements of the Jolene 
McIvor rink from Davidson. The McIvor rink captured their 
second straight national University Curling Championship on 
behalf of the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Asham Canadian University Curling Championship was 
held at the Caledonian Curling Club in Regina on March 26 to 
30, 2003. If you remember last year I had the privilege of 
talking about the achievements of the McIvor rink in 2002 
Canadian junior championships. 
 
Well this year’s foursome, including Jolene McIvor, Maegan 
Strueby, Allison Gerhardt, and Amanda Nahnybida, and coach 
René McIvor, went undefeated in the round robin, boasting a 
perfect six win, no loss record. They advanced to the final 
against a rink from the University of Western Ontario where 
they captured the title after a hard-fought, 10th end win. 
 
The goal of the Canadian University Curling Championship is 
to have curling recognized as a Canadian interuniversity sport. 
When we look at the success of our Saskatchewan teams that all 
levels have achieved, people of Saskatchewan can be very 
proud of their remarkable efforts in 2003. 
 
Jolene, daughter of Perry and Ronna McIvor from Davidson, is 
currently a fourth year student, majoring in sport and leisure 
management. 

I would ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
McIvor rink in their 2003 Canadian University Championship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Signs of Spring 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, you will remember that 
the once and future member for Indian Head-Milestone, Mr. 
Scott, would encourage us at this time of the year with his 
announcement of the signs of approaching spring — the 
crocuses on the hillside, bluebirds building their nests, and so 
on. I miss those statements. In some small way though, Mr. 
Speaker, perhaps I can fill the void. 
 
Now bluebirds I don’t know much about. Cranes on the other 
hand I am getting pretty familiar with because in and around my 
constituency of Regina Victoria, including the University of 
Regina, there are cranes all over the place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — My colleagues around that university in 
Saskatoon tell me pretty much the same thing. Presently there 
are two cranes nesting around the new $35 million twin tower 
student residence. There was a crane helping construct the now 
completed $30 million SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College) Building. Perhaps there will soon be a crane at the $31 
million Physical Activity Centre. Down on Broadway Avenue 
by the way, Mr. Speaker, you’ll see another crane hovering over 
a new high-rise. 
 
At the Saskatoon campus the cranes are around the $173 
million synchrotron; there’s a $13 million chemical engineering 
building extension, and the $33 million College of Kinesiology 
has room for a crane to put its legs down. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are Saskatchewan signs of spring, signs of 
hope and activity, signs that in Saskatchewan the future is wide 
open for all of us, cranes included. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Progress of War in Iraq 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
historic pictures are being shown on television today from Iraq 
and from the capital of Iraq — Baghdad. The scenes show 
Iraqis pouring into the streets, rejoicing, celebrating, and 
beginning to feel the breath of fresh air that is freedom after 
living so many years under the murderous dictatorship of 
Saddam Hussein. An amazing episode was played out in 
Baghdad as Iraqis came to a town square and brought down a 
huge statue of Saddam Hussein. Iraqis then dragged the statue’s 
head through the streets and pounded it with shoes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this conflict continues. Many have lost their lives 
in the efforts to free Iraq from Saddam Hussein’s regime, and 
there are still many dangerous challenges ahead. It’s my hope, 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

and I’m sure it’s the hope of all my colleagues, that this war 
comes to a swift resolution and that our prayers and thoughts 
are with those who have lost a son or a daughter, a brother, a 
sister, a mother, a father, and for all the children in this war. 
 
We also pray that all of the troops return home safely to their 
concerned family and friends. Mr. Speaker, it’s my hope that 
the freedoms Iraqis are now celebrating in Baghdad continue 
now and forever. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of months ago the 
Premier held a news conference to fess up about SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company), and he 
announced that his government would embark on a new era of 
ministerial responsibility and accountability. Well that era 
ended yesterday when the minister of Liquor and Gaming 
refused to answer the question, who was responsible for the 
NDP decision to lose $6.2 million on bingo. 
 
We know that the NDP’s bingo scheme had no business plan. 
We know that it had no specific cabinet approval. 
 
So what we need to know is, was it approved by the minister? 
Mr. Speaker, did the minister of Liquor and Gaming at the time 
approve the decision to risk $6.2 million on bingo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry that I haven’t 
made myself clear to members of the opposition. There are 
members of the public that do understand how government 
works. Obviously that member doesn’t and he never will know 
how government works on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Cabinet approved a linked bingo game as 
part of a larger gaming strategy. And the various ministers 
responsible for SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority) over the period of time during which linked bingo 
was approved, developed, implemented, and operated would 
have monitored SLGA’s work. This monitoring, Mr. Speaker, 
occurred through regular meetings and briefings as well as 
updates provided to the SLGA’s board which consists of the 
minister responsible and another cabinet minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that that minister is 
three monkeys in one — hear no evil, speak no evil, and see no 
evil. That’s why I’m asking my questions to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the Premier has tried to blow this off like it’s no big deal. 
He said it’s not important because it happened six years ago. 

Well first of all, it happened three years ago. Secondly, the 
NDP lost $6.2 million of taxpayers’ money. And thirdly, we 
just found out about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it only came out into the open when the 
Saskatchewan Party began to ask questions, just like SPUDCO. 
Mr. Speaker, isn’t that the way with the NDP? They lose 
millions of dollars, nobody takes responsibility, they try to 
cover it up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re just asking who was responsible for this 
decision. Did the minister of Liquor and Gaming at the time 
approve this expenditure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’m certain that it will now 
be quite evident to everyone why the nominated candidate for 
the Sask Party in Melville says there’s a lot of inexperience on 
that side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The minister responsible for SLGA, Mr. 
Speaker, did not approve an upfront expenditure for this 
program because initially there was no net budget impact that 
was projected, Mr. Speaker. SLGA management would have 
authorized related development and implementation costs as a 
course of doing business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what does it say when 
the minister has been a minister for two years, has some 
experience, and can’t answer the questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, you could understand why 
we don’t always believe the answers that were given by this 
government. It took them six years to confess and come clean 
on the SPUDCO affair. And even then the minister responsible 
didn’t get fired. He still sits in cabinet. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we find out the NDP lost another $6.2 
million on bingo. They didn’t have a business plan; they didn’t 
have proper cabinet approval. The contract went to a firm with 
strong ties to the NDP. The minister won’t tell us who made the 
decision, but we’re supposed to just trust them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nobody trusts this NDP government. Why won’t 
they answer this one simple question — who approved the 
mega bingo scheme? Was it the minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, cabinet 
approved the implementation of this project. There was no net 
budget impact at the time that the minister allowed this to go 
ahead. I mean, there was no need to. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, they’re questioning the process. Well I 
would like to table this advertisement by Western Canada 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

 

Lottery Corporation that had asked for tenders to become 
involved as agents on behalf of SLGA, Mr. Speaker. An RFP 
(request for proposal) ad was published in all newspapers in 
1997 and was open to all bidders, whether they had existing 
software system or proposed to develop the software system 
under the RFP specifications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition once again 
questioning the integrity of the Western Canada Lottery 
Foundation. Shame on you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, over a month ago officials of 
Liquor and Gaming promised to get information about the 
tendering process. I understand that the minister has tabled 
something today. Could the minister please explain what it is he 
has tabled? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well the tendering process, Mr. Speaker, 
in this case, was that the Western Canada Lottery Corporation 
— I’ll try and speak slowly, all right — as SLGA’s agent issued 
a request for proposal for software development. An RFP ad 
was published — one that I just tabled, Mr. Speaker — in 
newspapers in 1997 and was open to all bidders. 
 
Western Canada Lottery Corporation received and evaluated the 
proposals as WCLC, the very corporation that the opposition is 
questioning the integrity of. WCLC presented SLGA with its 
evaluations, Mr. Speaker, of the proposals, which identified two 
potential suppliers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not questioning Western 
Canada Lotteries. We’re questioning this NDP government. 
We’re questioning about a government that lost $6 million, 
without a business plan and without cabinet approval. We’re 
questioning a government that awarded $1.2 million bingo 
contract to a company with strong NDP ties, and we want to 
ensure that the contract was tendered and that it was tendered 
fairly. And so far the minister has given us nothing to prove 
this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how were other Saskatchewan firms invited to bid 
on this contract? And will the minister please table any 
advertising inviting bidding . . . bids for this firm. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I hope I’m speaking the 
language of the House, but I will repeat it. The Western Canada 
Lottery Corporation, as SLGA’s agent, issued a request for 
proposal. I tabled a copy of that document and it’s available for 
all the members to look at. 
 
The ad was published. There were a number of people that 
responded to WCLC, Mr. Speaker. WCLC made 
recommendations to SLGA. SLGA authorized WCLC to accept 
the lower cost proposal. And in this case it happened to be a 
Saskatchewan company, Mr. Speaker. Seems simple to me. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same NDP government 
that lost $28 million on SPUDCO and covered it up for six 
years. You can forgive us for being a little suspicious when they 
ask us to trust them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many firms were invited to bid on this 
contract and did SLGA send out letters? Did they send out 
letters to other qualified Saskatchewan firms inviting them to 
bid? And if so, will the minister table those letters. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I guess newspapers, I 
understand, are distributed to the wide population. Those 
proposals, those requests for tenders were advertised in those 
newspapers. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how else to explain 
that. Everybody was invited to participate in that tendering 
process, and those that did were reviewed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to go back to what these members 
opposite are trying to accuse this government of and SLGA of. 
The SLGA board, Mr. Speaker, and therefore the minister of the 
day, did approve a linked bingo budget expenditure for SLGA 
at the point when the linked bingo game was not succeeding 
and the SLGA budget impact was identified. This occurred 
through the board’s approval — the board’s approval — of 
SLGA’s 2001-2002 budget submission for government’s 
overall budget process. The minister responsible for SLGA at 
that time prudently recommended and cancelled the game. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated that 
the tendering process was handled for SLGA on their behalf by 
Western Canada Lottery Corporation. Could the minister please 
table any correspondence between Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming and Western Canada Lotteries outlining the terms of 
reference that they had to follow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again, Western 
Canada Lottery Corporation, as SLGA’s agent, issued a request 
for proposals for software development. 
 
And just in case they are not aware who the Western Canada 
Lottery Corporation is, Mr. Speaker, they take care of all our 
electronic gaming in this province, besides being responsible 
for 6/49s and the gaming industry in Western Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So why would you not go to someone who has the technical 
knowledge, who have . . . who were in fact involved in Alberta 
because they already had the linked bingo there, and who would 
you go to if not to technical people that knew what to do when 
you were going after this kind of a project? I don’t understand 
the line of questioning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this minister gets up in the House 
and somehow insinuates that I don’t understand the answers to 
the question, and that he is tabling the tender. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

Ms. Bakken: — This is not a tender; this is an ad. It is not a 
tender. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The member may proceed. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — It is an RFP; it is not a tender process. Would 
the minister like to table the correspondence between 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming and Western Canada 
Lotteries asking them to conduct this tender and what the terms 
of reference were? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, this had nothing to do with 
dollars. It was a request for a proposal from people that had 
some technical knowledge with respect to implementing the 
type of electronic gaming that we wanted to implement in this 
province. 
 
The request for proposals were submitted from people that 
knew what they were talking about when they were developing 
software and what would be required for hardware and 
implementing that type of an electronic gaming in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Because this awarding of this contract has 
raised many questions in this legislature and in the minds of the 
people of Saskatchewan, will the minister do the right thing and 
table the correspondence between Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming and Western Canada corporation outlining the terms of 
agreement and who received the contract and why they received 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SLGA 
communicated its specifications for a linked bingo game to its 
agent, the Western Canada Lottery Corporation. Western 
Canada Lottery Corporation took SLGA’s specifications and 
developed and issued a request for proposal for the initiative. 
That was the advertisement, Mr. Speaker. And there were 
responses to that and, based on the responses, Western Canada 
Lottery Corporation analyzed the proposals that were received 
and made recommendations to SLGA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister has indicated that there were specifications around this 
tendering process. Will the minister please table the tendering 
process which includes the specifications that they gave to 
Western Canada Lottery in order to decide . . . that Western 
Canada Lottery could then decide on their behalf who was 
awarded the contract? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Western Canada Lottery 
Corporation supplies our electronic gaming system to this 

province. They know what’s required for electronic gaming and 
how to link up various locations. That’s why we went to those 
people, because they knew what technical requirements are 
needed and they submitted . . . they requested request for 
proposals based on the type of project that this province was 
venturing on. 
 
Now an RFP that was published, that I tabled here, Mr. 
Speaker, was open to all bidders, whether they had existing 
software system or proposed to develop a software system. The 
Western Canada Lottery Corporation received and evaluated 
those proposals. They suggested . . . recommended those people 
that could carry out that particular requirement for this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this mega binga . . . bingo 
project, mega bingo project — it is mega bingo — and it was 
initiated by this government. It was not initiated by Western 
Canada Lottery Corporation. Yet the minister stands in this 
House and says that Western Canada Lottery Corporation 
should know — just automatically know out of the blue sky — 
what the specifications of the bid should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I ask, will the minister of Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming table the recommendations that they gave 
to Western Canada Lottery in order for them to decide who 
should get the tender? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, linked bingo was an SLGA 
initiative. I think we’ve confirmed that. We’ve confirmed that 
cabinet approved proceeding in that direction — I believe 
we’ve confirmed that. SL . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’m finding it a little more and 
more difficult here to be able to hear the response. I invite the 
minister to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, SLGA communicated its 
specifications for linked bingo to its agents, WCLC. They took 
SLGA’s specifications and developed . . . they developed and 
issued an RFP for the initiative. Wascana Gaming did not have 
any role in developing the specs of the RFP. It was not . . . It 
was WCLC. 
 
Now I hope that explains how the request for proposal is carried 
out, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Leader of the Opposition or 
that member could tell us how the nomination process works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker. Wascana Gaming seems . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Wascana Gaming seems to have 
two major claims to fame. One is mega bingo and the other is 
providing voter ID (identification) software for NDP election 
campaigns. 
 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

 

Wascana Gaming got a $1.2 million contract for a mega bingo 
scheme — without a business plan, without cabinet approval — 
and wound up losing $6.2 million. 
 
We would like the minister to answer exactly how was this 
contract awarded. So far the minister has given us no answers. 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister table the documents 
outlining the tendering process for mega bingo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, try that again, Mr. Speaker. Just in 
case they didn’t notice, the request for proposal issued by the 
Western Canada Lottery Corporation, Mr. Speaker, is dated 
Leader-Post, Regina, November 1997. I don’t know what can 
be clearer, unless they are in fact questioning the integrity of the 
very people that were asked to act as agents on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
So it was not the authority in fact that was asking for proposals; 
it was the people that know what electronic gaming is all about, 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how much fairer you could be in 
asking all bidders to submit in response to this request for 
proposal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister does not seem to want to answer how the $1.2 million 
contract was awarded as part of the mega bingo, so I’ll move on 
to the other part of the contract — the $5 million hardware 
contract for mega bingo. Would the minister answer to the 
House how it was tendered? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the initial cost . . . The 
whole project was looked at as providing additional revenues to 
our bingo industry and to the charities that relied on the bingo 
industry. The total cost was $6.2 million, Mr. Speaker. It 
involved the request for proposals for software, it included 
hardware, Mr. Speaker, and it included all the lines and the 
link-ups throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Nobody’s trying to hide anything. The member has access to all 
the public accounts and the Crown corporations’ accounts, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t know what . . . They still continue to question 
the process we used. I don’t know how to explain any further 
how you get people to tender on projects that know what 
they’re talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I ask the 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: 
who received the $5 million contract for the hardware system 
for mega bingo and how was it tendered? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, in 1997 this strategy was 
approved by cabinet, Mr. Speaker. This linked bingo was 
initially projected to be cost neutral to government. The game 

was expected to pay for itself but when it became clear the 
game was not attracting new players overall, therefore, the costs 
needed to be covered. And the costs were incorporated into the 
SLGA budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say again, the cost of $6 million is regrettable. No 
question. Any loss of public funds is regrettable. However 
SLGA is successfully managing gaming activity and regulation 
in a manner that contributes over $300 million to all our needs 
in this province, including highways and health and education, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely 
incredible. It is absolutely not justifiable that the minister stands 
in this House and says to the people of Saskatchewan, well 
we’re sorry that we lost $5 million but we don’t even know 
where the $5 million went for the hardware. 
 
I asked the minister twice: who received the contract for the $5 
million hardware that was put in for mega bingo and will he 
table the tendering contract? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the implementation of 
linked bingo was a costly exercise that involved software, 
hardware, and reliance upon probably a Crown corporation that 
does a great deal of good to this great province of ours, and 
that’s to SaskTel. 
 
And all these include costs of labour, Mr. Speaker, the hookups 
for lines. It was a very noble project to respond to the needs of 
our charities, Mr. Speaker — the needs of our charities that so 
desperately need what help they can get — and as part of the 
overall gaming strategy of this coalition government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, instead of answers today we have 
got more questions in the minds of the people in this legislature 
and across this province where $6.2 million went; how it was 
awarded to those people. And the question in everyone’s mind 
is what was this government doing to protect the charities in 
this province? They stand up in this House and say, we did this 
to protect charities, when in fact it cost them $6.2 million. It is 
disgusting and it is a disgrace. 
 
Will the minister stand in his place today and explain to the 
people of this province how his department justified the 
spending and who gave approval for it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, it was in response to people 
that relied on the gaming industry, Mr. Speaker, that prompted 
members on this side to look at how revenues for charities 
could be further raised. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, these are things that concern me a 
little bit about people who believe that they’re waiting to be in 
government. And I want to quote from my hometown paper, the 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

Melville Advance, Mr. Speaker, a comment from the wife of a 
candidate for that party. And this is what . . . And I quote, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

I will not be running because the SaskParty leader has 
personally attacked my family and slandered my husband. 
Elwin Hermanson has allowed the bullies in the SaskParty 
to overturn a fair and democratic election. 
 
As a moderate conservative and member of CUPE I doubt 
that the SaskParty . . . brokers would allow me to win 
another fair nomination . . . (Mr. Speaker). One woman 
alone cannot force the Sask Party caucus to respect 
democracy. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. I 
would ask the members to come to order. Order. The members 
will come to order. 
 
(14:15) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 15, The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 16, The 
Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 17, The 
Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a response 
to written question no. 54 and hope the members understand it, 
Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — Response to question 54 has been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before presenting my remarks related directly to the second 
reading of the Bill before us, I would ask leave of the House in 
order to make introduction of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to introduce 
to members of the Assembly some people who have come 
specifically because of their interest in the Act that is before us 
and who also take a very strong personal interest in child 
welfare within our province. 
 
And I think all are located in the west gallery. I’ll just ask them 
to identify themselves as I introduce them, Mr. Speaker. 
Representing the Yorkton Tribal Council from Keeseekoose 
First Nation, Chief Phil Quewezance and his wife Cheryl 
Quewezance. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Representing the Saskatchewan Foster 
Families Association, Mr. Kim Paproski. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Representing Métis Nation Community 
and Family Justice, Ms. Bonnie Start and Lynn LaRose. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And representing the Saskatchewan Youth 
in Care Network, Darlene Domshy, and representing the Regina 
section of Youth in Care Network, Nathan Payne. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2003 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the welcome that 
the members of the Assembly showed to these people of 
Saskatchewan who take great interest in this Act, and I’m very 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

 

pleased to rise to make remarks regarding the second reading of 
The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003. 
Mr. Speaker, our government believes that every child in this 
great province has the right to grow up in a family where 
they’re loved and nurtured, and where they can enjoy a sense of 
belonging and permanence. We believe that every child has the 
right to be protected from any form of abuse or neglect. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we know all too well that not all 
children grow up in safe and stable homes. Sometimes families 
go through periods of distress during which they may require 
help to safely care for their children. And we also know that in 
order to ensure the safety and well-being of children and youth, 
we must sometimes remove them from their homes and parents. 
This is a truly unfortunate situation for everyone involved, but it 
is particularly distressing to children who, through no fault of 
their own, suddenly find themselves living in an unfamiliar 
environment surrounded by people who are strangers to them. 
 
Clearly there are families who, for a variety of reasons, find it 
difficult to properly care for their children. We firmly believe 
that when this happens, Mr. Speaker, the needs of those 
children and families should not be met through the greatest 
extent possible outside of the child welfare system . . . or let me 
change that . . . that they should be met — let me correct that — 
that they should be met to the greatest extent possible outside of 
the child welfare system. 
 
This belief and the desire to avoid, whenever possible, having 
children become formally involved in the child welfare system, 
were significant factors in our decision to redesign our child 
welfare system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that government is simply not a 
good long-term parent. While we can provide for a child’s basic 
needs for food, clothing, and shelter, we cannot guarantee that 
we can meet the equally important but less tangible need for 
security, a sense of belonging, cultural identity, and continuity. 
Mr. Speaker, simply put, we cannot provide a child with roots, 
and these latter needs are critical factors in any healthy child’s 
development. 
 
We believe family is the primary influence in the growth and 
development of children, and that a child’s needs are best met 
by family. However, when the child’s parent or parents are, for 
a short time — or in some cases over the long term — not able 
or willing to meet these needs, then we must find other 
resources. 
 
We strongly believe, Mr. Speaker, that we need to look to 
extended family and kinship networks to see whether they 
might be the resource we’re looking for and, more importantly, 
whether kinship care is the resource that best meets the needs of 
the child. The government’s role then becomes one of 
supporting the extended family who has taken on the parenting 
responsibility, and providing that support in the least intrusive 
way possible. 
 
And before I go any further, Mr. Speaker, let me take a moment 
to clarify just what we mean by the term, kinship care. Kinship 
care supports the involvement of not only a child’s parents, but 
a broad range of family members when planning for the child is 
being undertaken. This broader range of people could include 

grandparents, aunts or uncles, a grown sibling, or any family 
member who has an interest in the safety and well-being of a 
particular child. In some cases it might include a person who is 
not a family member, but who is nevertheless someone who has 
developed a caring and positive relationship with a child — 
someone who is important to that child. 
 
Kinship care also supports the placement of a child with a 
family member or other person who has an interest in the 
welfare of the child when, for the child’s safety and well-being, 
he or she must be removed from the home. 
 
Leading experts describe kinship care as the care, nurturing, and 
protection of children by relatives, members of their tribes or 
clans, godparents, step-parents, or any adult who has a kinship 
bond with a child. This definition is designed to be inclusive, 
and respectful of ties of affection and cultural values. It allows a 
child to grow to adulthood in a family with which he or she has 
a close connection. Put simply, kinship care is a safe haven with 
someone who cares about what happens to a child, not just 
today, but throughout the child’s life. 
 
During the extensive consultation process which preceded the 
introduction of our child welfare redesign, our partners, 
community representatives, and other stakeholders were very 
much supportive of the direction we were going with respect to 
kinship care. As a result, kinship care is the major component of 
my department’s child welfare redesign. 
 
The Child and Family Services Act as it currently exists 
contains many of the essential elements and principles to 
support a kinship care approach. The children’s services model 
introduced last year strongly supports the introduction of 
kinship care as a placement priority. The model clearly 
articulates government’s role as parent and profiles the 
responsibility of the minister to children in care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am today introducing amendments to The Child 
and Family Services Act which go one step further. These 
amendments support the implementation of kinship care as a 
broad and comprehensive approach to providing for the care of 
children whose safety and well-being are at risk in their family 
home. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, these amendments provide my staff 
with a clear alternative to taking children into the care of the 
minister. These amendments will serve to ensure that when it is 
determined that a child is in need of protection, not only parents 
but family members with an interest in the child or others 
important to the child will have the opportunity to participate in 
the planning for that child. 
 
And they will establish a clear direction of priorities in court 
orders by making preservation of family the first priority, 
wherever this is reasonably possible and where doing so does 
not place the child at risk; and making kinship care the option 
of choice in situations where risks to the child’s safety and 
well-being dictate that he or she must be removed from the 
home; and then making state care of the child the option of last 
resort. 
 
These amendments will also add an interpretation of the word 
custody, which clearly establishes that children in kinship care 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

arrangements are in the custody of the kinship caregiver and are 
not wards of the government. 
 
The amendments will provide caregivers with the assurance that 
they have the freedom and the ability to make the day-to-day 
decisions and take the actions necessary to safely care for that 
child. As a result, Mr. Speaker, children in kinship care will 
enjoy a greater sense of security and belonging, I believe. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, we must and will ensure that in each 
case the kinship placement is appropriate and does not in any 
way jeopardize the child’s safety or well-being. To ensure the 
best interests of the child are protected, we have included a 
provision which requires that a home study must be filed with 
the court. The home study will outline the safety and adequacy 
of the caregiver’s home. 
 
The amendments I’m introducing today will reduce the need for 
permanent and long-term wardship orders and will provide 
children and families with a broader range of options for 
ensuring that children have permanent and stable families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taking a child or children into your home, whether 
for a short period of time or over the long term, can bring with 
it a variety of challenges. Children who have been abused or 
neglected have special needs as a result of that abuse or neglect. 
Families who care for these children, including extended 
families, have unique responsibilities and face problems and 
issues which can test even the most experienced parent. And no 
one would argue that it doesn’t place a burden on a family’s 
financial resources. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the members of the 
House that we will not simply place children with an extended 
family member or others with a significant interest in a child 
and then abandon them to struggle with figuring out how they 
will care for and support the child or children. 
 
As I stated a moment ago, the policy direction for these 
amendments already exists. Staff in my department are in the 
process of drafting comprehensive program standards and 
procedures to accompany these legislative amendments. We 
will include a broad range of views, particularly those of First 
Nations, as this work proceeds. 
 
The financial and other supports that are required by caregivers 
who take a child or children of a relative into their home will be 
determined and the supports that are currently available will not 
be reduced. Staff from my department and from First Nations 
child and family service agencies will provide ongoing support 
and assistance as needed and requested to children and families 
involved in kinship placements. 
 
Because we believe it is absolutely essential that those involved 
in developing kinship care resources and working to ensure that 
kinship placements work successfully in the best interest of the 
child, Mr. Speaker, we will be providing comprehensive 
training for staff. This includes staff working in the child 
protection program as well as those from First Nations child 
and family service agencies. 
 
Personnel from Saskatchewan Justice and other counsel who 
represent my department in family court will also receive 

training prior to the implementation of the amendments. In 
addition to the provisions I’ve identified, Mr. Speaker, the Act 
that I am introducing today contains several amendments which 
are of an administrative nature. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, prior to drafting these amendments we 
engaged in numerous discussions and consultations with groups 
and agencies with an interest in the well-being of our province’s 
children. The Children’s Advocate, FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations), the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan Foster Family 
Association have all indicated that they support the direction we 
are going with respect to kinship care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe there is no better or worthwhile 
investment than an investment in our children. One of the ways 
that we can make that investment for some children is to ensure 
that they grow up feeling connected to their family and their 
culture, that they grow up in a loving, supportive environment, 
in an environment where they feel they belong and where they 
can put down roots. 
 
(14:30) 
 
We further believe that the amendments to The Child and 
Family Services Act, which I am introducing today, will allow 
us to make that investment in some of our province’s most 
vulnerable children. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to move second reading 
of The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to rise on this particular Bill as indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, children are our most precious resource. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that resource — those children — are best kept with 
their families. Family is the best unit suited, Mr. Speaker, in 
raising our children to be the people and the citizens of this 
province that we all wish them to be 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a number of times I’ve accused this 
government of spending its time looking in its rear-view mirror. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in looking in their rear-view mirror on this 
particular issue, they finally found a good issue, Mr. Speaker; 
one that is truly of value to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this move to provide kinship care within 
community services, Mr. Speaker, is returning to the old values 
that people held in this province, where the family and the 
extended family cared and provided for the best interest, Mr. 
Speaker, of the children of this province. 
 
And I was very glad to see the minister say that the state made a 
very poor parent, and I agree wholeheartedly with the minister 
in that sense. For 30 years, Mr. Speaker, not just here in 
Saskatchewan but across the developed world, we have tried to 
make the state the parent, Mr. Speaker, for children that were in 
need and take the family out of that equation. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this particular piece of legislation brings the family 
back into the equation and I think that is a very positive move, 
Mr. Speaker. 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
issues about this particular Bill, dealing with some of the 
questions as to its implementation, how it’s going to work, Mr. 
Speaker, that we do need to have the minister clarify — such as 
he has talked about the review of the home situation, doing an 
evaluation. Mr. Speaker, I guess one of the questions on that 
issue would be what is the time frame involved in that kind of a 
review? You have a child in need, Mr. Speaker, how long will 
that review take? 
 
The minister himself has said that the state does not make a 
good parent. So you need to move that child, Mr. Speaker, into 
the most stable and safe condition possible as soon as possible, 
Mr. Speaker. And so you need to ensure that that review 
process take the minimum time possible while still ensuring the 
safety of the child involved. 
 
And we do have to keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that the safety of 
that child is of paramount importance, and that while family is 
important, the child is our first concern here. As soon as 
possible, Mr. Speaker, we need to move that child into — as the 
minister is calling it — kinship care, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 
family, it’s extended family; it could be friends. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, more than 30 years ago — 50, 60, 100 
years ago — we had a plan like that, Mr. Speaker, in place. It 
didn’t involve the government, but it was called godparents. 
And parents chose someone — a family member, a neighbour, a 
friend in the community — if in time of need that they could 
not provide for their children, then the godparents had agreed to 
do so. So the parents were involved in that process of choosing 
the kin caregiver, Mr. Speaker, and I think we need to take a 
very serious look at having that as part of this whole process. 
That the parents as well be involved in it, Mr. Speaker, in 
helping to choose who that caregiver, since they’re not able to, 
having them though be a part of that choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that does return . . . it does keep community 
values in place. And it’ll be very important in every 
community, Mr. Speaker — in the Aboriginal community and 
the greater community at large. There’s no difference. It’s all 
concern . . . We’re all concerned with our children and we’re all 
concerned with the family being a part of the . . . having the 
opportunities to raise that child, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So while we do have some questions and concerns, overall we 
believe this is a positive step in the right direction. But we need 
to give the minister some chance to look at the review . . . 
excuse me, not the review but the questions that we will have. 
We need to give a chance to our critics, Mr. Speaker, to take a 
look at this legislation and make a determination on just how 
it’s going to work, what the impacts are going to be, how the 
stakeholders are going to be affected, and how the children at 
the end of the day will be protected and given the best possible 
home so that they can grow up, Mr. Speaker, to be the citizens 
that we believe they all can be. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
to rise in the Assembly today to move second reading of Bill 
No. 4, an amendment to The SaskEnergy Act. 
 
As members will know, The SaskEnergy Act is the governing 
legislation for SaskEnergy and its subsidiaries. It was my 
pleasure last year to introduce one of those subsidiaries — 
Saskatchewan First Call corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as members will know, Saskatchewan First Call is 
the first stop pipeline screening and location service developed 
by SaskEnergy and the Saskatchewan pipeline community. 
Through a toll-free number, Mr. Speaker, underground energy 
pipeline location and notification service is now provided to 
contractors planning to dig or excavate anywhere in the 
province. 
 
All of these companies, including SaskEnergy, have their own 
pipeline location systems. However, in the past a digging 
company had to make a number of calls to ensure that all 
underground facilities were identified and clearly marked. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, with just a single phone call, 
Saskatchewan First Call issues pipeline locate notifications to 
all member companies. 
 
As my esteemed colleagues will know, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan First Call was developed in response to a need 
expressed by the energy pipeline industry. Through this service, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve helped make business easier and more cost 
effective for companies within the energy industry. 
 
But more important than the convenience, Mr. Speaker, is 
public safety. That was the primary reason behind developing 
Saskatchewan First Call. While the initial mandate for 
Saskatchewan First Call was to provide service to the oil and 
gas pipeline industry, the success of any one-call service is its 
continued growth to other organizations with underground 
infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the reason that today I am introducing the 
amendment to The SaskEnergy Act. The proposed amendment 
will allow SaskEnergy to expand the first call service outside 
the pipeline industry to other utilities, municipalities, and 
companies with underground facilities. SaskEnergy and its 
subsidiaries will be allowed to expand their safety services to, 
among other things, allow Saskatchewan First Call to operate as 
other one-call organizations in jurisdictions such as Alberta and 
British Columbia. Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment will 
allow SaskEnergy and its subsidiaries to provide call screening 
and notification services, facility monitoring, maintenance and 
operating service, facility location services, training of the 
corporations’ specialized skills. 
 
As you will know, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy and its pipeline 
subsidiary, TransGas, have more than 50 years expertise in this 
area. They maintain the largest buried pipeline system in the 
province. Together SaskEnergy and TransGas process more 
than 150,000 line locate requests annually. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will strengthen the safety 
provisions already contained within The SaskEnergy Act. 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, in many cases these third party 
organizations don’t have the necessary resources to set up 
services such as real time facility monitoring. Under this 
amendment, these organizations can take advantage of 
SaskEnergy’s existing applications, support team, and 
centralized operations staff. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, let me say that safety is a foundation 
for SaskEnergy and the entire pipeline community. By 
expanding the authority of SaskEnergy and its subsidiaries to 
provide these services to other third parties with underground 
infrastructure, we will further . . . we will be further enhancing 
safety for the public and digging community. I urge all hon. 
members to support this Bill. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 4, 
an amendment to The SaskEnergy Act. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to reply to 
the minister’s Bill, Bill No. 4, An Act to amend The 
SaskEnergy Act, and it also, as the minister said, also includes 
The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act and The Power 
Corporation Act. 
 
On the face of it, it would make sense to have a first-call 
initiative take place, Mr. Speaker. It certainly would be 
beneficial to companies that are doing construction or digging 
that they have one, one place to call that would cover all the 
various concerns that they may have as far as telephone lines 
and natural gas and power lines and so on and so forth, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
A number of concerns comes up of course whenever we hear 
about initiatives from this government concerning Crowns. 
There are private companies that do locating as far as lines and 
natural gas lines, and we’re concerned that the government is 
just taking this step to push more private businesses out of the 
province and put more control and power into the hands of the 
Crowns and into the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have seen since 1991 after the election of 
the new premier, Mr. Romanow, he gave the nod to the Crown 
corporations to expand its influence and investments in the 
province, to compete with the private sector in this province. 
And as we know, that has been a failure and it’s been disruptive 
to the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s really, in many cases, driven out private companies but 
also has really set up a red flag to other companies that may 
have been interested in investing in the province and kept that 
investment out of the province. As we see, over the years, 
there’s quite a list of Crown corporation failures — anywhere 
from SPUDCO, Guyana, Channel Lake, the dot-coms, and 
other poor investments made by the Crown corporations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve seen this government rely more and 
more on investments in . . . from the Crowns, we have seen the 
economy continue to be hurt, and the people of Saskatchewan 
has been very receptive to the Saskatchewan Party’s Grow 
Saskatchewan plan. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, the Grow Saskatchewan plan is a 

plan to grow the province by 10,000 people per year over 10 
years. And the purpose of the plan is to not only have more 
people in the province but widen the tax base and grow the 
economy for the good of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the NDP-Liberal coalition has 
wanted to grow the size of government and not grow 
Saskatchewan. And we have seen the unfortunate results of that 
policy in place and the damage it’s done to the productivity of 
this province, and to the future economic growth of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our critic for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), the member from Swift Current, 
will have many more questions and concerns and discussions 
about this. He will take this Bill to the people of Saskatchewan 
and ask for their input on this Bill. 
 
Unless of course the government . . . the Premier gets the 
courage to call an election before that, and at that time the 
Saskatchewan opposition, the Saskatchewan Party will be more 
than happy to compare our Grow Saskatchewan plan to the plan 
of growing the bureaucracy and the size of government that the 
NDP-Liberal coalition has embarked on in the last number of 
years. 
 
So this time I would like to move to adjourn debate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(14:45) 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of The Youth Justice 
Administration Act. This Act is necessary to enable the 
province to implement the new federal Youth Criminal Justice 
Act that replaces the former Young Offenders Act. 
 
I want to say that we are pleased that the Young Offenders Act 
has been replaced. This new Youth Criminal Justice Act, or 
YCJA, represents a new approach to dealing with criminal 
behaviour in the youth population that reduces the reliance on 
custody for less serious offences but emphasizes holding youth 
more accountable for their actions. I also want to emphasize 
that the YCJA provides us with new tools for dealing with the 
most serious and violent offenders. 
 
The Youth Criminal Justice Act introduces a number of new 
processes and sentences that entail changes to the current youth 
services practices and procedures. These are important changes 
that will have a lasting impact on Saskatchewan young people 
and communities throughout the province. The Act provides for 
me, as Minister of Corrections and Public Safety, to have 
responsibility for administering these programs under the Act. 
 
The young offenders piece of . . . this particular young 
offenders piece is one of the key components of the new 
Department of Corrections and Public Safety that was created 
about a year ago. We did that as part of a government-wide 
restructuring that was aimed in part at providing for a more 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

 

consistent approach to dealing with criminal behaviour in the 
province. 
 
With respect to the specifics of The Youth Justice 
Administration Act, the definition of a young person is 
simplified and it clarifies the age ranges for offences under 
provincial jurisdiction. Essentially, young people who are 
between the ages of 12 and 17 when they commit an offence 
will be classified as a young person. 
 
Members will observe that a number of the sections in The 
Youth Justice Administration Act deal with establishing and 
increasing the authority to make the necessary regulations to 
administer the Act and establishes the minister’s authority to set 
up and operate custodial . . . custody facilities. 
 
The new federal legislation also give us new tools to deal with 
chronic repeat offenders and violent youth. Some of these new 
options include setting the age limit for presumption of adult 
sentences for the most serious offences, which has been 
lowered from 16 years of age to 14 years of age. As such, the 
youth justice courts are empowered to impose adult sentences in 
serious cases of serious, chronic, repeat, and violent offences. 
This provision eliminates the need for us to transfer a youth to 
adult court in order to receive an adult sentence. 
 
It also provides us with the ability to use intensive rehabilitation 
custody and supervision orders targeted at violent youth. Less 
serious and first-time offenders will be held accountable 
through a range of community-based options that respect the 
needs of victims, communities, and youth. 
 
To assist in the implementation of this Act, we are committed to 
supporting community infrastructure for extrajudicial sanctions 
and are planning to increase the provincial capacity by 10 per 
cent across the province. We are staffing another 15 work 
positions to work with the courts, community-based 
organizations, and to supervise youth in the community. 
 
We believe the key to the new policies and programs is risk 
management and case management. This means support for 
victims, communities, and youth, using multidisciplinary and 
targeted approaches including a high-risk, violent young 
offender initiative which includes intensive supervision, 
custody, and treatment for these young people who pose 
significant threats to our communities. 
 
We are also introducing an information system and a sentence 
management program to better communicate with the police in 
order to hold young offenders accountable. 
 
In total $3.7 million is being made available in redirected 
provincial and federal resources to establishing the programs 
that are needed. 
 
I want to indicate, however, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial 
government remains concerned about the cost of this new 
federal legislation. When the Young Offenders Act was 
introduced in 1984, Canada provided 50 per cent of the costs. 
Today we estimate the federal share has fallen to about 17 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to say that very few people 

were satisfied with the Young Offenders Act. This government 
was among the critics of that former Act. 
 
Today the new Youth Criminal Justice Act provides us with a 
new approach. We believe the time has come to change the 
types of tools that we have to make . . . so that we can make a 
real difference in the lives of young offenders. To do that we 
need to respond and intervene more effectively before young 
offenders become serious, chronic, repeat offenders who 
present high risk to public safety. 
 
We cannot afford the high social and other costs to all of us that 
come from reoffending — costs which are measured in terms of 
lost human potential and opportunities for all young people to 
become participating, productive citizens of Saskatchewan. We 
can help mitigate this potential loss through a targeted, 
get-tough approach with chronic, repeat, violent offenders and a 
renewed focus on alternative measures for less serious and 
first-time offenders. This Act, Mr. Speaker, will assist us in 
these efforts. 
 
As such, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 8, 
The Youth Justice Administration Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to respond to the minister on Bill No. 8, the youth 
justice services amendment Act or an Act respecting youth 
justice services. 
 
I was interested to hear him talk a little bit about the Young 
Offenders Act, the federal legislation and how it’s changed — 
and how he was mentioning that it seems like nobody was very 
happy with that Act. And I know that’s certainly one thing that 
I’ve heard over and over again. When you follow the system 
through and people have entered the system, the Young 
Offenders Act, especially youth and the Young Offenders Act, 
really it is a frustrating time for people that have been violated 
by young offenders. They can’t seem to find any justice in the 
system. And the Young Offenders Act, now that it is being 
changed and giving the government more tools, is a good thing 
as long as those tools are used properly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister talks a little bit about some of the tools and some 
of the changes in the definitions, definitions of a youth as far as 
when they can be tried or charged under adult Act, things like 
that which you know we would, I think for the most part, agree 
with. 
 
It’s interesting though that the Young Offenders Act and the 
whole province, I mean we’ve had a . . . We have a real dubious 
distinction in this province, and especially in the city of Regina, 
for car thefts. Now it certainly has been decreased significantly 
and you know we have to applaud the measures that have been 
taken and hopefully this Act will further enhance some of the 
programs that have been put in place because, you know, it’s 
not a proud thing to have the distinction of being the car theft 
capital of North America. 
 
And whether it’s moving into other cities and other cities are 
having that problem, but it is . . . it certainly has been a 
problem. And now that the Young Offenders Act has been 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

changed federally, hopefully some of the tools — as the 
minister has talked about — will be used properly by this 
government to continue to reduce, for example, the chronic 
repeat offenders of car thefts and things like that. 
 
It was interesting. Right near the end of his speech he 
mentioned about getting tough on chronic young offenders. Mr. 
Speaker, I remember debating that issue last year in this House 
with our critic of Justice talking about different ways that we 
needed to get tougher on young offenders. It’s something that 
we have been saying and asking this government to do for a 
number of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ll be seeing through this new piece of legislation if they 
really are going to be getting tougher on young offenders. We 
look forward to getting input on this piece of legislation, to see 
if it is going to impact the way the government and the minister 
says it will because I think there’s a lot of stakeholders in this 
whole area that need to be contacted and input put into this new 
Act. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 
Benefits Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
today to outline for the Assembly the background and the main 
elements of these amendments to The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Act. 
 
There are two superannuation plans for teachers in 
Saskatchewan. All teachers who began teaching in the province 
since July 1980 belong to the Saskatchewan Teachers 
Retirement Plan, known as the STRP for short. This plan is 
governed through the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
which is responsible for determining the plan’s terms and 
conditions. 
 
The other plan is the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan, sometimes 
known as the old plan. This plan is administered by the 
Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. Its terms and 
conditions are all subject to negotiation through provincial 
collective bargaining and are set out in detail in the statute we 
are dealing with today. The amendments included in the current 
Bill all arise from negotiations between the parties to the 
provincial collective bargaining agreement. 
 
As members might recall, a new collective agreement was 
ratified last fall covering the period from September 1, 2002 
until August 31, 2004. This new agreement incorporates 
provisions that require several changes in the pension 
legislation and also obligates the government to introduce the 
necessary legislative amendments at the earliest opportunity. 
 
A number of the amendments are housekeeping in nature or are 
designed to simply address administrative issues that the 
commission had raised with the bargaining committees. There 
are four matters of a more substantive nature covered by the 
Bill and I will outline each of these individually. 
 
First there is an amendment to the way in which pensions are 

calculated for teachers who experience a period of long-term 
disability and who turn 65 without being able to return to teach. 
Under the current legislation, when these individuals turn 65 
and begin to receive a pension, the amount of that pension is 
less than it would be if they had remained healthy and had been 
able to keep on teaching. It was agreed that it is unfair for these 
individuals to be financially disadvantaged solely on the basis 
of having a disability that prevented them from teaching. 
 
Under the new provisions, the periods of disability for these 
teachers will be counted as contributory service, which means 
that their pensions will be calculated in the same way as if they 
had in fact kept teaching during their period of disability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment also means that for some teachers 
in receipt of a disability allowance, it will be financially 
possible for them to retire on a regular pension instead of 
having to continue receiving a disability allowance until the age 
of 65. This ability to superannuate in the regular way, rather 
than having to continue on a disability allowance, can be 
psychologically important for some teachers. 
 
The second main amendment deals with the purchase of periods 
of parenting leave for pension purposes. Under the current rules 
teachers in both the STRP and the Teachers’ Superannuation 
Plan are able to purchase a total of only one year parenting 
leave. It has been noted that this restriction is now inconsistent 
with the provisions of The Labour Standards Act and it is being 
eliminated. For both of the pension plans, the government will 
provide the employer portion of the required contributions for 
the purchase of additional periods of leave as it currently does 
for the first year. 
 
A third amendment will overcome an unintended consequence 
of the recent replacement of previous interprovincial reciprocal 
agreements with a new reciprocal agreement. 
 
For a small number of Saskatchewan teachers who had 
transferred their pension service to another province under the 
old agreements and who now wish to return under the new 
agreement, the amendment will help to eliminate a potentially 
significant financial barrier to their doing so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fourth and final major amendment to this Bill 
deals with the requirements for the contents of the annual report 
of the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. The current 
legislation requires the annual report to include such personal 
details as the names of plan members who have died during the 
past year, the age of each member at superannuation or death, 
and the reason for superannuation of each member. 
 
In consultation with the Department of Justice, the commission 
determined that these requirements are inconsistent with the 
principles of privacy in general and more specifically with the 
provisions of The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act. 
 
Further, the inclusion of such personal information is not 
necessary for effective public reporting and accountability by 
the commission. The requirement for inclusion of these details 
in the annual report is being eliminated. 
 
As I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are all 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

 

required as a result of provisions that have been negotiated by 
the parties to the provincial collective bargaining agreement. 
Those negotiated changes all have the full support of both the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association. 
 
I am therefore pleased to move, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 5, 
An Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 
Benefits Act, be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this a very important piece of legislation to a large 
group of people in this province, namely the schoolteachers 
whose pensions this piece of legislation deals with, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the issues that I’m sure interests the teachers to a great 
extent in dealing with their superannuation, Mr. Speaker, is the 
fact that the unfunded liabilities now, which the teachers 
superannuation is a large, the major part of, Mr. Speaker, is at 
$4 billion now. Four billion — that’s billion with a B, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s a huge amount of money, Mr. Speaker, and that 
has been going up every year, Mr. Speaker, the amount of 
unfunded pension there, since 1991. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the unfunded pension liabilities in this 
province in 1991 were $2.7 billion with a B, Mr. Speaker, and 
now that has almost increased by 50 per cent under this 
government, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s one of the areas 
where the Teachers Superannuation Plan and Act should be 
dealing with, Mr. Speaker, in getting that increase in the 
unfunded portion and the debt, Mr. Speaker, under control and 
this government has failed to do so. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some issues in this plan, this piece 
of legislation, that the minister will need to explain when we get 
into the Committee of the Whole, such as what is involved in 
the administrative changes that are being proposed by this 
particular Bill? It talks about administrative changes but it 
really doesn’t outline what they are, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure 
that the critic for this will want to get into that particular aspect 
of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the provisions though allows for teachers to contribute 
to the pension plan while they’re not actually teaching, Mr. 
Speaker, such as when they’re off on maternity leave or if they 
are perhaps off on disability, Mr. Speaker. I guess one of the 
questions that I would have, since the province will continue or 
the school boards will continue to provide the employer’s share 
of the contribution, will the employee also be contributing a like 
amount of money, Mr. Speaker? Will the employee be 
contributing as well as the employer, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I think that would only be fair. If the employer is putting 
their contributions in, well then the employee should be 
providing their share as well. Or if the employee wishes to 
make a partial contribution, Mr. Speaker, then the employer 
would do likewise, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, another section of the amendments that are 
coming forward in this particular piece of legislation deal with 
teachers that have been a part of the superannuation, have 
transferred out to another jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, and for 
some reason are wishing to come back into the plan again. And 
I’m hoping that the minister will be able to clarify in Committee 
of the Whole what is the criteria, what are the avenues for that 
return? Is that teacher again teaching in Saskatchewan or is 
there some other reason why the particular teacher in question 
wishes to come back into the Saskatchewan teachers’ 
superannuation? And if they do, what’s the criteria for it? 
 
I think those are some very important questions, Mr. Speaker, 
because as the minister pointed out that there’s a serious 
financial cost to the teacher who wishes . . . who may wish to 
return. Well who bears that cost, Mr. Speaker? Why is there a 
costs there? What does it involve? And what are the reasons 
why that a teacher from another jurisdiction would be allowed 
to come into the Saskatchewan pension plan, the teachers’ 
superannuation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So those are the kind of questions that we need to have 
clarified, Mr. Speaker, and some of the issues that need to be 
dealt with. And so, Mr. Speaker, to give the minister and my 
colleagues, the critics who will be involved in this, time to 
review the piece of legislation, see how it’s going to impact the 
stakeholders, that being the teachers themselves, Mr. Speaker, 
and the government, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Community Resources and Employment 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (RE01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before we vote off 
the estimates here, I would like to introduce the officials who 
are here to assist me in responding to the inquiries from the 
critic opposite and other hon. members. 
 
To my immediate right is deputy minister, Bonnie Durnford; 
seated right behind me is assistant deputy minister, Shelley 
Hoover; and to my immediate left, assistant deputy minister, 
Darrell Jones; and . . . where’s Don . . . oh, to the right of the 
deputy minister is Don Allen, executive director, financial 
management. Behind the bar, Mr. Chair, are Larry Chaykowski, 
executive director of housing operations; Phil Walsh, executive 
director of income support; Marilyn Hedlund, the executive 
director of child and family services; Deborah Bryck the 
director of child care; Ken Cameron, director of children’s 
services; Betty West, the acting executive director for 
community living division; and Jan Morgan, the acting director 
for Career and Employment Services. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I think, Mr. 
Chairman, the minister’s just a little optimistic, expecting a 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

quick move through his department, the former Department of 
Social Services, now entitled Community Resources and 
Employment. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, while there’s a name change in your 
department, certainly there’s . . . a lot of the responsibilities that 
the department continues to hold have . . . cause many questions 
to be raised in our eyes and certainly in the eyes of the public. 
 
So for the next period of time, Mr. Chairman, and to the 
minister, we certainly want to indicate that we’re pleased that 
your officials have joined you this afternoon; that we now have 
the opportunity, as this session begins to unfold, of actually 
getting into line-by-line and detailed discussion about the role 
and the responsibility of the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment. And it’s taken me time to get that 
on my tongue. Social Services, I think, was just . . . or just was 
natural because it had been there for so long. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Minister, unfortunately I’m going to 
have to give you a couple of bouquets today. Oh, I shouldn’t 
say unfortunately. I think it’s appropriate at times for members 
to — and opposition parties — to recognize when they feel the 
government’s made some positive moves and come forward 
with . . . and come forward and actually begun to implement 
some of the ideas we’ve talked about over the past number of 
years. 
 
And I think the minister will have to . . . would even 
acknowledge that yes, we have been in dialogue on a number of 
these issues. 
 
The current piece of legislation that we just had in for second 
reading today, we’ve talked about that extensively, I think 
probably at least over the last three years; I know since the 
current member has been minister of this department, 
responsible for the department. 
 
We’ve talked about the fact that . . . And as a member, as a 
critic, and certainly a number of my colleagues have felt 
strongly about this issue. Since I’ve been elected, I felt strongly 
about the issue of recognizing the importance of the family 
environment, the home environment, when it comes to young 
people in the province of Saskatchewan and especially when it 
comes to children. 
 
Mr. Chairman, last night, I had the privilege of joining with a 
number of community leaders and teachers and parents and 
young people in listening to Reverend Dale Lang make a 
presentation in the community of Kipling. And over the next 
couple of days, he’ll be meeting in a number of schools in the 
area that have invited Reverend Lang to come and speak to their 
students about bullying. 
 
And when we talk about families, we talk about relationships, 
and the relationships we build in the home certainly show up in 
how we treat each other, whether it’s in the schoolyard or no 
matter where. Whether it’s on the playground or in the sports 
arena, these relationships that we build, first of all as parents 
and children and then as siblings, one to the other, are just 
manifested in many ways in the community around us. 
 
And of course, we’re all aware of the fact that Reverend Lang 

very tragically lost their son in a shooting incident in Taber, 
Alberta about four years ago. And so, what was interesting in 
listening to Reverend Lang was just explaining the shock, first 
of all, that an incident of this nature could happen in their little 
community. Like he said, Taber, Alberta probably wouldn’t be 
much different than Kipling, Saskatchewan — a little smaller 
than a community of Moose Jaw, for example. 
 
And while we heard of these types of incidents in larger 
schools, mainly in the United States, we normally wouldn’t 
think of that type of a situation or circumstance happening in 
our small communities and as Mr. Lang said, was the furthest 
thing from their minds when they were away shopping that day 
only to come home and hear the phone ringing as they’re 
walking in the house and pick up the receiver and be asked to 
get over to the hospital immediately because their son had been 
shot at school. And a lot of that . . . And that arose because of a 
lot of pressures and pent-up anger that was building in the heart 
of a young person who I think even today still doesn’t 
understand why he ended up doing what he did. 
 
But you know, Mr. Minister, I think a lot of that can come back 
to the home relationship, the home environment. That young 
person came from a home where the parents had split and left 
and a lot of the anger and frustration was building in the home. 
 
And when we talk about this current piece of legislation and we 
talk about abusive relations, home relationships, those abusive 
situations really impact a young child very seriously. And if 
there isn’t a way of addressing that . . . And while the 
legislation is allowing for the department to find a kinship 
relationship versus just moving a child into a foster family 
relationship, I think, Mr. Minister . . . I believe, I firmly believe 
for the long period of time that we need to look at ways in 
which we can take advantage . . . I shouldn’t use the word 
advantage but look at how we can build relationships with 
kinship members. And as the minister has indicated, it’s not 
necessarily always a direct family member. It could be 
somebody who’s a good, close personal friend that a child 
would identify with. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, while we would like to see every 
home in our province be a home providing a loving and caring 
relationship, when that breaks down it’s certainly pleasant to 
know and it’s a good thing to know that there are family 
environments that we can work with so that child can . . . we 
can help build that child’s character as we try to deal with that 
family situation. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, while we’ll get into the debate on that piece of 
legislation a lot more as we get into that legislation, I certainly 
want to compliment you and your department for having 
recognized that this is something that we need to move ahead 
on, something that the Child Advocate has in her report, a 
number of years ago where she . . . I think the report was 
entitled Listen to Their Voices. That is something, Mr. Minister, 
that we want to compliment you and we look forward to the 
debate as we get into that specific piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, as well, the change of the name of your 
department to Community Resources and Employment from 
Social Services, here again, Mr. Minister, I will have to add that 
maybe it adds just a little different taste to how we look at the 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

 

department. I think we’ve talked about it in the past. My views 
at times, we need to start looking more at just providing care 
and look beyond that. There are circumstances in our province 
where there are individuals who are going to need care. They’re 
going to need government supports. They just don’t have all the 
abilities. 
 
We see the family situations with disabilities or individuals with 
disabilities. But I think it’s important to recognize that each and 
every person is a worthwhile individual and try to help build 
that character. And certainly many people on assistance through 
the years . . . There are many people that are quite capable and 
if given the right opportunities could certainly be employed and 
drawing on their own resources to provide for their personal 
care and for the care of their family. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So Mr. Minister, I guess before I would go any further, I’ll just 
give you an opportunity to explain why you have decided at this 
time to change the name of your department from Social 
Services to Community Resources and Employment without me 
trying to put a lot of words in your mouth. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And I 
appreciate the comments of the hon. member and the 
opportunity to draw some comment about the changing of the 
name of the department. 
 
Before doing that, I do want to say as well that I appreciate the 
comments of the hon. member in regards to the kinship care 
Bill introduced earlier today and which he didn’t have an 
opportunity to respond to, and I look forward to his comments 
on the record some time soon. But I do appreciate that this is 
not the forum for debate of that Bill, as the hon. member said, 
and that I was gratified, at the conclusion of the second reading 
of that Bill, that there was strong applause on both sides of the 
House. 
 
Surely when we’re dealing with the well-being of children, in 
particular the most vulnerable children of our society, that is not 
an issue which divides us by ideology — and that we can find 
common cause and move forward in a progressive kind of way. 
And I think that’s what that’s about. 
 
Having said that, just to come directly to the question the 
member raises about why Community Resources and 
Employment, why that name? And I think . . . Perhaps if I can 
summarize it, Mr. Chair, in the same way that I have when 
asked by a number of people in the media — why change the 
name; Social Services has been the name of the department for 
31 years, why Community Resources and Employment? — and 
my answer simply put is this, that in my judgment the name is 
finally catching up to the department. 
 
The department has been going through a transition for some 
time that has been significantly affected by the decision to 
introduce the Building Independence program back in 1997-98. 
And that then was further enhanced with the reorganization a 
year ago to bring housing and Career and Employment Services 
under the same policy umbrella of the department — and 
therefore, Mr. Chair, giving us the ability, under the same 
policy framework, to provide services which support 

Saskatchewan people in achieving their greatest level of 
independence, of ability to sustainably shape their own futures. 
 
The original mandate of the Department of Social Services, 
that’s captured in many ways in the income security and the 
child and family services portion of the department, and that 
continues to be a very important core mandate of the 
department. Also the community living division certainly is part 
of the core mandate. 
 
But what we’re recognizing is that there are many facets that 
contribute to the ability of an individual or a family to shape 
their own destiny. And part of it is trying to do the best we can 
with the public resources that were provided by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, to take those resources and use them in the most 
effective possible way for Saskatchewan citizens to move 
forward within the context of an environment in which we’re 
living. 
 
And to me one of the key facets in that environment in which 
we’re living now is that there is a tightening of the labour 
market that is happening in Saskatchewan, across Canada, 
North America, largely driven by the retirement of the baby 
boomers which, on the one hand from the point of view of 
employers, is a challenge that they refer to as recruitment and 
retention. For those of us who see it important to assist our 
citizens who live outside the mainstream or on the edge of the 
mainstream of employment and other active participation of 
citizens in their province, to be able to become active 
participants. 
 
And so it’s bringing together those policy pieces under the same 
umbrella that I have referred to and recognizing that very much 
this is an initiative that is based on community values. 
Community-based organizations are very much a part of the 
delivery of the services of the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment, and that very much it is supports 
for people to be able to connect in meaningful ways to 
mainstream employment that is essential to give them the tools 
to get on with moving forward and eventually, to the best of 
their ability, for many to remove themselves from needs for 
public services in order to function as successful individuals or 
well-functioning families. 
 
And I think the benefits, Mr. Chair, when I look at that, are 
twofold. On the . . . in terms of why we are here now in budget 
estimates, we look at the spending of the public dollar. There is 
an immediate benefit that we see in many ways as building . . . 
of the Building Independence program being introduced. We’ve 
seen the caseloads, the social assistance caseloads continuously 
dropping year after year after year after year, for eight 
consecutive years — lowest level in over a decade. But what’s 
more important than that in many ways, Mr. Chair, is that as a 
result of that kind of holistic sort of strategy and support for 
labour market attachment for families with children, today in 
Saskatchewan there are more than 13,000 fewer kids growing 
up on welfare than just five years ago. 
 
And so there’s not only a benefit today, but just as importantly 
there is a benefit in the next generation. Because surely the . . . 
as children grow up, the aspirations that they will have for 
themselves, the goals they will set themselves, the possibilities 
that they will envisage for themselves, will be reflected in the 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

world that they see around them and what they see as normal 
and possible. 
 
And so the degree to which we can assist parents to move out of 
the poverty circumstances or even more seriously the cycle of 
poverty, there is a benefit not only to them directly now but to 
those children who grow up in homes in which there are parents 
who are supporting that family effectively. 
 
And so when you look at what are the supports that any family 
needs in order to become self determining, what do you need? 
You need employment. You need a place to live. You need 
transportation to be able to get around to participate in your 
society, some of the disability stuff. You need the ability to 
have your children cared for in a way that you feel confident 
when you’re participating in education to improve your lot or to 
participate in the world of work. And you need, if you are a 
person with disabilities, the supports in order to function 
effectively as a citizen and supports that will help to make that 
move to employment in ways that we’ve not perhaps thought all 
that possible before. 
 
And so when we look at the budget today that is before us in the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment, in 
many ways the changes in that budget and our new 
expenditures reflect the intentions of the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment to be a place for 
Saskatchewan people to find the resources to live as 
self-determining and in a sustainable way as possible. 
 
So I appreciate very much the opportunity for the hon. member 
to state on the record for people who take an interest in these 
kinds of affairs in our department to understand why we’ve 
made that change in name. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, before we actually move on, I’ll just send across a 
copy of some global questions that we’ve been sending. We’ve 
been putting them in the mail but to make sure that they . . . 
rather than delaying, we may as well get them sent across right 
now so I’ll send them with one of the Pages. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, we talk about employment and employment 
opportunities and I’d like to know what your department is 
actually doing to assist people in finding employment, what 
resources are used, what are workers doing when they sit down 
with a client. 
 
I’m told, in some cases where clients have gone into an office 
and talked to a worker, they’ve been handed a list of some job 
opportunities that might be available and suggested they go and 
contact these offices before any assistance is given out. 
 
And in some of those cases, Mr. Minister, I think one of the 
problems that may arise if they don’t find a job right away, one 
of the concerns is at least getting some assistance until that job 
may kick in. Well you may say here’s the job; go and start 
working there. If the person doesn’t happen to be hired on, they 
still left having to deal with the issue of assistance. 
 
So what specifically does the department do when a client 
comes to them, and assisting them, and I guess first of all in the 
immediate and then down the road because I think there would 

be time periods too where we’re probably looking at maybe 
encouraging a client to further their education or upgrade their 
education or take some training so that they can meet some of 
the specific opportunities out there. 
 
And I’m wondering if, Mr. Minister, you could kind of let us 
know where the department’s going, what they’re doing to date, 
and how they’re addressing this need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Mr. Chair, I’ll answer the question in two parts. And I think the 
question is being asked in the context of people who are coming 
to the Department of Community Resources and Employment 
who are unemployed and have low financial means. I think 
that’s the context the question’s being asked. 
 
Oh, and by the way before I forget, I appreciate the global 
questions and will respond directly and save the price of the 
stamp. We don’t have any objections to being frugal in the 
expenditure of the public purse. 
 
Now, first of all then, if we, if the department has contact from 
a citizen of Saskatchewan who is without financial means and 
has . . . but has employment arrangements that are pending but 
just not available right now, then in that case what would 
happen is that the citizen would receive some short-term 
financial support just to tide them over until they’re going to 
work. 
 
But the more substantial question, I think, that you ask is, then 
if the contact is made seeking financial assistance by someone 
who is employable, then what is our system that supports that 
person making the connection to employment? 
 
And the first thing that would happen is that the citizen would 
be scheduled to attend a Jobs First orientation which would in 
most cases be held at the local Career and Employment 
Services office. In the orientation the individual would receive 
information about their entitlements as a citizen, but more 
importantly, to enable that transition to employment, would 
become familiar with the services provided by the Career and 
Employment Services office; and including in that the potential 
for direct referral related to the skills or experience that person 
may have to employment opportunities that exist in the area, 
which is exactly what one of the things that Career and 
Employment Services offices do. 
 
It is important to me that the Jobs First program as much as 
possible are held at the Career and Employment Services 
offices because in those offices, those 20 offices around 
Saskatchewan, we have in my judgment one of, if not the best 
resource in Canada when you combine the knowledge and the 
support of the people who are there with the technology that’s 
available by way of information in connecting people to 
employment opportunities or employers to people who are 
looking for work — both ways. 
 
So it is very important to me that it be held there so that if 
people were not previously familiar with that as an ongoing 
resource all around Saskatchewan no matter where they live, 
that they become familiar. It is also through the contact then 
with the Career and Employment Services offices of 
Community Resources and Employment that it is possible to 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

 

link an individual person to the world of employment in a 
number of different kinds of ways — through the bridging 
program; there is a wage subsidy program that we have; we 
have a self-employment program that is offered; and there is 
also the JobStart/Future Skills program. 
 
So these, we’re able to connect people to emerging employment 
opportunities that may have to do with growth of employment 
opportunities. Career and Employment Services offices do a lot 
of connection with employers who are seeking employees, and 
so they’ll help to make that direct connection. 
 
It will also be the office, Mr. Chair, through which 
Saskatchewan citizens will have contact with counsellors who 
will know what kinds of supports — including potentially a 
provincial training allowance for participation in educational 
activities, for upgrading of basic education — that these are the 
people who will know what’s available from any level of 
government and will be in the best position to make referrals or 
to offer advice to individuals. 
 
(15:30) 
 
In concluding, Mr. Chair, I would say to the hon. member I had 
an opportunity to have that very conversation with one of his 
colleagues just the other day who was explaining to me a 
circumstance — I won’t get into personal details but related to a 
constituent — and asked what’s the best thing I can do? 
 
And I said to the hon. member’s colleague, the best thing you 
can do really is to refer your constituent to the closest Career 
and Employment Service office because there they’ll find 
people who understand about the process of making decisions 
related to the world of work and your involvement in it so they 
can provide counselling, that kind of thing. But they’re also the 
people who understand how to make the connections to the 
supports if you need them. 
 
And so what we have through the current employment service 
offices are a range of supports which can be very, very helpful. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I just 
need a clarification. When you’re talking Career and 
Employment Service offices, are these under your department 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They are, okay. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve made the comment about the fact that if an 
individual comes to a worker and they’re needing assistance, 
but they’re maybe willing to work or maybe not willing to work 
but it looks like they’re quite capable of working and a worker 
would suggest that there’s a couple of job opportunities out 
here, that the worker would give them the ability to contact the 
employers to see if there possibly would be employment 
available, that till that employment kicked in, that individual 
would receive some assistance. 
 
Now that was kind of the . . . what I heard you saying. But I 
know I’ve had people call me who have been told, well there’s 
a job over here, you can go and apply for that job. And yet they 
didn’t have any indication that any assistance would be 
available if the job didn’t pan out. 
 
The other circumstance that rises, arises, Mr. Minister, and I 

guess that’s why my colleagues and I run into it a little more, is 
in the rural communities most of the times you’re dealing with a 
social worker who’s travelling to your community and they may 
be available only one day of the week. 
 
Now if it’s a Monday or a Tuesday, early in the week, chances 
are that within a day or so, if that job opportunity is available in 
that community, that you may have the ability to actually go to 
work and start having some income coming in, although I think 
we must realize income may not be available till the first pay 
period which may be two weeks down the road. And so I’d like 
to know how that is addressed. 
 
Secondly, if it so happens it’s towards the end of the week that 
the worker happens to come to your community and you’re 
given the opportunity or mention there’s a job opportunity here, 
but the business closes down. Let’s say it’s a Thursday evening, 
you run on Friday morning, but the business closes down Friday 
afternoon, and whether or not you get the job you may not find 
out until the Monday or the Tuesday before you actually begin 
to work. You still have . . . are dealing with a situation where 
you may not have the financial resources to provide the food or 
maybe just some of the incidentals of housing needs that are 
there at the time. 
 
And so I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, how exactly does your 
department or workers deal with a situation like that, so that a 
person isn’t left out in the cold especially if they’re coming at 
the last minute and found that their resources are really limited? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the hon. 
member’s question and I want to in response refer to two 
things. One is the process proceeding from a call centre contact 
which would be the most likely form of contact that the person 
who is applying would make, and then also make reference to 
the transition employment allowance which was introduced in 
February of this year. And both of these are directly related to 
the kind of circumstances that the hon. member raises. 
 
When someone inquires about financial assistance, then it 
would be typically through the call centre and it would be done 
by telephone. And if the person at that time indicates that . . . 
while they would likely indicate that they are awaiting 
employment opportunity, as you suggest possibly, or that there 
is an emergency need, which is the other possibility that you 
raised . . . the hon. member raises, Mr. Chair. The transition 
employment allowance can be activated right away and can, for 
example, cover the period of time until the first paycheque is 
received if there is employment that is already planned to be in 
place. 
 
If the applicant indicates that he or she has an emergency need, 
then it is possible to activate payment as early as that day. 
Depending in some circumstances, it may not be in some cases 
possible to be precisely that day but communication would 
occur between the call centre and the local income security 
office and in most cases that would occur very quickly and it 
could possibly be the same day, but within a day or two would 
be typical. 
 
And I think, Mr. Chair, it’s those two things in combination that 
would respond. There is the possibility to make arrangement for 
emergency payments that would be done locally at the income 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

security office, or the transition employment allowance which 
would tide a person over until they got their first paycheque. 
 
All of this, and the Career and Employment Services offices are 
under the framework of the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, when you mention 
transition needs being available and have activated immediately 
and you talk about community services, if you’re in the 
community though and you’re making a call — and I take it all 
of these lines are 1-800 numbers so that there’s no . . . you’re 
not limited in your ability to call to seek assistance — but how 
does the transaction take place say, well I’ll just use Kipling for 
an example? I’m just going to throw a community like Kipling, 
or it could be Nokomis. 
 
You happen to be living out there and you’re calling this 1-800 
number and the call’s coming out of Regina and you need the 
funding immediately, how does that money then . . . how is that 
money disbursed to meet the needs of that individual? Because 
they may not have an office that they could just access or go 
down and get the funds from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, if the — you’ll know, the hon. member will 
know the geography a little bit better than I will know it — if 
the person was in Kipling, then the closest office would 
probably be Weyburn or Estevan? Which would it be? 
Weyburn. 
 
So what could happen in that circumstance then is if the person 
was able to get to Weyburn, could go to the office there to pick 
up the cheque. The cheque . . . alternatively the cheque could be 
put in the mail, possibly the same day, probably the next day, if 
that was soon enough to meet the needs. 
 
So arrangements would be made at that time, given the ability 
of the . . . the emergency of the circumstance and the ability of 
the Saskatchewan citizen to get to a point where the cheque 
could be provided to them. 
 
Alternatively there would be a third alternative and that’s that 
there could be arrangements made for a worker to bring the 
cheque to that location. But understandably that would be . . . 
there would probably be a period of time in order for that, for 
that to be done. I think it would be misleading to suggest that 
that could be done . . . that kind of an arrangement could be 
done on the same day. So the most likely, it would be a cheque 
put in the mail by the next business day or the cheque available 
at the closest office if the person is able to get to the office in 
order to pick it up. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I guess the circumstance we’re talking about here, and 
I . . . You know you’ve explained about three different options. 
 
Now if it happens to be an individual who has been employed 
and just finds themselves in a transition, and they’re probably 
. . . are in a position where they do have a vehicle, they may be 
able to make the trip to Weyburn to pick up a cheque of that 
nature. 
 

If it happens to be an individual however who does not have 
access to or does not have a vehicle and does not have the 
ability, and who possibly was waiting for some other source of 
income to arrive and finds themselves really cutting everything 
quite short when they come for seeking assistance — they’re 
really in a emergency need — what specifically would your 
department do to ensure that there was resources available? 
 
Especially let’s say it’s a Friday that the call comes in. Now 
you’ve got the weekend to deal with and there may not be a lot 
in the house at the time to meet a family’s needs. And is there a 
way of dealing with either a financial institution or of giving 
assurances that this funding will arrive, that a person could at 
least go down to the local store, for example, and pick up some, 
just some basic needs to keep them over till the cheque arrived? 
Or what process is there available to address that circumstance? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The hon. member is 
certainly raising what I think is probably the most 
difficult-to-respond circumstance. And I know he raises it, 
understanding that where you get sort of the 5 o’clock Friday 
call and the office isn’t open until Monday and the person isn’t 
living in a community in which there is a Community 
Resources and Employment office. Under those circumstances 
it may be that the best that can be done would be for the 
payment to be . . . the emergency payment to be received by the 
individual on the following Monday in that circumstance. 
 
There may be an exception to that and that’s that the department 
can make arrangements for electronic transfers to a person’s 
financial institution, their credit union or bank. But it takes 
several days to set that up. 
 
However if this individual had previously had involvement with 
the department and had made that arrangement, then in that 
circumstance there could be an electronic transfer done 
immediately. And that would . . . so if the person, for example, 
had access to an instant teller, then that that may provide the 
solution. 
 
So bottom line, Mr. Chair, is that the department will do the 
best that we possibly can to respond to the emergency needs. 
And in the worst-case scenario — where there had been no 
previous contact or there had been . . . there had been no 
previously established electronic transfer arrangement made; 
it’s Friday at 5 o’clock; you’re in a community that doesn’t 
have an office — in all likelihood the reality is that we’re not 
. . . we’re just not in a position to be able to assist that 
individual until Monday. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you. Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, 
I raise that and while I was talking of an emergency situation 
where a client may arrive . . . come to your office or make that 
call as a result of a real need, I’m also raising it on the basis of a 
letter that I sent to your office, I received just recently, about an 
appointment, a medical appointment that a couple were facing 
and had maybe requested . . . 
 
Actually it had been acknowledged that they would need some 
resources to be able to attend this medical appointment. And the 
unfortunate result of the fact that the resources didn’t arrive on 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

 

time was that the medical appointment had to be postponed and 
rescheduled for another day. 
 
And the part that I don’t understand there is that the worker 
acknowledged that that appointment was needed, that financial 
resources would be needed for the appointment to be met as it 
meant a drive from the rural area to an urban centre. 
 
And when you look at . . . And I think, Mr. Minister, if you 
recall the case and it may not . . . may be difficult because you 
may have had a number of letters on all other issues, but in this 
specific case, circumstance, it was a couple that was actually 
needing to get some medical decisions and see a specialist so 
that they could apply for a disability pension. 
 
And by foregoing and having to miss the appointment because 
the funding didn’t arrive on time to guarantee that they’d be 
able to make their appointment, they had to cancel out and now 
the appointment is into May. It means that the department 
probably there while that . . . Well they’re still probably going 
to have to provide some resources until the final 
acknowledgement is made of disability pension being available. 
Facts are, that’s been delayed a period of time. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, we need to certainly take a look at 
how we meet the requirements of individuals especially if we 
acknowledge that there is a need there, that we’re going to be 
providing for that need, making sure those resources are 
available immediately and at that time so that appointments of 
this nature can certainly be met. 
 
So I’m just putting that out and asking that we certainly take a 
look at making sure that this is met in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you again, Mr. Chair. I do want to 
add to my previous response having to do with the availability 
of emergency financial supports. I appreciate the fact the 
officials reminded me of one other possibility that can be 
helpful in some cases, and that’s that vouchers can be issued by 
the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) to individuals. 
 
So if in the circumstance again that the hon. member raises 
which, Friday at 5 — the one he described — and the office not 
open until Monday in another community and it’s an emergency 
circumstance, the department can possibly make, if this seems 
to be a workable solution, make contact with the RCMP. And 
the RCMP can deliver a voucher that could be used for example 
at the local co-op or whatever. So there is an avenue that in 
emergency circumstances can assist. 
 
On the particular case, the hon. member will appreciate, Mr. 
Chair, that I cannot and therefore will not . . . And I know that 
he’s not asking me to discuss the particulars of an individual’s 
case in public on the record. But I simply want to assure him 
that we will look very carefully at the communication that he 
sent. 
 
And if he wants to add anything more by way of detail here 
after we move along to the next department’s estimates which 
will probably be in about 8 or 10 minutes or so . . . While the 
officials are here, if he wanted to bring more detail to my 
attention, I’d be happy to do that and to follow up and look at 
the specific case. 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Certainly 
we’ll look forward to getting you more information, and 
possibly there’s even a response already on its way. 
 
But the reason I raised it is because it was an issue that had 
been brought to our attention. And the comment that you made 
about even working through the RCMP, I think is something 
worthwhile noting so that when we’re working with the 
department or with your office down the road that we look at 
some of the avenues and maybe throw out these suggestions 
that this is the way of addressing this need. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to get one further question in before we 
possibly move on to another department for today. And it’s a 
question regarding a request we had made of the Child 
Advocate back in October, and regarding mental illness. And it 
deals with a situation that was brought to our attention where 
we had asked the Child Advocate to look at a particular 
circumstance and how we address it. 
 
And I’d just like to point out in today’s paper — you may have 
even noticed it, Mr. Minister — where Dr. John Conway, 
speaking to the media about a study he’d done regarding mental 
illness and the heavy toll it’s taking in the province of 
Saskatchewan, his comments were: 
 

There are people in Saskatchewan who are dying because 
their mental illness is left undiagnosed and untreated. 

 
And he says: 
 

. . . the province must provide more training for health 
professionals and more services for patients. 

 
He mentioned about 60 per cent of the people in this province 
not getting help. Now when we’re . . . We’re not talking about 
training here in this department because I know that’s another 
area, another department’s responsibility. However, Mr. 
Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we realize and I 
think this article today points out the fact that there is a problem 
in our province regarding mental illness. 
 
And back in October we raised the issue of a family who had 
come to our office requesting help as a result of actions their 
teenage son had taken and the problems, the strain on the family 
as a result of the mental imbalance that their teenage child was 
facing. 
 
And we had asked the Child Advocate to actually do a review 
or at least to look into the circumstances and come up with 
some recommendations. And, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if 
you are aware of where this is to date. I know when we met 
with the Child Advocate back in February, the advocate had 
indicated that her office certainly had been looking at it but 
needed more time. 
 
What I’m wondering today, Mr. Minister, is if you’ve heard 
anything further in regards to this file. And certainly I’m not 
going to raise the names of individuals. I think it’s appropriate 
we leave them out of the debate. But kind of a general question 
regarding the state of mental health and the review that’s 
currently taking place in this province in regards to the question 
that was raised at that time. 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank you, Mr. Chair. And looking at the 
clock, I think this will unfortunately be our final exchange 
before moving on to the Department of Corrections and Public 
Safety. 
 
First of all, I do — in regards to the previous question — I do 
want to acknowledge a letter has been received and a response 
is in the process of being drafted as a matter of course and 
should be received shortly. 
 
On the matter of the case the hon. member raises and then 
perhaps more to the point, more generally, the matter of 
treatment for mental illness for children and youth in our 
province and their needs, I have to say first of all, that our 
Department of Community Resources and Employment is not 
directly involved in the review or the handling of the case to 
which I think I know he is referring. So I’m just not able to 
provide an informed response. 
 
I do know that the report referred to in the news today will be 
. . . will certainly go to the Department of Health and will be 
considered and responded to by Health, by the Department of 
Health. 
 
And on the review, as in any review that the Children’s 
Advocate does, we’ll await the conclusion of the Children’s 
Advocate and then pay very, very close attention to the advice 
that the Children’s Advocate might have for our Department of 
Community Resources and Employment if possible. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, with recognizing the hour of the day, I do want 
to say thanks to the hon. member for his questions, unless he 
wants to proceed to the vote. But I see by the look in his face, 
he’s not quite ready yet but I think he’s getting closer; I think 
he’s getting closer, Mr. Chair. 
 
I appreciate that we’ve been able to begin an important 
deliberation on the range of services provided to the people of 
Saskatchewan through the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment. And I’ll look forward to our next 
opportunity, coming soon, Mr. Chair, to a legislative channel 
somewhere near you. 
 
And that having been said, I want to thank the officials for their 
assistance today and then move that we move our deliberation 
on the Committee of Finance to the Department of Corrections 
and Public Safety. 
 
(16:00) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 
Subvote (CP01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I am joined today by our deputy minister, Neil Yeates. 
Seated behind me is the new assistant deputy minister of adult 
corrections, Terry Lang. Mae Boa is the executive director of 

management services. As well we have Maureen Lloyd who is 
executive director of the young offenders program. 
 
Behind the bar is Tom Young, who is the executive director of 
protection and emergency services, and Brian Krasiun, manager 
of codes and standards compliance for the licensing inspections 
branch. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
welcome to the minister and the officials from Corrections and 
Public Safety. 
 
Before we get into some questions I would like to send this over 
to the minister. It’s a set of global questions and . . . so the 
minister can receive them in a timely fashion. I’d like to have it 
on record that they’re sent over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much. I appreciate 
receiving these and we’ll endeavour to get timely answers to 
them. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to just 
start off with some budget questions. 
 
And I notice in the budget the — I’m sure everybody has — the 
estimate for 2002-2003, 114 million, forecast 116 million. 
There’s a $2 million difference in that amount. And I notice 
from an OC (order in council) of 31 March that additional 
expenses of 7.975 million will be required for the 
appropriations, Corrections and Public Safety, for fiscal year 
ending 31 March, 2003. 
 
My question to the minister is, there’s a $2 million between 
estimate and forecast, and this is about an 8 million difference. 
Will that be added to the forecast amount of 116 million? Or 
will that be added to the 114 million amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Last year at this time as we were 
getting into the discussion on the budget, we had indicated that 
this was a new department and it was receiving portions of its 
activity from other departments that were undertaking this. One 
of the largest pieces of that was the movement of the young 
offenders’ programs into the new Department of Corrections 
and Public Safety. 
 
Because that transfer happened in-year as opposed to at the start 
of a budget year, there was some additional cost. And what the 
larger number reflects is a recovery of some of those monies 
from the former Department of Social Services that have been 
moved over into Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’m not quite following you 100 per cent 
on that. If there’s 700 . . . or 7.9 million, if it was moved from 
corrections publics . . . or to Corrections and Public Safety from 
another department — and I haven’t gone through the budget 
book to see where it’s actually said that it’s been transferred — 
and I’m . . . I would . . . if you’re suggesting that it’s moved 
over, there should be a line item somewhere in the budget 
document that says that it’s transferred from this department to 
Corrections and Public Safety. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is indicated on the restatements. 
These estimates were restated. You can find that on page 136 of 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

 

the Estimates book. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now I don’t 
believe you answered my question initially of this 8 million, 
roughly $8 million. Understanding that it may have been 
transferred from another department, will that not change your 
forecast expenditures for the year 2002-2003 by an amount of 
$8 million? Or will it be added on to the 114 or 116? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It’s actually included in the forecast 
for ’02-03 and again, of course, because it’s been received for 
’03-04. So it’s not added on top of that; it’s included in those 
numbers. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Minister, if it’s in those 
letters, what did we need an OC for, at March 31, asking for 
another $8 million expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Because it wasn’t initially contained in 
the CPS (Corrections and Public Safety) budget last year, we 
needed a special warrant and an OC to execute that special 
warrant to move the resources from the one set of line items to 
the other. So to reflect the change, the transition from Social 
Services to CPS, we needed to do that by special warrant which 
of course required the OC that . . . of which you’re speaking. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I must be missing 
something because in your forecast last year is 114 million and 
you’re suggesting to me that it’s included in the 114 million, 
and yet at the end of the year you ask for another 8 million. I 
mean, that doesn’t compute. 
 
At the start of last year, your estimate was $114 million and 
you’ve said that it is included in that $114 million. And yet the 
OC this March 31 . . . So there’s something missing in this 
explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think that the issue here is a 
confusion on the part of the member between what the blue 
book was last year, which said it would be 108; it has been 
restated here at the adjusted number. And the restatement of 
course is indicated in the Estimates book on that page 136 that 
we’ve spoken of. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I notice and you’ll see, Mr. Chair, that 
the minister has stated that the young offenders program would 
be transferred. There’s $3.5 million dedicated to the young 
offenders program, 3.3-plus to the adult corrections. 
 
But can the minister explain the 450,000 administration costs, 
and administration and central accommodations in central 
services at 170,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — These two numbers that the member 
refers to relate to one-time costs that are associated with the 
establishment of the department. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. I would like 
to ask the minister about budget rebasing and if he’s familiar 
with budget rebasing or if his department is familiar with 
budget rebasing and if, in fact, they do budget rebasing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Does the member . . . The question I 

would have, is he asking about what is also known as 
zero-based budgeting, ZBB or is this . . . If he could be more 
specific in his question, perhaps I could be better prepared to 
answer it. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I would gather from that that 
budget rebasing is not a common phrase then within your 
department. But budget rebasing is basically when a department 
overspends their allotted budget and asks for excess money, 
then the following year that becomes their base budget. That’s 
what budget rebasing is. Rather than find out the reasons why 
there’s an over budget or looking at ways within the budget of 
the rationale for it, rather than just arbitrarily say well that’s 
now our base budget and we overspend again; next year that 
becomes a base budget and so on and so on. And I’m 
wondering if in fact that practice is used or if, with that 
explanation, if in fact that’s been happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Because of the way that this 
department responds to other pressures, certainly in the adult 
and youth corrections, a lot of our expenditure drivers are 
external to us. We do work with a base; it is not always the case 
that last year’s costs would be the absolute base we work from 
this year. 
 
Last year what we saw was some additional costs as a result of 
increased pressures on the adult corrections with 
higher-than-anticipated numbers that required us to increase 
that. We have taken an appropriate forecast this year and the 
Treasury Board is in agreement with what we anticipate our 
budget will be. 
 
I think we should understand that with this department though, 
there is always the potential because a lot of our cost drivers are 
external to us through the judiciary, that inmate counts, remand 
issues, sentence lengths are really beyond the cost control of 
this government and as such and this department, as such is 
difficult for us to always pinpoint exactly what that cost is 
going to be. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well the reason I asked the question, Mr. 
Chair, is basically it’s like budget creep. And we understand 
inflationary costs and we understand external pressures. But 
when a department has overspent by x number of dollars and 
that becomes a base for next year, it doesn’t really provide an 
explanation as to why this has happened. 
 
And then there’s the inflationary factor. And just looking at the 
budget in the schedule of expenditures, you could see that in 
addition to the estimate and the forecast, there’s another couple 
of million dollars on, and that’s why I call it budget creep or 
rebasing. Because if it’s being rebased and then you add another 
for . . . another couple million for whatever, rather than look at 
why we went over in the past years. And that’s why I brought 
this before you is to find out an explanation if, in fact, that’s 
what we’re doing or if there’s another explanation for the 
increase of, well, 2 or $4 million, whatever way you want to 
look at it, in the budget for this year. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There are two key issues in terms of 
the increase that we are looking at, and in fact they are around 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

the increase that we’re looking at for public service payments, 
staffing costs. And the second is the increase that we see related 
to having higher-than-anticipated inmate counts. Those are the 
two issues that in this particular budget are driving that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So I would gather from that, Mr. Chair, 
that if our incarceration numbers go down, we would see an 
appropriate drop in the expenditures from within the budget. 
Would that be correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The counts alone would not 
necessarily drive up or down the cost. Of course length of 
sentence has something to do with that. 
 
But yes, if there was a decrease in the number of inmates or a 
shortened sentence time, that the counts are down in the 
facilities, that would require . . . would allow us to find some 
additional resources there. That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — But, Mr. Chair, did you not just 
previously say that the reason for the increase in cost was 
because increased people in the institution. And that’s what 
caused the corresponding cost. But did I not just hear you say 
that the value is not going to change much whether there is 
more inmates or less inmates. Did you not just say that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No, actually I was agreeing with the 
member that in fact we would see likely a corresponding 
decrease if we see a decline in inmate counts. 
 
But we need to understand it’s not simply counts that drive it. 
Of course there are some inflationary pressures, and I think the 
member’s identified that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, Deputy Chair, to the minister. 
I would like to now talk a little bit about . . . when we’re talking 
about budgetary costs, I would like to . . . and I’ve heard and 
I’m sure we all have heard — factual or not, and this is why the 
question is coming — overtime costs at our four main facilities: 
the Regina, Saskatoon, and the two in P.A. (Prince Albert). 
 
And I would like the minister to provide what the overtime 
costs have been for the last fiscal year in each one of those 
facilities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We don’t have that with us today but 
we can endeavour to provide that to you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, I’d appreciate that and can I 
get a timeline on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I will provide it in a timely manner 
once we’re able to compile it. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, a timely manner is next year, 
six months from now after session is over; can we put a date of 
10 days on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, can we get a time from the 
minister to have these figures to me? 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — As soon as they’re prepared, I’ll make 
them available to the member. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, that’s not really acceptable. 
Could I have a time from the minister as to when these would 
be available because this is very crucial to debate on the budget 
as to what these overtime costs are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well in fact, Mr. Deputy Chair, that’s 
not necessarily so. As the member would say, the costs that we 
anticipate for staffing are factored into the budget. For us to be 
able to pull it out will take some time. As we are able to do that, 
once we have been able to do that, we’ll provide it to the 
member. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’d like to go on record 
as saying I totally disagree with that and I’d like a little bit more 
commitment from the minister because this is a factor of costs; 
it maybe is a factor of the additional costs in the facilities and I 
think it’s only fair that we have a timely response to this. 
 
So I would ask the minister again if he would provide a date 
that I could receive this, because to me there’s some figures that 
I would like to see before we can enter into more debate on 
some of these budget figures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ve said we don’t 
have those figures with us. We’ll endeavour to get them on a 
timely fashion. Once they’re prepared I’ll provide them to the 
member, but I’m not prepared to make a commitment to this 
House on a firm date that I’m not able to keep. That may be the 
way the members opposite act but that is not the way members 
on this side act. As the answer is available, I’ll make it available 
to that member. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, I guess, Mr. Chair, we can sit here 
all summer but I think this is a very important issue. And I think 
it’s very, very crucial that we have and understand what 
overtime costs are at these facilities. 
 
And if the minister wants to sit there in his holier-than-thou 
attitude and say we’ll do it in my good time, I don’t think that’s 
appropriate for the House. I think we should have some 
commitment on a time that we can have these figures. And I’m 
not suggesting in 24 hours; I realize you wouldn’t have them. 
There’s probably other questions I have, you won’t have the 
figures here now. But to willy-nilly say whenever I’m ready to 
give them to you, I don’t think is acceptable. I think we should 
have a time. If you want to say it’s a month, fine, we’ll make it 
a month. Two weeks is fine. But just leaving it wide open, I 
don’t think that’s acceptable, Mr. Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think I’ve 
answered this question. I want to say that I’m sure that the 
member opposite does not want me to be increasing the 
overtime worked by our officials in order to provide the answer 
to this question. We’ll undertake to get the answer in an 
appropriate time; I would hope by the next time that we are able 
to review our estimates in this Assembly and I will endeavour 
to do that. 
 
For us to pick, as the member opposite suggests, willy-nilly out 
of the air some kind of a date would be inappropriate. We need 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

 

to allow the officials time to gather the information. I’m not 
sure where he wants to go in terms of the questioning. I would 
welcome him to pursue whatever line of questioning he wants 
on this. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — The next time we meet, Mr. Chair, I will 
again raise this issue. If the minister does not have the figures 
for me by then we’ll probably go through the same discussion 
once more. And if they’re not provided at that time, like I say, 
we can sit here for months; it doesn’t bother me at all. 
 
Mr. Chair, my next question is based, possibly somewhat along 
the same line, is shift trading. What is the minister’s policy on 
shift trading? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, shift trading is 
permitted. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, to what extent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Policy permits for shift trading to 
allow workers to have a flexible work environment, although 
obviously we have a policy in place to ensure that it does not 
drive up overtime and that it has appropriate cost containment 
measures with that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister, is 
shift trading permissible that would constitute 16-hour shifts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — To what extent, Mr. Chair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The maximum is two 16-hour shifts in 
a row. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, thank you. Two 16-hour 
shifts in a row. Could you, could the minister explain that? To 
me two 16-hour shifts in a row is 32 hours. I don’t believe 
that’s what you mean. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It would be one 16-hour shift followed 
by a rest period and then the next . . . the employee could have 
on the next day another 16 . . . two shifts equalling 16 hours. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So as you just explained, there’s a 
16-hour shift followed by an 8-hour break followed by another 
16-hour shift. Can the minister tell the House what the work 
week hour . . . hours per work week that the guards perform at 
the institution? Is it a 40-hour week? Is it 37? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It’s thirty-seven and a third, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So, Mr. Chair, reading into this, at two 
16-hour shifts in a three-day period or three-and-a-half-day 
period, one could complete a week’s work, in essence would 
fulfill your thirty-seven and a third hours, if you worked two 
16-hour shifts at 32 hours and then the balance of it in another 
. . . after another 8-hour break. So in a period of three days, you 
could in essence finish your weekly work. 
 
Is this condoned by the department? Is this a practice within the 
organization, that this actually happens? And if it is, to what 

extent would this happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We have a policy to provide a flexible 
work scheme for the officers and the guards that are in the 
facilities. If that is the way that the officials want to structure 
their work week and as long as it doesn’t provide a difficulty 
for management or security, we see no reason to prohibit it. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — One of the reasons I bring this forward 
and question the validity of 16-hour shifts is a 16-hour shift is a 
pretty difficult shift to work through, and especially if you’re 
working a 16-hour shift, followed by 8 hours off, and another 
16-hour shift. I’m sure the minister would agree that that could 
present some problems with such things as fatigue. And when 
you’re in an institution, a corrections facility, if fatigue is an 
issue, it could have some very, very catastrophic implications. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And that’s why I’m questioning as to what kind of a policy. Just 
to say we provide flexible hours, I think there has to be a little 
bit more management and supervision over it. Because if in fact 
this is happening, if in fact it could work like I’m suggesting, 
that has been brought to my attention, that in fact it could be 
providing some of the problems that exist within the 
correctional facilities. Because we have individuals there as 
guards or management, whoever is allowed to do this 16-hour 
shift — a week’s work within three days — one would have to 
agree that this could provide an awful lot of stress on the 
individual doing it for whatever reason that he or she is doing it. 
 
And that’s why I’m questioning as to if it’s condoned and if it’s 
condoned, to that level by the department. And if it is condoned 
are we looking at . . . or are you looking at trying to abate some 
of that? Because I think any individual could look into this and 
say that could be creating some of the problems within the 
department. Is the minister and staff looking at this as an issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, as I’ve said, this is a 
practice which is permitted. The only stipulation we would put 
on it is that obviously it’s not scheduled that way. This is a case 
where the corrections official would come and ask for this. If it 
does not affect on work performance, it’s within the appropriate 
policy. 
 
If the member has a specific concern that he wishes to bring to 
my attention, he can do so here or do so privately. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s not my concern; it’s 
concerns of the people of the province, I believe when we look 
at what’s happened in the recent past and try and get to why and 
how this could happen . . . I’ve not been privy to the report that 
the minister said he has received. I don’t have a copy of it and I 
was wondering if the minister would provide me with a copy of 
that report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I would certainly welcome the . . . this 
opportunity. I’m very particularly pleased that the member has 
raised this issue. I think this is a good opportunity for him to 
stand in this House and to offer his apology to the unionized 
workers in the facility who of course he blamed for the escapes 
a month ago. And he had suggested this was a result of them, as 
you will remember, watching TV and playing Game Boys. 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

Now today it appears that member is suggesting it is because 
they were shift trading. If there are any facts that back up the 
member’s assertions, perhaps he could provide them to the 
members of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I appreciate the rant 
from the minister but he’ll also notice that I never accused 
anybody. I merely asked a question, and there’s no reason that 
I’ll get up in this House and apologize for asking a question for 
which I’m not getting answers. 
 
Now will the minister table a copy of the report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, the member is making 
again veiled assertions about what happened. I have explained 
publicly as to what the investigators have provided. If now he’s 
casting aspersions at the investigators, perhaps he could put 
some basis of fact behind this or take it up outside so that the 
employees can deal with him directly. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’m perfectly comfortable with asking 
the same questions outside, Mr. Chair. Will the minister table 
the report? He has said that he has received the report. Now I’m 
asking if he will table the report so we can have a look at what 
was discovered within the investigation at the facility as to what 
precipitated the escape. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, obviously for security 
reasons I’m not in a position to table the report in the Assembly. 
And if the member has questions, I’m prepared to do my best to 
answer them. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Chair, it doesn’t appear that 
the minister is answering questions. That’s why I’d like to see 
the report. And every time I ask a specific question he gets on a 
rant about that I’m accusing somebody, and all I’m doing is I’m 
asking questions that I’m not getting answers to. 
 
Now I’ll give an example on this one. It was asked in a written 
question and I’ll re-ask the question to the minister. 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: were 
managers at the Regina correctional facility warned by 
guards as to the danger of holding inmates in the 
auditorium from which recent inmates escapes occurred? 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, I would direct the 
member’s attention to the Votes and Proceedings issue no. 16 
for Tuesday, April 8, and he will note on the appendix I, 
questions and answers, that this question no. 50 was answered 
on Tuesday, April 8. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, that’s the question. It was not 
answered on April 8 to what the question stated. And I will read 
the answer, if you wish, into the record. The answer to the 
question that I just asked, and here is the answer if you can 
believe it’s an answer: 
 

As a result of a shift briefing report on March 7, 2003, 
management was made aware that a vent situated above a 
door in the auditorium had been tampered with. However, 
the vent was replaced the week prior to the escape and was 
found not to be a contributing factor in reference to the 

escape. 
 
Well that’s a very non-answer to the question, so I’m asking the 
question again. Were managers at Regina correctional facility 
warned by guards as to the dangers of holding inmates in the 
auditorium? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, my job gets much easier 
when the member asks the question and then reads the answer. I 
would encourage him to read the answer again into the record if 
he so chooses. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, it’s not an answer to the 
question. Will the minister answer the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Question no. 50 has been asked; it has 
been answered. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, it’s very, very clear that the 
minister has not answered the question. Now the minister can 
sit there and say this non-answer is an answer. The question is: 
did the guards . . . were the managers at the facility warned by 
the guards as to the dangers of holding inmates in the 
auditorium? That’s a simple question. It has nothing to do with 
a vent; it has nothing to do with anything else. 
 
Were managers at the facility warned by guards as to the danger 
of holding inmates in the auditorium? It’s a simple question. 
Were they or were they not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, let me say this. The answer 
is provided. It is provided fully. It is provided with detail. It is 
provided with a date in terms of the report that was provided to 
members. 
 
Now that member across the way likes to cast grand aspersions. 
A week ago, two weeks ago he had suggested that guards at that 
facility were to blame because they were watching television or 
playing Game Boys. That was the assertion that member made 
in this House — not borne out by fact. Now today he is 
suggesting, now today he is suggesting it was shift trading that 
was a result of that — also not borne out by fact. 
 
That member is casting some very broad aspersions against the 
public service of this province that I doubt are very much within 
the basis of the appropriate debate of this Assembly. And it 
doesn’t matter how loud those sanctimonious hypocrites across 
the way get, Mr. Chair. 
 
Let me tell you this, that it is helpful if they want to provide 
questions that are based on fact before simply smearing the 
good reputation of the public servants involved. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Hon. members, order. 
 
I would ask hon. members to use temperate language and not 
get into personal attacks and references to calling others 
hypocrites and the like. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, I of course apologize for 
referring to the members’ hypocrisy. 
 
The Chair: — I’ve attempted to make sure that there is 



April 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

 

warnings and I would indicate that would be the member’s first 
warning. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s very 
interesting. When the minister appears to be absolutely stuck 
for an answer, he goes on a tirade about something and accuses 
people about something that is not factual. 
 
And I wish to pose the question again to the minister. The 
question is very simple, and I don’t . . . I’m not sure what the 
minister doesn’t understand about estimates, where . . . 
Estimates, Mr. Chair, is where questions are asked and there’s 
supposed to be answers provided. I will ask the minister a 
question again: were managers at the Regina correctional 
facility warned by guards as to the danger of holding inmates in 
the auditorium — yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this question has been 
asked; it has been answered. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, it has not been answered. 
And I would like the minister to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It may not have been answered to that 
member’s satisfaction, but the question has been answered. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Chair, the minister actually 
refuses to answer the question. I’m not sure what the reason is 
he’s not answering the question. I would like an explanation as 
to why he will not answer the question because he is . . . he’s 
answering a question that is totally, totally, totally nowhere near 
what the question is. It’s like asking the time of day and 
somebody’s telling you how to build a watch. It’s got no 
relevance whatsoever to the question. 
 
The question is pure and simple: were people advised? And the 
minister wishes to say, well there’s a vent that was replaced. 
Well I may be missing something here, Mr. Chair, but what, 
what does the replacement of a vent have to do with whether 
the guards or the management was advised about the dangers of 
holding inmates in the auditorium? Now how can the minister 
sit there and answer that it’s answered in because they replaced 
a vent? 
 
I mean, this is . . . He talks about hypocrisy, Mr. Chair. Yet he 
stands up and talks about it like we’re being hypocritical. But 
how do you explain that answer, where he’s not giving an 
answer? So I’d like to have the minister explain how holding 
inmates in the auditorium, whether they were warned by 
managers or guards, what that has to do with a vent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I don’t know how to put this any 
simpler than we have in the written answers. On March 7, 
managers . . . Well, Mr. Chair, the members ask questions and 
then they yell from their seat to make noise. And if they want 
the answer, the answer has been provided many times. 
 
On March 7, managers were advised there was a problem about 
the tampering with the vent. The vent was replaced and it was 
not a contributing factor in the escape. I don’t know how to 
make it any simpler for the member opposite. That was the 
advice that was given. That was the action that was taken by 
management. And it seems to be appropriate. 

If the member has other questions, I’d be willing to answer 
them. If he wants to ask this another seven or eight times, I’ll 
answer it the same way. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, how was management made 
aware that the vent was tampered with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I would draw the member’s attention 
again to the Votes and Proceedings, answer to question no. 50. 
He will note the managers were made aware as it indicates in 
the one, two, three, four, five, sixth, seventh, and eighth words 
of the answer. They were made aware by a shift briefing report. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Now, Mr. Chair, back to the question. 
Who made the observation that precipitated this viewing of the 
vent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, the staff on shift prepared 
the shift briefing report. So obviously it was the staff who were 
on shift at that point who indicated that the vent had been 
tampered with and made it aware to managers who had taken 
the action to have the vent replaced. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, was it the same . . . Did, by 
chance, the same briefing report advise managers that holding 
inmates in the auditorium might not be a good idea? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It was not in the shift briefing report. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I don’t know how we’re going to get a 
question out, or an answer out of the minister. It’s not . . . it’s 
not in the shift report. Then I have to, I have to ask once again: 
were people, managers, warned about the dangers of holding 
inmates in the auditorium? And this pat answer is not 
acceptable. It’s not an answer to the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well whether this answer is acceptable 
to the member or not is certainly an issue that he can take up. 
But let me say this. Certainly managers and staff are aware of 
the limitations in terms of many parts of the facility. We are 
aware of limitations in terms of the auditorium. I have said 
publicly that one of the issues that was clearly a contributing 
factor in this particular escape had to do with not having line of 
sight maintained where we have medium security and a higher 
risk of escape by inmates. 
 
I’m not sure how I can put this any more simply for the 
members. Clearly members are aware of . . . staff members are 
aware of this, the limitations of this facility. Managers are 
aware of the limitations of this facility. Procedures have been 
updated to make sure that the escape risk is minimized. I trust 
that that satisfies the member’s question. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Chair, it never answered the 
question yet but I’m . . . The minister is going to sit there and 
not answer the question. With that in mind I’m wondering how 
many questions that he will even attempt to answer throughout 
estimates if his demeanour is going to be sitting there and say 
I’ve given answer. He can give an answer to every question that 
is asked from this side of the House and say, we’ve fixed the 
vent. It might have nothing to do with the question whatsoever. 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2003 

 

How is the facility in Prince Albert doing? Well, we fixed the 
vent. It has absolutely nothing to do with it. But he can sit there 
in his pious manner and say, well we fixed the vent. 
 
I think in estimates we’re supposed to get some answers to 
questions. And for the minister to sit there and just say I’ve 
answered the question is not good enough to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I think they deserve some answers to some of 
these questions. And for the minister to just . . . Whatever I ask 
from now on, he can say — regarding April 8, whatever — we 
fixed the vent. Well I don’t really think that that’s an answer to 
the question. How much overtime does the facility spend each 
year for overtime? Well, we fixed the vent. 
 
It just doesn’t make sense, does it? Well that’s the same as the 
answer to the question that I asked. We fixed the vent. 
 
So for the minister to get up and start using, well we answered 
the question because the vent is fixed; he can use that for every 
question that I so ask. It just doesn’t make sense, does it? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chair, I’m going to ask one more 
question that’s kind of pertaining to this, pertaining to this and 
that is — and the minister can rant away on it — does the 
department permit what is known as moonlighting by staff, or 
with staff holding full-time jobs outside of their full-time job at 
the facility? Does this happen? And if the minister would 
answer if this happens and if it is condoned by the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Any outside work undertaken by 
employees needs to be approved by our department and by the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
I appreciate the questions that the member has asked, and in 
noting the time of day I’m going to suggest that . . . I will thank 
my officials for appearing. I’m going to move that we report 
progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:55. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................471 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................471 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................472 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................478 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 86th Anniversary of Battle of Vimy Ridge 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................472 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................472 
 Cut Knife Bowlers Advance to National Masters Tournament 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................472 
 Casino Moose Jaw Wins Award of Excellence 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................472 
 Canadian University Curling Championship 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................473 
 Signs of Spring 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................473 
 Progress of War in Iraq 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................473 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Mega Bingo 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................474 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................474 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................475 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 15 — The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................478 
 Bill No. 16 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................478 
 Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................478 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................478 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................478 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................478 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................480 
 Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................481 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................482 
 Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................482 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................483 
 Bill No. 5 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2003 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................484 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................485 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund—Community Resources and Employment—Vote 36 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................485 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................485 
 



 

 

 General Revenue Fund—Corrections and Public Safety—Vote 73 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................492 
 
 


