















































Hansard: June 05, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1451 
 June 5, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m really pleased to 
stand again today and present a petition on behalf of the people 
who are concerned about Highway No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and the 
surrounding area. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Okla, 
Yorkton, Preeceville, Hazel Dell, and Kelvington. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of the Moose Jaw and district 
concerned about a lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Signatures on this petition again this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 
are all from the city of Moose Jaw, and I’m proud to present on 
their behalf. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous, 
deplorable, and inexcusable condition of Highway No. 43. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Del Bonita, Alberta, Gravelbourg, Lafleche, 
and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to refrain from 
extending his statement by increasing the number of adjectives. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who have grave concerns over the condition of Highway 
47 between Estevan and Boundary dam resort. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by constituents of mine, 
namely from Estevan and Lampman. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
residents of my constituency who have a concern about the CT 
(computerized tomography) scanner plan of the government, 
but also a constructive solution to it that would be budget 
revenue neutral. And the prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner in Swift Current and instead provide a new CT 
scanner for the southwest. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners today are from the 
frontier city, Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
won’t use the adjectives that my colleague from Thunder Creek 
used but I rise representing concerned citizens with the state of 
Highway 43. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
Gravelbourg and Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today on 
behalf of citizens of west central Saskatchewan concerned with 
the deplorable and despicable state of cell coverage north of 
Coleville. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
construct a new cellular phone tower at Coleville, 
Saskatchewan. 
 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens from Coleville, 
Kindersley, and Smiley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to Saskatchewan crop insurance premium 
increases. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by citizens from Davidson and Imperial. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increase in crop insurance 
premiums to farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Cando and Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
presenting a petition on the condition of Highway 14. The 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair the highway in order to address 
safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by the good people of Wilkie and 
surrounding area. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the allocation of a CT scanner in the 
southwest part of the province; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 12, 18, 36, 41, 114, 116, 119, and 120. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to stand today to table 
the final report of the Special Committee on Regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, outside of the federal parliament, the province of 
Saskatchewan is the only provincial jurisdiction that has had an 
active Regulations Committee. The purpose of the Special 
Committee on Regulations is to review regulations, determining 
whether or not they comply with the intent of the parent piece 
of legislation in order to ensure that Saskatchewan residents are 
treated fairly as regulations are implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years the committee has been very ably 
assisted by the Legislative Law Clerk and his staff, as well as 
staff from the Clerk’s office. Your committee would like to 
extend our thanks to Mr. Ken Ring, the Legislative Law Clerk, 
and his staff who have been very diligent in reviewing 
regulations and bringing to the committee’s attention areas in 
regulations where extra scrutiny needed to be applied. 
 
Our thanks as well to Ms. Margaret Woods, the Clerk’s office, 
and Hansard staff for their assistance in helping our committee 
to run smoothly in dealing with issues in carrying out our 
duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the member from 
Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the final report of the Special Committee on 
Regulations be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: what is the total assessment 
of non-agriculture Crown land that is south of the north 
administrative district; further to that, what is the average 
quarter section assessment of this same land? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to other 
members of this legislature, 36 grade 6 students from Dalmeny . 
And they’re seated in the east gallery as well as behind the bar 
over there. 
 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

 

They are here today to see what’s happening in the legislature. 
Their teachers that are with them are Ms. Roxanne Bitner and 
Mrs. Darlene Thiessen, also three other chaperones. 
 
This school, by the way, Mr. Speaker, has the unique situation 
that they know a lot of people in this building. I think they have 
former principals, former citizens, and all sorts of other people 
in this building that they know. 
 
And if they don’t have any questions at this time, I’m sure 
they’ll have some questions in about 20 to 30 minutes from 
now. 
 
So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming the 
students from Dalmeny, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and to the members of this 
House, a woman sitting in the gallery opposite here, with one of 
my staff, Michelle Kobayashi. In this gallery on the west is Ms. 
Caroline Lowe from Lowe’s Tea Room and the Sherwood 
museum. Ms. Lowe has been running a very successful business 
west of the city and south of the Trans-Canada and hopefully 
this very successful business will have an opportunity to even 
be better in the near future as it may be the home of the 
Diefenbaker homestead. 
 
So I’d like all members here to welcome Ms. Lowe to the 
gallery. And we hope that she enjoys the session and join me in 
welcoming her please, folks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, I’d like 
to introduce 26 grade 4 students from Hillside School in 
Estevan. And they are accompanied by their teacher, Shelley 
Barlow, and four chaperones and they’re seated in the east 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I met with the students briefly just before 
proceedings and one of the questions that they had was 
concerning the condition of the highways. And although we 
never had time for drinks, I will be sending their juice boxes 
with them. And I hope that is an acceptable substitute for the 
young man that questioned me about milkshakes. 
 
So I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in welcoming 
them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the House, a young man sitting in your gallery, 
Cory Ecarnot. 
 
Now Cory has a very keen interest in politics and I hear he even 
tapes question period in the proceedings and watches them 
when he gets home at work . . . or from work in the evenings. 
So I hope he enjoys the proceedings this afternoon and I would 

like all members to please welcome him to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you another young man who is seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. He is a long-time parliamentary officer, not 
from Saskatchewan, but from our neighbouring province of 
Manitoba. His name is Mr. Binx Remnant. Binx served as Clerk 
of the Manitoba legislature for 17 years and prior to that served 
as Clerk of the Northwest Territories Legislative Assembly for 
16 years. 
 
In his retirement, Binx has been involved in consulting projects 
with the parliaments of South Africa and Kenya and remains a 
respected source of parliamentary advice for his Canadian 
colleagues. I look forward to meeting with him this afternoon. 
 
A welcome for Mr. Binx Remnant. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Show 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I, 
the Minister of Industry and Resources, and the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs had the privilege of attending the 
10th biennial Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Show in Weyburn. 
This is the second largest show of its kind in Canada, befitting 
the fact that Weyburn is a major centre of this Canadian 
industry. 
 
We enjoyed speaking with a number of the 282 exhibitors, who 
expressed what an excellent event this was due to the facilities, 
the volunteer organizers, and the quality of the exhibits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during dinner and the awards banquet, Clayton 
Woitas, president and CEO (chief executive officer) of Profico 
Energy Management Ltd., was awarded the Oilman of the Year 
Award. In his acceptance speech he called himself a 
Saskatchewan wannabe. He stated to the crowd of 700 that 
there was a Saskatchewan advantage due to our competitive 
royalty structure, a fair regulatory system, and our communities 
who are working with the oil and gas industry. In other words, 
our future is wide open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is working with the oil and gas 
industry to build a strong, economic foundation for our 
province, and in the process, making Saskatchewan a 
world-class venue of excellence. 
 
Congratulations to Weyburn for organizing this showcase 
event, and congratulations to the expanding Saskatchewan oil 
and gas industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night the Leader of the Opposition, who is also the next premier 
of Saskatchewan, along with eight Saskatchewan Party MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) attended the awards 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

banquet at the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Show held in 
Weyburn. 
 
After a delicious pit roast beef supper, which was prepared and 
served by the Weyburn Young Fellows Club, the presentation 
took place. 
 
Inducted into the Saskatchewan Oil Patch Hall of Fame were: 
Frank Proto, Chair of Petroleum and Technology Research 
Centre, Regina, and he was the senior vice-president of AEC 
Pipelines; Ken Lee of Midale Petroleums Ltd.; Jerry Mainil of 
Caprice Resources; and Naisie Schnell of Franklin Pipe and 
Supply. The Saskatchewan Oilman of the Year was Clayton 
Woitas, president and CEO of Profico Energy Management Ltd. 
And the Southeast Saskatchewan Oilman of the Year was Les 
Avery of ARC Resources. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating these oilmen and 
to thank everyone involved in the oil industry for their 
contributions to our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Luther Academy Building 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
respectfully enlighten this Assembly concerning an educational 
legacy in Melville. Today the Luther Academy will be 
celebrating its 90th anniversary in Melville. At the same time, 
the Melville Heritage Museum will be celebrating its 20th 
anniversary of occupying the Luther Academy Building. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it all began way back in 1913 when construction 
commenced on Luther Academy, the very first school for 
Lutheran students in Saskatchewan. Built at a cost of $22,000, 
the academy was the grandest building of its kind in the district. 
 
The academy opened to 32 students from the three Prairie 
provinces in 1914. Attendance quickly grew from year to year, 
until in 1926 it became necessary to move staff and all to the 
new, larger, modern quarters at Luther College in Regina — a 
very well-respected school which we know is still thriving 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1927 the academy was converted to one of the 
first nursing homes in the province and was known as St. Paul’s 
Old Folks Home. In 1975 the home was moved to its new 
facilities, built right next door, and talk ran wild about 
demolition of the old building. However, Mr. Speaker, public 
opinion did not agree with this rumour and in 1981 the academy 
building was declared a heritage site. And after major 
restoration in 1983 the Melville Heritage Museum opened its 
doors to the public. 
 
I encourage all members to come celebrate with us in Melville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Petitions for New Scanner 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the provincial budget 

the government announced that Swift Current would soon 
become home to a permanent CT scanner. And while we’re 
grateful for the announcement, concerns have been expressed 
that our health region is slated to receive the portable unit 
currently shared with Moose Jaw, while two other communities 
in Saskatchewan will receive the new CT machines in the 
budget. 
 
I’ve been informed that the demand for the CT scanner in the 
Southwest exceeds the capacity and the capability of this used 
unit, which is also prone to malfunctioning and requires 
frequent maintenance. But to the credit of local health care 
professionals, they’ve come up with a budget-neutral, 
constructive solution that wouldn’t add any cost to the budget. 
 
The portable unit has provided excellent training for our local 
diagnostic health care staff. Also, the size of our region and the 
level of our CT expertise make a strong case for a newer, more 
reliable unit. It’s also been suggested that the portable CT unit 
could possibly be used to train health care professionals in other 
regions that presently don’t have CT technology but that are 
scheduled to receive a permanent unit. 
 
A petition to this effect, Mr. Speaker, is currently being 
circulated around Swift Current and people have been 
responding to this common sense request from the grassroots 
and from health care professionals, a request of this 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, we would ask the government 
give it every respectful consideration. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Vehicle Idling Campaign 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday was 
Clean Air Day and I’m pleased to say that as part of the day’s 
celebrations, the Minister of Environment announced a new 
clean air initiative at a wonderful school in my constituency of 
Regina Wascana Plains, W.S. Hawryluk School. The member 
for Saskatoon Greystone was also in attendance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the initiative is the anti-idling campaign. It is a 
co-operative effort between Saskatchewan Environment and 
Climate Change Saskatchewan. It is designed to educate people 
about the environmental problems associated with idling 
vehicles in terms of air quality and the climate change, and to 
encourage them to stop the practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, W.S. Hawryluk School was chosen as the site of 
the announcement because the school has an active environment 
club and is particularly interested in the issue. In fact they have 
a sign outside the school for some time now that’s asking 
drivers not to idle their engines because the negative effect on 
air quality in the school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the students and teachers of W.S. 
Hawryluk School, in particular Mrs. Tomyn, the principal, and 
Mrs. Agopsowicz, the adviser to the environmental club, for 
hosting the launch and I want to commend them for all their 
efforts on behalf of creating a healthy and sustainable 
environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

 

YWCA Gala Evening of Cinema 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
evening I was pleased to represent the Leader of the Official 
Opposition and the Saskatchewan Party at the gala evening of 
cinema for the YWCA (Young Women’s Christian 
Association), a benefit for women in need and their families, at 
the opening ceremonies of Galaxy Cinema in the Normanview 
Shopping Centre right here in Regina. Galaxy Entertainment, 
Harvard Developments, and the YWCA of Regina hosted the 
evening’s entertainment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Galaxy movie theatre features giant 
screens, 10 stadium auditorias, Dolby digital surround sound, 
and the ultimate in seating comfort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than a century ago, the YWCA of Regina 
opened its doors and its hearts to women and children in 
Regina. The YWCA is to be commended for providing quality 
programs, services, and advocacy to meet the varied and 
changing needs of women and their families. 
 
Their programs include the Isabel Johnson Shelter, children 
who witness violence program, Big Sisters program, child care 
services, and support of residential housing for women who 
face challenging life issues. 
 
I wish to express my gratitude to Freida Link, Chair of the 
Regina YWCA capital campaign, and to Ken Prue, director of 
marketing for the Galaxy Cinema, for their gracious invitation 
to join in the celebration of the grand opening of the Galaxy 
Cinema and the fundraiser for the YWCA of Regina. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina’s 36th Annual Mosaic Festival 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, where can you travel 75,000 
kilometres, travel over 4 continents, 7 oceans, 30 countries, and 
40 borders in just 3 days? Oh yes, and did I mention eat a lot of 
great food? Well it’s right here in Regina, that’s where. 
 
This year marks the 36th annual Mosaic festival. With 17 
pavilions, Saskatchewan’s oldest multicultural festival expects 
to attract over 15,000 visitors. 
 
Mosaic is listed as one of the top 100 festivals in North 
America, and with good reason. Visitors can taste the wonderful 
cuisine that is served at every pavilion. Everyone has a different 
reason why they go to Mosaic. Each of the pavilions offers 
something new and exciting. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this is Saskatchewan. And that means 
Mosaic is planned, operated, staffed, and presented by a huge 
number of volunteers — volunteers who very much deserve our 
admiration and our thanks. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Professional Legislation for Paramedics 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, last year the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government introduced and gave second 
reading to the paramedic Act. The Act was promoted in a 
government press release last spring as legislation that would, 
quote, “. . . improve the quality of emergency medical services 
for people of Saskatchewan.” Yet the NDP let this Bill die on 
the order paper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time the minister said there were issues 
concerning this legislation raised by the fire chiefs and that 
sorting out those issues would take a few months. But here we 
are one year later and the paramedic Act has not been 
reintroduced by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was this legislation not reintroduced by the 
minister this session? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working with 
the paramedics group as well as many people who are within 
the firefighters group around a number of issues that relate to 
their two types of occupations, and we have Saskatchewan 
Health officials working with them. It appears that there are 
many of the issues resolved. These things are still being worked 
out and being finalized and until such time as I can be assured 
that this will proceed with the support of all of the people 
involved, then we won’t be introducing it into the legislature. 
 
But I want to make the point that we value these workers who 
are the emergency medical people in our province and we want 
to make sure that we get this right so that it works for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in a 
letter dated June 2 and addressed to all Saskatchewan MLAs, 
the Saskatchewan Paramedic Association states that they have 
had countless meetings with Saskatchewan Health and the 
Saskatchewan Association of Fire Chiefs. They have been 
lobbying for this legislation since 1997 and they are clearly 
frustrated that legislation is not before this Assembly. 
 
In a letter addressed to Saskatchewan MLAs, the SPA 
(Saskatchewan Paramedic Association) says that the Minister of 
Health wrote them last July after the end of the session and after 
the NDP let their Bill die on the order paper. In his letter the 
minister said, and I quote: 
 

Please be assured that we remain committed to pursuing 
passage of this legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, surely this government has had time to work out 
any amendments that were required to meet the concerns of the 
industry over the past year. So why is the minister not taking a 
leadership role and committing to reintroduce this legislation in 
this session? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things we do on 
this side of the House is we listen to all the people involved in 
any particular issue. And this is a challenge relating to the 
firefighters and the emergency medical personnel. It doesn’t 
just relate to our province but is an issue right across North 
America. 
 
We want to come up with a solution that works here in 
Saskatchewan that doesn’t create problems for the paramedics 
or for the firefighters. We’re close to getting some solutions 
around that, but until such time as we have a 100 per cent 
assurance, I don’t want to bring something into this legislature 
and not be able to proceed with it. 
 
Our goal is to make sure that we have a strong support for the 
paramedics in the province but also that we recognize many of 
the concerns of the firefighters. We’re going to do that in a very 
considered way, a very New Democratic way. We don’t push 
things through like some of those members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the legislation 
that the SPA is promoting would create a self-regulating 
professional body for all emergency medical service providers 
in this province irregardless of where their workplaces are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in his letter the minister said, and I quote: 
 

The . . . (SPA) and its members have demonstrated through 
the process over the past few years that your organization 
possesses the professionalism required to assume 
responsibility for self-regulation. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, why is it that this government always has to 
dither and dither and wait till things become a crisis before they 
act? Mr. Speaker, the minister has been lobbied by the SPA 
since 1997; the legislation was before the House last year; why 
is the holdup taking so long after this is clearly in the best 
interests of the industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to the 
hon. member’s question across the way is that on this side of 
the House we listen to all the people before we proceed. And I 
think that’s very important, especially when you’re dealing with 
professional legislation. 
 
There are at any single time a number of different groups that 
are working through the various requirements of setting up 
professional legislation. And it’s not a simple process, it’s not 
an easy process, because you do have to work with all of the 
others who may have a concern about the kind of profession 
that you’re in. 
 
That’s what we’re doing with this group, and we’re doing it 
with quite a number of other groups at this time. When we’re 
ready, we will proceed with this legislation because we think 
it’s important legislation — but only when we’re ready. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Sound Stage 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday, 
despite the Premier’s assurance that we would be getting more 
information about the Crown corporations and that they would 
be held to a higher account, we didn’t get any answers of the 
minister responsible for these investments despite some specific 
questions on a myriad of risky government NDP gambles into 
the private sector. 
 
Having said that, we have a question for the minister 
responsible for the Regina sound stage that has now . . . that has 
cost $12 million to build, funded entirely by taxpayers, Mr. 
Speaker. How many million Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars 
has the NDP government risked on this construction and 
operation of the Regina sound stage, including all loans, loan 
guarantees, grants, equity, and operating funding? And will the 
minister responsible share with the Assembly how much money 
the sound stage lost in 2002? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence 
of the minister, I would take notice of that question and get 
back to the member, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Galleria Real Estate Study 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. We accept the 
minister at his word that the answer to all of those detailed 
questions, Mr. Speaker — how much the taxpayers have lost 
and how much the government is into this thing for loans, loan 
guarantees, grants, equity, and operating funding — will be 
provided, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there is another investment that we would 
like to find . . . we would like to get some information of on 
behalf of the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. We 
know, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP is interested in not telling the 
truth or giving out the details about its own investments. But 
now they’re also trying to hide, if you can believe it, they’re 
trying to hide information that the federal government would 
like to provide in one of their deals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the federal government bought a major 
office tower in Regina for $28 million. The feds say they need 
the Galleria high-rise to satisfy office requirements. The federal 
government officials want to release the real estate study, the 
real estate study proving that the deal was good for federal 
taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. But the NDP government has said that 
they don’t want that study released. 
 
Will the Minister Responsible for SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) direct his officials to 
release that real estate study, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, quite honestly there’s 
been a little bit of liberty taken with the facts, since at this point 
no decision about releasing information has been made. SPMC 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

 

has been provided a copy of the report the federal government 
has been asked to release, and officials are reviewing that 
particular document to see what information in fact related to 
the corporation and the federal government intends to provide. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as a third party with confidential information 
within the report, SPMC does have the right to review this 
report before it is released, Mr. Speaker. We do this to ensure 
that SPMC’s position within the real estate marketplace is not 
being released. And as stewards of Saskatchewan tax dollars, 
Mr. Speaker, we believe it’s reasonable for us to protect 
information that might make it more costly for us to enter into 
lease arrangements and agreements on behalf of our client 
departments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the federal official who has 
been commenting in the local media and the provincial media 
on this issue, a fellow by the name of Bob Wright, highlighted a 
little bit of the concerns that the provincial government has for 
some reason about the release of this real estate study. He says: 
 

They (that would be SPMC) are co-mingled in the 
document. (And) the document has our investment strategy 
in it (that would be the feds) and SPMC investment strategy 
(in it). 

 
So here’s the question for the minister of SPMC. The question 
was simple. Will he direct officials to release this information? 
What could possibly be in the real estate study that the NDP 
government doesn’t want the people of the province to know? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s another danger 
underlined if those people ever get into government because 
they don’t care about third party confidentiality and respect. To 
release information that might damage our future relationships 
with lease arrangements and the real estate people in this 
province would not benefit either this government or taxpayers’ 
dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those types of questions that are being asked are 
totally irresponsible and the opportunity to ask those questions 
have been in this House, in Committee of the Whole. Those 
questions that are being asked now about reports that contain 
third party information that could be damaging to our future 
relationships are irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let’s at least get 
a basic commitment, if we can, from the minister of SPMC 
today that if it is at all possible, if his review of this matter with 
other third parties proves to clear the way for the release of this 
document, that he will direct his officials to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s at least get that basic commitment. 
 
The federal government presumably would have the same 
concerns about third parties. The federal government, the 
federal Liberal government, has said, we’d like to release this 
study. The only holdup is the provincial NDP. Surprise, 

surprise. 
 
Will the minister give us the basic commitment that barring any 
problems with these third parties he references, this real estate 
study will be tabled in this legislature and reported to the 
taxpayers of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, again it’s extremely evident 
. . . And I hope the member continues, continues that line of 
questioning because it clarifies and verifies the fact they have 
no respect for any third party, any third parties involved in any 
arrangements, business arrangements — obviously because they 
have no idea how business operates. And that’s very 
frightening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have the right to review the report and after the review has 
been done, there will be, as we always have, released whatever 
information we can release without damaging our relationships 
in the business community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sex Offender Registry 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. 
 
This week the House of Commons Justice Committee heard 
from many witnesses who raised some grave concerns about the 
proposed federal sex offender registry. And one of those 
concerns, Mr. Speaker, was that as the legislation stands now 
the registry will be nothing more than a telephone directory. 
 
Private citizens, social service providers, the John Howard 
Society, lobby groups both for and against the registry, and the 
Canadian Police Association all agreed the system as it is 
proposed now is critically flawed. The federal government is 
still defending that legislation, Mr. Speaker, as it is right now 
and says it was developed in consultation with provincial 
attorneys general. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will Saskatchewan’s Attorney General take action 
to push amendments to the federal legislation so that it will 
serve as a significant crime fighting tool to protect people from 
sexual predators? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. In answer to the question, Mr. 
Speaker, as I have stated previously, publicly, yes we will. We 
will seek those improvements to this legislation. But what we 
will not do in the meantime is to hold up the idea of a federal 
registry for sex offenders. 
 
We believe that a national sex offender registry is the way to 
go. We also believe it can be improved. Some of the criticisms 
have been raised by the member and also by us and we will 
work toward those improvements. 
 
And I want to advise the House as well, Mr. Speaker, that we 
are doing several other things to combat sexual abuse and 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

criminal sexual abuse, including paying careful attention to 
conditions of release, having strict conditions of release, 
employing peace bonds, a national flagging system, and also 
applying, where appropriate, to have persons declared 
dangerous sexual offenders. 
 
We’re very proactive on this issue. We’ll continue to be so. And 
we will work to improve the legislation before the House in the 
manner the member has described. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, by this province taking 
some action of its own to set up a database or a Web site listing 
sex offenders’ names and photographs would not be any 
deterrent to the ongoing work of the national sex offender 
registry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just this week, right here in Regina, a news report 
indicated that there was a sexual assault on a young girl. Mr. 
Speaker, other provinces have taken matters into their own 
hands and they have taken steps to protect their citizens either 
with actual registries or with Web sites and public awareness 
tools. In fact even the federal government has made an 
amendment to their legislation in order to incorporate Ontario’s 
database of sex offenders into the national model. 
 
If we had a database like that here in Saskatchewan, it too 
would be incorporated into the national model. But, Mr. 
Speaker, as usual NDP Saskatchewan has done nothing. And 
now they’re sitting back again while the federal government 
completely fouls up the national project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government compromising the 
safety of Saskatchewan people and particularly our children? 
Why is the NDP not taking action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, when any member of the human family is 
harmed in this way it is harm to all of us in the human family, 
Mr. Speaker. And this issue is an issue that concerns all of us 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I would ask members to 
refrain from hollering across the floor. Thank you. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say that 
sexual abuse of any kind, and in particular child sex abuse, is a 
scourge on humanity and we are all opposed to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say also it is a very difficult issue that we’re taking 
active steps to combat. It is an issue, Mr. Speaker, that I hope 
transcends partisan politics in the legislature here. 
 
But I do want to say that, as I’ve said to the member before and 
as I’ve stated publicly, Mr. Speaker, we do have and have had 
since 1996 a Public Disclosure Act, Mr. Speaker, whereby the 
police authorities have the authority to advise the community in 
particular circumstances of the presence of a sexual predator. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we believe that the best way to handle this is 
through the police authorities, to let them decide in an 
appropriate way, as prescribed by legislation, when such 
notification should go out to the community. We do not agree 
that anyone should be able to post this information on a Web 

site at any time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, some of the flaws of 
the proposed sex offender registry I’d like to point out in the 
Assembly today. 
 
That it is not retroactive and only people who commit a sex 
offence after the Bill is passed would be included. Number two, 
there is not enough specific information about offenders such as 
photographs to help police locate an offender they may be 
interested in tracking. Number three, it won’t use the latest 
technology available to police forces. Number four, the 
penalties for offenders who don’t register are lax. Number five, 
there is no specific list of what type of offences would require 
registration. 
 
One police officer with the sex crime and child abuse unit in 
Winnipeg called the proposed legislation empty, meaningless, 
and a gross misrepresentation. Mr. Speaker, clearly the federal 
government and the provincial attorneys general have not put 
enough teeth into it. 
 
What are the amendments that the minister in this province of 
Saskatchewan is going . . . What are the amendments that you 
intend to put forward, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
that in the member’s last question she has pointed out that she 
does not take issue simply with what the province of 
Saskatchewan is doing, as she indicated in a previous question. 
She now takes issue with what all of the attorneys general from 
all of the provinces and all of the political parties are doing. 
And I respect the member’s right to take issue with that. 
 
But I want to say in that respect that it is inaccurate to say, as 
the member said a few questions ago, that this province, unlike 
other provinces, is not doing something which she assumes we 
should be doing. She now says the whole country isn’t doing 
what she thinks we should be doing. 
 
But I want to say to the member that it has been the position of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, and we brought forward a 
resolution to Justice ministers across Canada almost three years 
ago, Mr. Speaker, that there be a national sex registry. 
 
And I think that most reasonable people would understand that 
we live in a society where people are very mobile. Sex 
offenders can be very mobile; they can move from city to city, 
province to province. This matter must be addressed on the 
national stage. I’ve already indicated to the member we will 
seek the amendments that she is talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we 
learned at the time of SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development), partnership is an NDP mining term meaning 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

 

someone else gets the gold and the taxpayers get the shaft. 
 
My question for the Premier: where is our partnership with 
Broe now at? When he announced in Belle Plaine last October 
that an ethanol plant was going to be built in the month of May, 
to what year was he referring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ve 
answered that question a number of times in this Assembly and 
also in the public forum, Mr. Speaker. I’ve said that we would 
not go ahead with the deal, Mr. Speaker, until we have the best 
possible deal available for the taxpayers and the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we continue — we continue — 
to work with the financing companies, Mr. Speaker, to try and 
ensure that we can still begin construction this year if at all 
possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Automated Land Titles System 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, it was recently announced by the 
province of Nova Scotia that they had carefully examined our 
new automated land titles system and that they would not be 
purchasing it. 
 
My question for the minister: if, if he has produced the most 
technologically advanced product in this province since 
GigaText, why then is it over 500 per cent over budget? Why is 
it still not working properly? And why will no one buy it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
to the public that there are several inaccuracies contained in the 
statement that that member just made. I want to say to that 
member that there are law firms — and the member should 
know this — who are putting applications for a transfer in and 
getting the transfers through in less than a day, Mr. Speaker. 
And since the beginning of this year, the average transaction is 
going through in three days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:15) 
 
I find it curious . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, this member and 
the opposition complains that we’re not selling our technology 
to Nova Scotia. 
 
Yesterday, another member is complaining that we’re selling 
SaskEnergy technology to New Brunswick or Nova Scotia, one 
or the other, Nova Scotia. So it really doesn’t matter what this 
government does, Mr. Speaker, the opposition will complain 
about it. 
 
But I want to say to that member from North Battleford that he 
should join with us, come into the 21st century where 
information technology, information technology does work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

Ambulance Service in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of 
Justice for his kind offer but been there, done that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, according to a two-year-old 
government study, one-third of our ambulance fleet, at that 
time, was not roadworthy. Increasingly, patients cannot be 
transported to the nearest hospital — which of course now is 
much, much further since this government took office — 
because we don’t have proper ambulances. 
 
Well a year and a half ago, the province promised to adopt 
standard ambulance fees throughout the province so we would 
not discriminate against rural patients whose hospitals have 
been closed. When is the government going to keep its promise 
to upgrade the province’s ambulance fleet and to standardize 
ambulance rates throughout the province? 
 
I asked this question last week. The minister said, well it had 
something to do with Paul Martin in 1995. Well I’m asking the 
NDP in 2003, when are they going to keep their word? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this has been a very 
interesting day. We know that when you only have one 
member, it’s hard to cover a number of issues. So today we 
have the Trinity — three-in-one Liberal. And so I appreciate 
getting a chance to answer this question. And I think it’s the 
Holy Ghost part of the Trinity that I’m answering. 
 
And so what I want to say to the member is that this whole 
issue around emergency medical services across the province is 
a challenge for all of us. It’s part of our action plan; we’re 
working on various parts of it. 
 
One of the areas that we’ve been working this year is training 
many more emergency medical technicians; we’ll continue to 
do that. We work with the regional health authorities to have 
them upgrade their fleets of ambulances on a sustained basis. 
 
But we also listen very carefully to many communities who 
have their existing ambulance in their community and they 
wanted to have more time around some of those issues because 
many times they were an important asset in their community. 
 
So we’re working hard to make sure we have a good health 
system in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Mount 
Royal on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and also to my 
colleagues. I want to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Legislative Assembly, two guests in your 
gallery. And in particular Diane Francis, who’s a noted national 
columnist with the National Post, and a very well-known, very 
respected commentator. And also she is accompanied by 
Harvey Linnen, who runs Linnen and associates here in Regina. 
 
And I was very pleased to attend a luncheon sponsored by the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants at the Centre of the Arts over 
the noon hour, and Ms. Francis was the keynote speaker. And 
also the Leader of the Opposition and the Finance critic from 
the opposition were there also. 
 
And I was sitting at the same table as Ms. Francis and I must 
say, we had a really delightful conversation. I’m not sure that I 
succeeded in convincing her that the editorial policy of the 
National Post should be somewhat revised, but nevertheless we 
did have a very enjoyable visit, and after which she gave an 
extremely thought-provoking address and answered questions. 
 
And I’d like all members of the Legislative Assembly to 
welcome Ms. Francis and Mr. Linnen here today. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — With leave also to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I too would 
like to join with the Minister of Justice in welcoming 
well-known national columnist Diane Francis to Saskatchewan 
and to Regina and to our Assembly, as well as Harvey Linnen 
of Linnen and associates. As well as enjoying the comments 
that Ms. Francis made, I actually jotted down a couple of notes 
and one of her comments I thought might actually apply to the 
upcoming election in Saskatchewan when she said: the big 
doesn’t eat the small any more, fast eats the slow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a comment, I have a comment also when I 
introduce the second guest, but I also want to suggest that Ms. 
Francis made some excellent comments on the role of Crown 
corporations and certainly we appreciated those comments as 
well. 
 
With Ms. Francis is Harvey Linnen, and amongst his many 
companies he has a company called Sigma Analytics. And the 
reason I made the comment about the fast eating the slow is, in 
a recent poll done by Sigma Analytics, it showed the 
Saskatchewan Party was ahead of the NDP in a recent poll and 
gaining ground with a lead of about six or seven points. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re very glad to have these guests with us, 
and please welcome them to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Swift Current on his 
feet? 

Mr. Wall: — To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. I’d ask through you to my 
colleagues in the legislature, for their attention and for their 
willingness to join me in welcoming a visitor in the east gallery. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is one of the principals in one of 
the excellent schools in Swift Current. Bryan Braun is a 
principal at Ashley Park School. And also Bryan and I 
graduated from the Swift Current Comprehensive High School 
in the 19 . . . (inaudible) . . . or so. 
 
And so I just ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
Bryan to the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from North Battleford on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As someone who 
over the years has very much enjoyed reading the columns of 
Diane Francis, on behalf of the entire Liberal caucus I too want 
to join in welcoming Ms. Francis to the Assembly this 
afternoon and to the province, and to thank her that her 
newspaper of course reported earlier this week — speaking of 
election results — that my party in Manitoba doubled its 
representation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine 
Renewal Plan 

 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to inform you and all hon. members of the renewal 
plan for the College of Medicine at the University of 
Saskatchewan which was announced this morning by the 
Minister of Health, the Minister of Finance, and myself to a 
very delighted crowd of health sciences academic students and 
other interested people in the health field. 
 
This plan responds to the challenge presented last November by 
the Committee on Accreditation of Canadian Medical Schools, 
and we are confident that this plan will ensure the ongoing 
accreditation of the college. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, this plan 
builds for the future of health education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plan was developed and approved through a 
very successful partnership between our government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. I 
would ask members to tone it down, particularly the comments 
— order, please — particularly the comments that are thrown 
across the floor. 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The plan was 
developed and approved through a very successful partnership 
between our government, the university, and the Academic 
Health Sciences Network. 
 
The goal of the plan is to see the probationary order lifted and 
full accreditation sustained. The college has already made 
significant steps in this direction through their work on student 
experience and curriculum. 
 
The plan unveiled today positions the college to take the final 
steps in addressing the accreditation requirements of the 
college. It will mean library improvements to support the 
changing curriculum of the college. And it will mean the 
university, college, and Academic Health Sciences Network can 
move forward in addressing faculty requirements. 
 
The plan is supported in this fiscal year by $1.5 million from 
the departments of Health and Learning. In total we anticipate 
the annual incremental cost to government will be about 13 
million after full implementation. It is an investment we are 
proud to make, Mr. Speaker, as it is an investment, not only in 
higher education, but in the future of health care. By enhancing 
physician-training programs, we are confident that 
Saskatchewan will continue to attract and retain health care 
professionals. 
 
This is the 50th anniversary of our medical college and I can 
think of no better way to celebrate this milestone than by 
opening the door to the college’s bright future. 
 
I want to credit the university community and the health 
sciences network for their hard work and their partnership. 
Saskatchewan works best when we work together and today’s 
announcement is no exception. Together we are safeguarding 
our health education system and ensuring a wide open future for 
all our province’s aspiring physicians. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
official opposition could have written this ministerial statement 
for the government six months ago when we realized the 
problem of the College of Medicine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course this is an important announcement 
today, and of course it was absolutely essential that this 
commitment come to the College of Medicine at the University 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not new news, and it’s another example of 
how this government seems incapable of doing the right thing 
until either people in the industry, people in the profession, or 
the official opposition finally embarrasses them into doing the 
right thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this item should be included in 
the budget that was delivered this spring in the legislature 
because the information that was required to make the 
commitment was before the Department of Learning and before 
the department of medicine prior to the budget being tabled in 

this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance should have been aware of 
this information. It’s important news; it’s a step on the right 
direction; but it’s another example of how difficult it is to get 
this government to do the simple things that are simply the right 
things to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions nos. 671 through 700 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 671 through to 
question no. 700 inclusive have been tabled. 
 
(14:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — And I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With me 
today to my left is Ms. Karen Pflanzner who is the Crown 
counsel with legislative services of the Department of Justice. 
And seated behind me is Mr. Jim Hall who is the 
Superintendent of Insurance at the Saskatchewan Financial 
Services Commission. And behind Ms. Pflanzner is Ms. Jana 
Odling who is a legal analyst at the Saskatchewan Financial 
Services Commission. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon to 
the minister and to his officials. Mr. Minister, I have a number 
of questions in regards to this Bill, The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Amendment Act. 
 
Could you please outline all the groups and all the individuals 
that you have consulted with in the drafting of the legislation 
that is before us today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I should tell the member, this is a 
very, very long list and I’ll go over some of it but perhaps 
undertake to send over a copy. We have consulted with all 
insurance companies licensed in Saskatchewan, of which there 
are 247 — the Insurance Bureau of Canada, the Canadian Life 
and Health Insurance Association Inc., CompCorp, the Property 
and Casualty Insurance Compensation Corporation, the 
Saskatchewan Insurance Managers Association, the Insurance 
Brokers Association, the Insurance Councils of Saskatchewan, 
the Canadian Association of Direct Response Insurers, the 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

Canadian Association of Financial Institutions in Insurance. 
 
And I’ve got about a third of the way through, and I’d be happy 
to continue or to send it over. I’ll continue because the member 
seems interested and I’m happy to do so — the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance, the Canadian Bar Association, the 
Canadian Institute of Actuaries, Saskatchewan Municipal Hail 
Insurance Association, the Canadian Association of Insurance 
and Financial Advisors now called Advocis, the Canadian 
Association of Mutual Insurance Companies, the Canadian 
Insurance Self-Regulatory Organization, the Farm Mutual 
Reinsurance Plan Inc., the federal Department of Finance, the 
Canadian Fraternal Association, the Independent Financial 
Brokers of Canada, Willis Canada, L. E. Yingst Company Ltd., 
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Canada Inc., Aon Reed Stenhouse 
Inc., Marsh Canada Limited, Blue Insurance Ltd., North Central 
Insurance Brokers, Cameco Corporation, Robin Hood 
Employees’ Mutual Insurance Association, and all members of 
the Canadian Council of Insurance Regulators. 
 
So it appears that there has been very, very widespread 
consultation with respect to this legislation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Over what period of time 
were these consultations held? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, approximately the 
past year. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, for the 
minister. Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, when the last major 
update of this Act took place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the last major 
update of this legislation was in 1998. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, can you tell me what 
reaction you have received from the insurance brokers, the 
insurance industry, in regards to placing so much of this into 
regulations or of the Act into regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Very favourable overall support. They 
agree with the movement to streamline and put some powers 
into regulations so that it will be easier to have government 
respond when the insurance industry identifies changes that 
need to be made. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the insurance 
brokers have raised this as a point of interest with us when we 
asked them to take a look at the Bill. While they agree that 
many of the changes here are very technical in nature and serve 
to update the Act, they are concerned that so much is being 
moved to regulations where future changes will not come up in 
this Assembly for scrutiny and will not be subject to public 
debate. 
 
Do you find the concerns raised by the insurance brokers 
ill-founded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — My understanding is that the insurance 
brokers did raise some issues. No, we did not find them to be 
ill-founded. We said that we would do further consultation with 
the insurance brokers when the regulations were developed. 

And as I have indicated to the member, there were many 
parties, dozens and in fact hundreds of organizations and 
companies consulted. And it is true that there may be some 
concerns about some parts of the Bill, not others. But that is one 
organization, the insurance brokers. But there are many other 
organizations consulted that did not have the same reservations 
and in the main the organizations are in the vast majority, very 
supportive of the changes. 
 
Having said that, the insurance brokers raised some concerns 
which we’ll continue to dialogue with them concerning . . . And 
when we develop the regulations, we’ll take their concerns into 
account. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I think that one of the reasons that 
exemplifies why the insurance brokers are concerned about 
allowing cabinet to change so much of the Act and take it out of 
the purview of the Legislative Assembly has been demonstrated 
in just the last few days because a very, very profound change 
was made in the insurance industry through regulations that 
give a credit union the right to buy and own insurance 
brokerages. And because it was done through regulation, there 
was little or no public debate on this issue. 
 
So do you see why insurance brokers and other Saskatchewan 
residents might be a little concerned by moving even more 
authority behind closed doors to cabinet and away from the 
public eye? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well actually I want the member to know 
that the changes made with respect to giving the credit unions 
the right to invest in or own insurance brokers certainly were 
not done behind closed doors as the member just indicated. 
 
In fact, as the member I believe knows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the Insurance Brokers Association was sent a letter giving them 
at least 90 days notice that the government was considering this 
change. So to say that this is somehow done in secret is not 
accurate. And also when the member says there was no political 
debate, I want the member to know, as she well knows already, 
that there was in fact some public debate. 
 
We heard from insurance brokers and their view; we respect 
their view. We also heard from credit unions their view; we 
respect their view. But at the end of the day a decision was 
taken. That’s what governments do — they have to analyze 
situations and take decisions. And in this particular instance, 
because the member may be suggesting that the government did 
something wrong, I want to point out the government did 
nothing wrong and the credit unions aren’t doing anything 
wrong either. 
 
The simple reality is, and I will defend it, this government made 
a decision. The decision was to allow credit unions to invest in 
or own insurance brokerages. Why did we do that? Very 
simple, because banks are allowed to do that. And in our view 
— it may not be the member’s view but it is our view — that it 
is unfair to credit unions to say what banks can do, you cannot 
do, because credit unions should be on a level playing field with 
banks. 
 
I would point out, secondly, that there is no restriction on 
insurance brokerages offering a full range of financial services 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

 

outside of . . . or associated with insurance brokerages. That in 
fact is done. In fact, there is one insurance company, Hi-Alta, 
which has now been chartered as a bank, that competes directly 
in 14 communities with credit unions. 
 
I would also point out that insurance brokerages are, as I said, 
allowed to sell a wide variety of financial services which in fact 
compete with credit unions, and it is not unreasonable that 
credit unions should also be on a level playing field with 
insurance brokerages. 
 
I realize that there’s some controversy here. But I want to say to 
the member that we live in a world where information 
technology and a variety of other forces have fundamentally 
altered the way business is done. As everyone knows from 
watching television, we can access financial services on the 
Internet. We can bank with banks that have no branches here in 
Saskatchewan at all. 
 
Credit unions have to compete with that sort of thing; so do 
insurance brokerages to some extent. And the days when it is 
the job of government to tell financial institutions what they can 
and cannot do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have ended. They’ve ended 
with deregulation at the federal level. They’ve ended in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And if it is the position of the member and the Saskatchewan 
Party that we should have a rule that says credit unions should 
not be able to purchase or invest in insurance brokerages, I 
invite the member to get up and state that that is her position 
and the position of the Saskatchewan Party and I would be very 
pleased to debate that issue with the member any time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Chair, once 
again the minister has taken the opportunity to stand in this 
legislature and to misconstrue and mislead . . . misconstrue 
what I’ve said and to mislead the public as to our position on 
this issue. 
 
My question had nothing to do with the stand that’s been taken 
as to whether the credit union has the right to buy and own 
insurance brokerages. That is not what I presented to you. What 
I did present to you was the concern of Saskatchewan citizens 
that these kind of regulations, these kind of changes are now not 
open to public debate, and it’s a matter of allowing the public to 
know and understand what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . or Mr. Chair, to the minister, I want him to 
know that I take issue with the way he presents these kind of 
things and misconstrues what I have said. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of definitions for various 
classes of insurance that are being removed from the legislation 
and being put into regulations. What purpose does this serve 
and how is this change beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan 
or to the insurance industry? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I 
certainly don’t mean to misconstrue the position taken by the 
hon. member because I’ve asked the hon. member what her 
position is and she hasn’t stated it. So I can’t really misconstrue 

it because we don’t know what her position actually is. 
 
But I do want to say to the hon. member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that the changes that are being made to this legislation — and 
this is very important to understand — are similar to changes 
that have taken place across Canada. They’re not something that 
just the Government of Saskatchewan does. All across Canada 
we’re trying to harmonize the insurance legislation. 
 
And in summary, what we’re proposing to do in this legislation 
is — with respect to classes of insurance — to move the 
definitions of classes of insurance from the Act to the 
regulations, as the member’s pointed out, to allow the classes to 
be updated more easily as required. And that will help facilitate 
the future adoption of the classes of insurance developed by a 
national organization called the Canadian Council of Insurance 
Regulators. 
 
And as the member may know, there are many areas where we 
try to harmonize laws and rules with other provinces so that 
business can be done on a consistent basis across the country. 
What this does is enable us to adopt classes of insurance 
developed nationally so that we can be in sync with the other 
provinces. That’s one of the goals. And so that’s why we’re 
doing it in this manner. 
 
And I would point out to the member that this is something 
done in other provinces as well; done by various political 
parties that are in government in the various provinces. It is not 
something that we in the Government of Saskatchewan alone 
are doing. We are with the other political parties and the other 
provinces. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know, Mr. Chair, the 
minister seems to be, by his innuendo and so on, he seems to be 
taking a bit of a stand here saying that he feels as though we’re 
opposing this Bill. The fact is, Mr. Minister, we are asking 
questions about the Bill on behalf of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. So you don’t have to defend why you’re doing 
what you’re doing, you just have to explain it. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, details regarding the guarantee fund and reserve 
fund requirements are also being removed from the legislation 
and being put into regulations. Can you tell us how these 
changes will benefit the insurance industry or the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are detailed 
formulas that are in legislation now which are not as clear as 
they should be with respect to issues like the reserves that 
reciprocal insurers should have, and I’m advised that they need 
to change periodically. 
 
They are detailed and that they are formulae that would more 
appropriately be dealt with in regulations so that we would have 
the ability to change them as required. And again, that that’s 
something that they’re doing elsewhere as well, and I’m 
certainly very happy to answer that question and explain the 
legislation and indeed any other questions that the hon. member 
may have. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, an exemption is 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

being put into the Act pertaining to mutual benefit societies. 
Can the minister briefly explain this exemption and explain why 
this is being undertaken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, a mutual benefit society is a society 
that provides funeral benefits not exceeding $400 — so that 
somebody would have sort of a policy, but it’s only up to $400 
— and sickness, accident, and disability benefits not exceeding 
$12 a week. 
 
So it’s very small sums of money and very kind of small 
societies and very few of them actually exist. And because the 
amounts of money are very small, the groups are small, and it 
isn’t a situation where people are put at a great deal of risk. 
 
We feel that these mutual benefit societies should not have to be 
licensed under the Act but that if people are offering benefits 
that are greater than those amounts, they should have to be 
licensed under the Act. And I think, basically, licensing under 
the Act is probably just too large a burden, too onerous for a 
very small organization like that. And we don’t believe that 
consumers that are members of these societies would be at great 
risk if they’re not required to be licensed under the Act. 
 
But having said that, if anybody wants to offer benefits that are 
larger than that, then certainly they have to be licensed. But the 
threshold is really very, very low. Anything over $400 for 
funeral benefits or $12 per week for sort of sickness insurance, 
you do have to be licensed. But below those amounts we don’t 
believe that it’s necessary. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, we do see 
changes dealing with unlicensed insurance dealers. I wonder if 
you could tell us how many unlicensed insurance dealers we 
have in the province and under what conditions they are 
allowed to operate without a licence, and also what restrictions 
are placed on them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that’s a very good question, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I actually asked the very same question myself 
of the officials earlier. I said, well, what is this about somebody 
transacting business with an unlicensed insurer? What would 
that mean? 
 
Actually there, what this refers to is a situation where somebody 
needs a particular type of insurance but it is not available in the 
province of Saskatchewan and sometimes not even in Canada 
because nobody sells that type of insurance. So they want to go 
and they want to buy the insurance say from the Bahamas or 
London, England or somewhere which is a company that isn’t 
licensed in the province of Saskatchewan. But since they can’t 
get the insurance here, they need to go to an unlicensed insurer 
in the sense that it’s a company outside Saskatchewan but they 
need to get that product. 
 
And that company then has to file an affidavit and get some 
kind of permit in Saskatchewan. I’m told there are about 12 
situations per year where this may arise. 
 
And under the existing legislation, unlicensed insurers, these 
would be insurers external to us. And how many would there 
be? Well there could be hundreds around the world. Because as 
anybody where . . . I have a business, I can’t get insurance there 

so I go to another company somewhere — Frankfurt, South 
Africa, who knows? 
 
And presently they are allowed to transact insurance in 
Saskatchewan where there are no licensed insurers that can 
provide coverage at a reasonable price or where there are no 
licensed insurers that can provide insurance on the terms 
stipulated by the consumer. In other words the consumer wants 
to go there because they can’t get what they want here. And that 
is what the situation refers to. 
 
There would be many hundreds of other companies around the 
world to which this might apply and that is a situation where it 
would arise. 
 
But it would not be a situation where you’d have unlicensed 
insurers that would be selling insurance in Saskatchewan to 
Saskatchewan people. Those companies would have to be 
licensed under the Act. So, a very good question. I hope that 
provides some clarification of why in some odd cases — about 
12 a year — a consumer in Saskatchewan would be purchasing 
insurance from an unlicensed insurer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Ah, Mr. Chair, some days this place is somewhat 
like a circus, I must say. Mr. Chair, I have one other question 
for the minister. Can you outline the other changes that are 
being made here that you see as increased protection for 
consumers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was talking 
about unlicensed insurers a few minutes ago . . . And consumers 
will benefit from the disclosure requirements related to the 
unlicensed insurer provisions, that the brokers will have to say 
if they’re dealing with an unlicensed insurer. They’ll have to 
say to the consumer: you must realize that this is a product from 
someone who is not licensed in Saskatchewan. So we think that 
will be helpful. Informing consumers, they’ll be in a better 
position to assess their insurance needs. 
 
Otherwise this is mainly a housekeeping piece of legislation. 
Most of the amendments do not directly relate to consumers or 
market conduct issues, and for the most part they are to reduce 
red tape and update outdated requirements. 
 
Given that they do not provide us . . . that it is not primarily a 
consumer protection Bill, but at the same time we do not 
believe the Bill has any adverse consumer consequences either. 
The focus really is on red tape reduction. And it’s a balancing 
act between reducing the insurer’s requirements and still 
providing a level of regulation and protection for consumers. 
We do not believe on balance that anything will adversely affect 
consumers. 
 
And the one really consumer protection aspect is the warning 
that goes to consumers when they’re dealing with an insurer 
who is unlicensed in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Minister, in that 
same vein, could you outline for me what you see in this Bill as 
changes that will help the insurance industry in Saskatchewan 
grow and flourish? 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the changes 
would be as follows. Insurers would benefit from the 
amendments in that they no longer have to deposit securities 
with the government. There are other ways to make sure that 
they’re financially solvent. 
 
Federal insurers are able to make one annual filing with the 
federal regulator instead of having to make a separate filing 
with the Saskatchewan regulator. Federal and extra-provincial 
insurers no longer have to make extensive annual filings in 
Saskatchewan; they only have to report on the business 
transacted in Saskatchewan, not elsewhere.  
 
And provisions relating to provincial fraternal societies have 
been updated. They no longer have to file their constitution, 
rules, or bylaws with the superintendent. 
 
Provincial insurers are affected by the amendments in that a 
discretionary actuarial report is being proposed. Actuarial 
reports will only be required in circumstances where the 
superintendent considers it necessary. Considering the seasonal 
nature of hail insurers’ operations, it would not be the 
superintendent’s intention to require an actual . . . actuarial 
report from these types of insurers, for example. 
 
There are however some other provincial insurers that should be 
required to provide annual actuarial reports, as their liabilities 
are much more difficult to value. 
 
So basically it reduces some of the red tape for some of the 
companies without substantially altering or affecting their 
ability to do business in a way that is . . . It recognizes the need 
for consumer protection. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, those are all the 
questions that I would have on that Bill. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 100 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 
before I do that, if I may, I’d just like to thank the member from 
Humboldt for her questions and assistance here today. I believe 
that the member from Humboldt and I are always able to get 
just to the nub of the issue when it comes to these matters. And 
I appreciate her assistance in that regard. 
 
And I’d also like to thank the officials for their assistance here 
today. And without that . . . I’d like to move that we report the 
Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 

The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Seated to my left is Ms. Madeleine Robertson, who is 
a Crown counsel with legislative services at the Department of 
Justice. And behind her is Ms. Karen Pflanzner, who was just 
here and introduced on the last Bill, who is also a Crown 
counsel with legislative services of the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
welcome to your officials, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as I 
indicated in my remarks during debate on this Bill, that I serve I 
guess in two roles. I not only serve as a member of the 
legislature in questioning this Bill, but I also serve as a condo 
owner, and serve currently as the president of the Castle 
Heights Condominium Association. 
 
Some of the concerns that I think are being addressed by this 
Bill have been put forward long before I became a condo 
owner. And it’s interesting, Mr. Minister, I believe in some of 
the releases from the CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation), I think we’re looking at now a statistic across 
Canada that there are well over 500,000 condominiums, and of 
every four home constructions about one out of four is a 
condominium. 
 
Mr. Minister, your amendments to the Act are broad in scope, 
and I guess my first question would be, Mr. Minister, is the 
need for change and the need for these amendments, who was 
the primary . . . or what group was the primary influence in 
bringing about these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I’m happy to answer the 
question for the member. It is mainly a response to requests we 
get from owners of condominiums and also the many 
condominium corporations there are around the province, of 
which there are hundreds and hundreds. And basically we get 
requests at the Department of Justice from time to time for 
updating the condominium legislation to deal with some of the 
issues here — like the issue of taxation for example, the issue of 
reserve funds and reserve studies, and proxy voting. 
 
These are all things that would typically be raised by owners. 
They’re not generated as such within government. There aren’t 
people that sort of, you know, sit around trying to figure out 
how to change the Act. They’re suggestions that come from the 
community out there, and perhaps even the members on the 
condominium corporation might have been, either itself or 
through some organization, putting forward some suggestions 
for change. 
 
And before I sit down I’d certainly like to congratulate the 
member on his election as president of the condominium 
corporation. I’m sure it’s a very well-run organization and we’ll 
all have to consider moving there ourselves, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And as is the case 
with most volunteer boards, you happen to show up at the 
wrong meeting and sometimes you become elected. But no 
doubt I’m enjoying the role that I play there, and there are a 
number of concerns that owners have raised and I appreciate 
those concerns. 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like clarification. In your . . . In the 
amendments, many times you use the words or the phrase, 
condominium fees. Now condominium fees mean to an owner 
the monthly fee that is paid to the condominium corporation. 
Yet to a condominium corporation, there are many things that 
fit into that fees. They could be, they could be part of the 
insurance deductible that someone has to pay. It could be part 
of a large capital assessment that’s added. 
 
And I’m wondering, in light of the fact that two of your 
officials here represent Justice, is there a clear and concise 
definition of what is meant by condominium fees? Or is it broad 
in scope, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the 
member for the question. 
 
The legislation deals with different terms. One is simply the 
word, funds. In section 55 it says the corporation shall establish 
the following funds and then it refers to a common expenses 
fund and then one or more reserve funds. So it contemplates a 
common expenses fund, also reserve funds. 
 
And then in section 56 it says the corporation shall levy on the 
owners of the units condominium fees. And then it says they 
will consist of two types of contributions — one being 
contributions to the common expenses fund and the other being 
contributions to the reserve fund. 
 
So in other words you’ve got common expenses fund and 
reserve fund. And I would think that with respect to the 
common expenses fund, this could relate to day-to-day 
expenses or it could relate to any variety of other expenses of 
the condominium that we’re . . . a corporation that were truly 
common expenses. 
 
So I think it is . . . The corporation, to answer it this way, the 
condominium corporation has the freedom within its bylaws to 
levy, on the owners of the units, fees for contributions to the 
common expenses funds and also reserve funds. And I think 
that that becomes quite general and gives them a lot of 
flexibility. 
 
And then when you go on in the next section, section 57 of The 
Condominium Property Act, it says that the corporation — that 
would be through its board — would determine the amounts 
required for the common expenses fund, so the amounts could 
be for monthly heating expenses but they might be for some 
other extraordinary expense as well, and determine the amounts 
of the owner’s contributions. 
 
And so I would answer it this way. I would say that it’s very 
general. And it is really within the power of the board of the 
condominium corporation to determine what the fees should be, 
and also to add on things that they think it’s appropriate to 
charge fees for as long as they make that decision, you know, in 
a democratic way according to the bylaws. In other words, by 
the duly elected board of the condominium corporation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Mr. Minister, there is a need to clarify what your intent was or 
what the Act is proposing in the clause, I believe it’s clause no. 
17, the changes to section 63. 

And as a bit of an introduction, Mr. Minister, what difficulties 
condominium corporations are facing today is that if a mortgage 
exists on a particular piece of property with an existing 
financial institution and a condominium corporation now 
registers a lien based on your . . . And I think your definition is 
correct when you talk about condominium common expenses. 
They may include an assessment for a capital property. They 
may be condominium fees, monthly fees that are in arrears. But 
there is an amount of money that has now become in arrears if I 
can use that phrase. 
 
Currently the mortgage has first right. And the condominium 
corporation then follows that particular order. The concern by 
condominium corporations is first, is this, Mr. Minister, is that 
if the mortgage is at . . . almost at value of property and the 
owner of a condominium corporation decides to default on the 
mortgage, the condominium corporation, through maybe lack of 
diligence and maintaining accurate records, is now suddenly in 
a position where it cannot collect what is owed in arrears. 
 
Now the definition that you’ve indicated in section 63, the 
condominium corporations and I’m sure condominium owners 
as well as financial institutions . . . Because I do have a reaction 
from a financial institution that we consulted with. And I note, 
Mr. Minister, that in your second reading speech I think of May 
12 you indicated that you had, your officials had consulted with 
financial institutions. A financial institution is indicating that 
this is strictly condominium fees, and they emphasize the fact 
that it is only fees. It does not contain the assessment. It doesn’t 
contain other things that may be added. 
 
(15:15) 
 
My understanding, Mr. Minister, and I want you to clarify, is 
does the lien allow a condominium corporation to place that 
lien against a property, against that mortgage that is inclusive of 
everything that the individual owner owes to the condominium 
corporation — the assessment, the insurance deductible, all of 
the things that are owed? Could you clarify that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the member is correct, Mr. Chair. The 
amendment really only gives the condominium corporation 
priority over the mortgage with respect to fees that are in 
arrears. And I should say that that is . . . The lien that presently 
exists is the same. There is a lien that exists under section 63 of 
the Act that the condominium corporation can put on now, but 
the question is they can’t put that in priority of the mortgage 
now. 
 
And what this does is it allows the condominium corporation to 
put the lien on in priority of the mortgage, but it does not 
change what the lien can relate to in the first place. So that 
presently the lien, which might be a second charge to the 
mortgage, is only for fees that are in arrears. And this will 
simply allow that lien to be on in priority over the mortgage, but 
it still is only fees that are in arrears. 
 
The difference being that if the condominium corporation also 
had a bill, a claim against the unit owner for the legal costs of 
going after the unit owner let’s say, or interest or some other 
claim, perhaps even a civil claim out of Small Claims Court for 
damage done to the building let’s say, which would really not 
be fees in arrears, those claims . . . They presently don’t have a 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

 

lien with respect to those claims and they wouldn’t be getting 
priority either. 
 
So in one sense the legislation doesn’t change what the 
condominium corporation can have a lien with respect to, it’s 
the same. It’s only fees in arrears. All it does is it says this is 
going to be . . . The priority will be different. This will take 
precedence over the mortgage, which they didn’t have the right 
to do before. So it doesn’t go all the way to allow any claim to 
be given priority over the mortgage. And I suppose in a way it’s 
kind of a balancing act between the rights of the condominium 
corporation and the financial institution. 
 
Now the amendment does say also that when the condominium 
corporation puts a lien against the title to the unit, they must 
notify the financial institution so that at least the financial 
institution, the first time it happens, can say well we appear to 
have a problem here and try to take some steps with respect to 
that customer. When the mortgage comes up for renewal, for 
example, well typically they won’t renew it if there’s something 
taking priority over that mortgage. 
 
And sorry to be so long-winded, but the member’s quite correct 
in what the lien would relate to. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The difficulty 
though, Mr. Minister, and I fully understand that it’s just a 
matter of priority, but you used, and I noticed that you used, the 
words condominium fees in arrears. 
 
It seems to be there’s uncertainty and maybe not clear definition 
of fees. Does fees currently and as proposed in this amendment, 
do they include a special assessment that may have been voted 
on by the entire group of owners and now the special 
assessment is also in arrears? It’s not really a fee because it was 
. . . It’s a special assessment that has been assigned to every 
owner. And now if that individual is in arrears, does the words 
condominium fees in arrears, does it include the special 
assessment as well as a monthly condominium fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, yes it does. There’s absolutely no 
question under the legislation that a condominium fee is any 
contribution toward the common expenses — whether current 
or the reserve fund — that the board of the condominium 
corporation assesses against the owners. And whatever those 
fees are, once they’re in arrears, those are considered 
condominium fees. There’s no question about that under the 
legislation. 
 
And whatever is owed as a fee in arrears — whether it’s the 
monthly charge, a special assessment, reserve fund charge, 
doesn’t matter — those can all be added. They can be included 
in that lien and the lien can take priority. No problem there. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you so much, Mr. Minister, for 
clarifying that. That will help a lot of condominium 
corporations I think in understanding. And it’s unfortunate that 
it’s not retroactive, is all I can say from the point of view of 
Castle Heights Condominium Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, now financial institutions . . . Is there a concern 
from financial institutions? 
 

By your explanation just now, if a financial institution is 
carrying a mortgage on a condominium that is at near maximum 
of value . . . and I understand that many financial institutions 
deal with a 75 per cent of value potential for a mortgage. 
 
But if that value based on the depreciation of a condominium 
unit suddenly reaches the point of being almost the equivalent 
— the value of the condominium and the value . . . or the 
amount of the mortgage is almost identical — and now a 
condominium corporation passes a resolution that says we have 
a capital project and we’re now assessing you an additional 
$10,000, have financial institutions expressed any concern 
about whether or not now they’re suddenly going to call a 
mortgage because of that additional liability that now has 
become a priority versus their own mortgages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes . . . well I should say, Mr. Chair, we 
had consulted with the mortgage lenders’ association and, no, 
there wasn’t that kind of alarm . . . there wasn’t any kind of 
alarm about the provision expressed in that sense. 
 
I think there are a couple of reasons. The first reason is when 
the condominium corporation itself is assessing these fees 
against the unit owner, they are doing so to, you know, in part 
to maintain the building and also sometimes to improve it and 
also to have a reserve fund in case something goes wrong with 
the roof or the plumbing system or whatever. So in that sense 
the fees actually serve to protect the security of the mortgage 
lender. 
 
And so I think there’s an understanding of that, that if you’ve 
got the fees in the first place, even if they’re not paid, the reason 
they’re there is the condominium corporation is doing the 
maintenance and upkeep of the building. And that is in the 
interests of the mortgage lender in the sense that they don’t 
have that with respect to, say, a single family dwelling where 
nobody has a reserve fund or a regular system of maintenance 
and upkeep. So in that sense it can be viewed almost as a 
positive thing. 
 
But there’s another reason that I would give and that is that we 
have to bear in mind that it is very unusual — it does happen 
but it’s very unusual — where the value of a piece of real estate 
will drop below what is owed for that real estate, at least from 
the point of view of the financial institution. 
 
And the reason for that is, to get a mortgage in the first place — 
as the member knows, but I think the public may be interested 
in this — you normally have to put at least 25 per cent down. 
And so the amount that the bank or credit union or other 
institution that’s lending the money is owed is going to, 
generally speaking, be worth only up to 75 per cent of the value 
of the property. And it’s not very often that real estate will 
depreciate to the point where the value will be less than the 
mortgage that’s owed. 
 
And then if they have a high-ratio mortgage — which is 
available under the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation 
for people who don’t have the 25 per cent; it’s true that they can 
mortgage up to 95 per cent of the value of a piece of property 
— but in that situation they also have to contribute by paying a 
three and a quarter per cent, I believe, premium on the amount 
of that mortgage to a national fund which is used to compensate 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

lenders who lose money. 
 
So I mean, I think it would almost be always the case where if 
you had a situation where the mortgage approached the value of 
the real estate, then normally it would be a high-ratio mortgage 
and you’re almost . . . you have some red tape, you know, to get 
the money but at the end of the day the financial institution is 
protected for the money. So no, I don’t think it’s a major issue. 
I think it’s a balancing act. 
 
I should say that the same kind of — well, or similar anyway — 
provisions exist with respect to things like insurance, fire 
insurance. Often this is a contractual provision in a mortgage, 
but where a lending institution will have the right to add the 
amount of fire insurance to the mortgage if it is not paid, and 
then they have to go out and pay it. 
 
And I mean in that sense it’s a similar sort of situation. They get 
affected by a Bill but it relates to something that has a direct 
impact on the value, the quality of the security they hold as 
well. 
 
So I think they understand why these provisions are necessary 
for condominium corporations. And although the condominium 
corporation gets a priority, I think they also can see the value in 
the condominium corporation having the ability to protect itself 
so that the property can be maintained and enhanced. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for clarifying that, Mr. Minister, 
and I do completely agree with you that as a condominium 
corporation makes a decision to make an assessment on every 
owner, it’s doing so in light of a capital project that is probably 
going to increase the market value, thus the value that the 
financial institution may be using, 75 per cent of that value or 
whatever, now is increased as well. 
 
So I didn’t foresee a problem and I’m glad to hear from you that 
you think the financial institutions will not, will not have 
difficulty with that clause. 
 
And I think what it does is it encourages condominium 
corporations, a potential buyer, and a financial institution — if I 
can refer to all three — in a process that is going to take place 
regarding the potential sale of a property. There has to be more 
disclosure and complete disclosure now so that an estoppel 
certificate that is being provided by a condominium corporation 
is in fact accurate. 
 
That’s what the owner is going to want to check. That’s what 
the financial institution is going to check because now they’re 
not going to want a surprise. So thank you for clarifying that, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, on page 7 of the Bill, reference to clause no. 17, 
section 63.1(2)(b), you indicate there that the interest that we’ve 
just been talking about does not have priority over a . . . was the 
claim for taxes. What is meant by a prescribed interest or claim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, we do not at the moment have 
anything in particular in mind that should take priority over the 
lien charged by the condominium corporation. But the advice I 
have from the officials is that it may be in the future that there 
may be some kind of claim that should take priority. 

And one example that is raised is the possibility of a builder’s 
lien taking priority over the claim of the condominium 
corporation. And a builder’s lien of course is, if I’m an 
electrician and I’m asked to come in and either wire the 
building initially or rewire it, then I can, if I’m unpaid by the 
corporation, I can file a lien against the building. 
 
And I’m told that in British Columbia they have made the 
decision that a builder’s lien should take priority over the lien of 
the corporation against the unit owner. In Ontario they have 
reached the opposite conclusion. And we don’t actually have a 
view on it but we’re thinking that, as time goes on, there may be 
situations where somebody comes along and says that their 
claim should have priority. It might be a builder’s lien, it might 
be a different situation. 
 
And although we don’t have anything in mind right now, the 
feeling was that we should provide the flexibility in the 
legislation to consult with the condominium developers and the 
corporations and the unit owners as time goes on. And there 
may be something we should do differently. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I should say that the reason you would want to do that is 
with respect to this condominium legislation, as the member 
knows, it is a situation where there are many parties that are 
interested because it’s actually one in three dwellings now in 
Saskatchewan that is being built as a condominium. And we are 
constantly receiving different situations that developers may 
bring to us, or people that live in condominiums or the 
condominium corporation boards themselves. 
 
And so to the extent that we can be able to prescribe this sort of 
thing in regulations instead of every time somebody wants a 
change coming to the legislature, that would be one reason for 
providing this kind of flexibility in the legislation to allow the 
cabinet to make regulations. But again, these would really be at 
the request of the condominium community, not something that 
the government would have much of an interest in generating 
by itself. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, for 
clarification as well. I don’t believe that your Bill proposes to 
do anything to this particular understanding. And that is that if a 
condominium owner has been charged with some assessment or 
some other debt that needs to be paid and is not in arrears, but 
there is a debt on the piece of property that this owner now 
owns and sells the property to a new owner, there is no intent in 
this Bill and any sections that would change the fact that the 
debt travels with the property. Is that clear? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that’s absolutely correct and clear. 
There’s nothing in this legislation that would change that. And 
that would . . . The Land Titles Act which now governs the title 
would continue to govern in exactly the same way except that, 
except with respect to what we’ve already talked about, that 
there would be a lien that could be registered prior to a 
mortgage. 
 
And of course normally that would not operate that way under 
The Land Titles Act but there’s no other change that’s made 
that would affect the validity or priority of encumbrances that 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

 

are registered against titles through the land titles system. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m glad to 
hear you clarify that. No question the estoppel certificate will 
indicate what debts are owed and that travels with the title. 
 
Mr. Minister, the section on page 6, section 15 talks about a 
reserve fund study. And you made reference to that, that there 
will be a reserve fund study now where you will actually be 
directing a condominium corporation to have that study within 
three years. So it’s an expense for the condominium corporation 
board. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the Act you make reference to a study that 
would determine an amount of a reserve fund. Are you 
expecting that there will be regulations that will contain what a 
reserve fund should be? Or will it be an amount that will be 
determined by the condominium corporation board of that 
specific condominium units? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, Mr. Chair. The 
amount of the reserve fund would be set by the board of the 
condominium corporation. It would not be prescribed in the 
regulations. And the way this is really written is not so much to 
prescribe the amount of the reserve fund but to force, if you 
will, every condominium corporation periodically to take a look 
at the building and to see what if anything needs to be done or 
what the problems may be. 
 
And then to have that presented at their annual meeting — not 
each year but every so many years — so that people really do 
sit down and think about it and talk about it so that they don’t 
fall into a situation where you have kind of a major catastrophe 
in a building because nobody’s paid any attention to it for 10 
years, and everybody goes about their business and all of a 
sudden says, why didn’t anybody tell us about all this? 
 
And so the intent of the legislation is to say that every 
corporation shall do a reserve fund study periodically. 
 
It does not set out who should do that study. It doesn’t require, 
for example, that they necessarily hire professionals to do that. 
You may have condominium corporations that have architects, 
engineers, knowledgeable farmers — of which there are many, 
you know, in terms of various systems — people, tradespeople 
that you know can look at buildings and assess things in smaller 
buildings. 
 
And so it mainly is to say everybody has to direct their mind to 
this periodically so that we can at least have a dialogue at our 
condominium corporation about what the problems are. And 
otherwise you know it’s sort of out of sight, out of mind. 
 
And we’ve seen in British Columbia the kind of, really, disaster 
that has befallen people over the leaky condos. I don’t think 
we’re going to have a problem with leaky condos in 
Saskatchewan. It would have been nice the last few years to 
have a few leaky condos. But it’s to prevent that kind of disaster 
from happening here. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And you’re right, I 
think this type of guidance is especially important for 
condominiums that have been built for 25, 30 years. And as 

you’ve said, everything’s been rolling along nicely for 20 years 
and maybe a board decided not to build a reserve fund and all of 
a sudden there is a failure of two roofs, and a need to repair and 
replace all windows, and now you’re looking at a $500,000 
project. Now you need a special assessment and this type of 
study is important. 
 
A clarification, Mr. Minister, same section, section (5). And I 
note that you said you weren’t intending to have a specific 
person do these studies. Section (5) says that, “Every study 
must be conducted in the prescribed manner.” 
 
And that is of concern to some condominium corporation or 
property managers that I’ve talked to. It says prescribed manner 
yet nobody knows what that prescribed manner is. Is it the 
hiring of an individual? Is it a time period? What is meant by 
prescribed manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, we’re going to have widespread 
consultations before we prescribe the manner in which the study 
must be conducted, and all of the parties will be consulted in 
this regard. 
 
The thinking here was that there may be some different needs 
according to the different sorts of buildings. For example, if you 
have a condominium corporation that has 10 units in it, let us 
say, my feeling is that that is a condominium corporation that 
can determine on its own, through inspection by its unit owners 
if it so wishes, the people that live there, what they think should 
be done — that they would do their own reserve study if they 
wish or they could hire somebody if they wish. 
 
And we don’t have these rules set out yet. I’m just using 
examples. But you may have another situation where you have 
a condominium corporation where there are, let’s say, hundreds 
of units — let’s say a 30-storey building in Saskatoon with 8 
units on each storey, 240 units, something like that — where 
there are much more complicated systems for mechanical, 
heating and air conditioning, ventilation, elevator shafts, 
elevators, underground parking, and so on and so on. And it 
may be that with respect to a very large corporation, the rule 
might be, look, you have to have a reserve study every three 
years and that reserve study for this building has to be done by a 
qualified professional. Now what the qualifications would be, 
I’m not sure. Is it an engineer, an architect? I don’t know. 
 
But the point is, there may be different rules with respect to 
different sorts of condominium corporations. 
 
And we had in bringing forward the legislation, in the 
consultations we had with condominiums, some of them, some 
of the parties consulted with said, every reserve study should 
have to be done by a qualified professional. It doesn’t matter 
whether it’s 4 units, 100 units — everyone should be a qualified 
professional. Others were of the view that no, that should be a 
decision to be made by the condominium board. And I don’t 
mind saying, I’m of the view that you should not have to have a 
qualified professional in each case. That’s my view. 
 
Having said that, we’ll be respectful if the views of the 
community are different. But I believe they’re not different. I 
think that the condominium corporations in some cases want to 
have professionals and other cases don’t. 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

We will have to assess the degree of risk. We’ll have to consult 
with the developers, the owners, and the boards. That’s what 
we’re going to do and then we’ll prescribe when do you need a 
professional and when do you not. And that will take some time 
to work out but we’re going to work it out in a reasonable way. 
 
And that’s the reason why we believe the best thing to do is to 
say that the study should be conducted in the prescribed 
manner, as prescribed in the regulations, and there will be 
different rules for different sorts of condominiums. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for clarifying that. 
Mr. Minister, I guess the concern that has been expressed by 
property managers of course is that the prescribed manner 
doesn’t become so onerous that it becomes very difficult for 
condominium corporations to carry out that type of study, 
because the goal here is to ensure that every three years, or 
periodically, that there be an assessment that is accurate and 
carries that out. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Bill also refers to a prescribed rate of interest 
in section 16. Could you indicate to the Assembly what that 
prescribed rate of interest currently is? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — With leave to introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome a 
school group from Davidson. A number of students, 29 
students, grade 9, are here. I hear that they were doing 
something else up here and they got rained out so they decided 
to stop here which was good. With them is teachers, Scott Cory 
and Paulette Kehlo, and I also see a chaperone or two with 
them. 
 
I hope that they will enjoy the proceedings. Right now we’re 
under Committee of the Whole. We’re discussing Bill 27 with 
the critic asking the minister some questions on it. I don’t know 
how long you’ll be here but if you’re going to be here a while 
longer I can always answer some questions for you outside the 
Chamber. 
 
I will welcome you here along with . . . and ask the other 
members to welcome you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, also 
leave to introduce guests as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
thank you to my colleagues. Seated in the east gallery is a large 
group of students that come from the community of Foam Lake. 
This is an annual trip, I think, for the grade 5 students. 
Teachers, Mr. Jim Hack and Ms. Ruth Gislason, do this on a 
regular basis and I’m pleased to see the grade 5s here from 

Foam Lake again. 
 
We have 26 grade 5 students, and along with the two teachers 
I’d also like to introduce Debbie Slowski, who is a teacher aide, 
and Dennis Friesen, the bus driver — probably the most 
important person today — that’s going to ensure that the 
students get back to Foam Lake safe and sound. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome the students, and as 
indicated by my colleague, what we are doing at the moment is 
referred to as Committee of the Whole. And I’ll have an 
opportunity to answer some of your questions probably in about 
15 minutes. 
 
So I want all members to join me in welcoming the grade 5 
students and the adults with them to the Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2003 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes, the member 
from Canora-Pelly was asking me a few minutes ago about the 
meaning of this provision: “The interest rate fixed pursuant . . . 
shall not exceed the prescribed rate.” 
 
This would have to do with interest rates charged by 
condominium corporations on money that was owed to them by 
their unit owners that was overdue. And we don’t actually have 
in mind that there is a problem that currently needs to be 
addressed. We don’t have in mind prescribing a rate. So as long 
as we don’t do that, they can charge whatever rate they want. 
 
But if there is any abuse, for example, with a condominium 
corporation saying, you have to pay us 20 per cent interest a 
month or something, then we would want to have the ability to 
deal with that as some other jurisdictions have, to say, look it’s 
fine to charge interest but you have to charge the people a 
reasonable amount of interest. And that is the purpose of that 
provision. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
of the other sections contained in Bill 27 deals with taxation and 
assessment, and the current procedure in condominium 
corporations is that the entire unit — and I think you used an 
example of a 30-storey unit with 240 different condominium 
units within that structure — currently we have an assessment 
procedure that assesses the entire building and then allocates 
assessment to the owner based on the unit factors. 
 
Now the suggestion in the amendments is, I think, a dramatic 
change in that now each of the individual units will be assessed 
a specific market value . . . specific assessment value based on 
market conditions. Mr. Minister, the concern of individual 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

 

condominium owners is that this not become a method of 
increasing assessments overall because very clearly taxation is 
connected to assessment. 
 
So the concern, Mr. Minister, is that if a total property, a 
building that contains 12 different condominium units, has a 
current value, is it the intention of the amendment that after 
each individual unit is assessed — in other words all 12 — that 
the total assessment of the building to begin with will now 
equal the 12 individual assessments combined? Is it still the 
intent that the assessed values of the entire structure would 
remain the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, it should not make a big 
difference in the total assessment for the building but there’s no 
guarantee that it won’t make some difference. I mean, the actual 
taxation paid for the building could go down or it could go up 
depending on the circumstances. 
 
But I should say that this is a change that has been asked for by 
the condominium owners themselves because they believe it’s 
unfair that they’re assessed taxation . . . Well let’s say that I 
own a condominium that’s worth $80,000 and it has the unit 
factor of my neighbour. But my neighbour has upgraded her 
condominium and her condominium is worth $120,000. Mine is 
worth 80,000. Presently if we have the same unit factor by 
having the same space, we’re paying the same tax. 
 
But this amendment would say you will pay the tax pursuant to 
the value of your condominium. And most people would regard 
that as fair — and in fact, I think it’s such a good provision, it’s 
even got the opposition members happy for a change — and so 
that’s the reason for the change. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
value of the condominium, I’m glad to hear that you don’t 
expect a dramatic change. But you are correct, many owners 
who have a similar unit factor as a neighbour and are paying the 
same amount of tax even though their unit may be, you know, 
worse or better than the others, needs to be clarified. 
 
One final question, Mr. Minister, dealing with the common 
area. Under the old system, of course, the building was assessed 
that dealt with not only the individual units but it also included 
in the assessment the common area. How will that now be 
translated into individual owners? Will individual owners be 
assessed their unit plus an additional amount of the common 
area to compensate for that assessment that currently is in the 
total process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There will not be any assessment of the 
common area. The common area will be, in effect, valued by 
the value assigned to the individual condominiums. The value 
of one’s condominium will be affected by the quality of the 
common area, among other things. And it’s felt that if each 
individual unit is assessed a certain amount of taxation, that you 
thereby will in effect be indirectly taxing the common area. 
 
So it will be done indirectly in that way, but there won’t be any 
separate taxation or assessment with respect to the common 
area. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to thank the 

minister and his officials for helping not only me but I’m sure 
the property owners and the condominium property managers 
and condominium corporations have a better understanding of 
the amendments that you have proposed. Thank you very much 
for clarifying those. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to ask the minister to ask the 
committee to report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and before I do that 
I’d like to say to my colleagues I don’t think I should have to do 
all the voting in this House by myself. And I think it will give 
the students the wrong impression that I’m the only one that 
votes around here. Okay the . . . and everybody agrees with that. 
 
Well before I move that we report the Bill without amendment, 
I’d like to thank the hon. member opposite for his very helpful 
questions. He’s obviously very knowledgeable about this 
subject, and I mean that, as president of a condominium 
corporation himself. And I really enjoyed the opportunity to 
explain some of these provisions which are very important to a 
lot of people in the province. 
 
I also want to thank the officials for assisting me here today, for 
the good work they did today, also the good work they do on 
our behalf each and every day of the year. And with that, Mr. 
Chair, I’d like to move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Non-profit Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant 
la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I have one official with me today and 
he is Mr. Tim Epp, and he is the Crown counsel of the 
legislative services branch of the Department of Justice. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon 
once again to the minister and his official. Mr. Minister, I have 
about three or four questions in regards to this Bill, An Act to 
amend The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we have a number of volunteer and 
non-profit organizations that organize day camps and so on 
throughout the summer, and I would expect that parents sending 
their children to these camps would sign a release form. But 
there may be a situation arise, for instance if a child drowns and 
there was not proper supervision or some type of other injury 
occurs in which the non-profit organization’s employees did not 
follow standard procedures or perhaps exhibited poor judgment. 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

Will this amendment prevent a parent from then suing the 
organization or an individual if negligence is involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. The answer to the question, Mr. Chair, 
is no. This amendment would not prevent a person from suing a 
non-profit corporation well actually in any circumstance where 
the non-profit corporation could be sued now, so that if an 
employee of a non-profit corporation was negligent, the 
corporation and the employee could be sued today. And under 
this legislation the corporation and the employee could still be 
sued. 
 
What this speaks to is the position of somebody on the board of 
the non-profit corporation. To use an example, well a non-profit 
corporation let’s say, that runs a summer camp for children. A 
child goes to the camp; a child is injured through the negligence 
of an employee. Today the child’s parents might be able to sue 
the non-profit corporation, and the employee who was 
negligent, and the board member who didn’t really do anything 
connected with the problem but is just a board member, but 
who would be vicarious . . . maybe vicariously liable for the 
acts of the employees of the corporation. 
 
What this would say is you still can sue the corporation, you 
still can sue the employee, but you can’t sue Joe or Mary who 
sit on the board just because they’re on the board. They would 
have to be . . . Now they could be sued if they were personally 
involved in a situation that happened. Let’s say they were 
running the camp and they were negligent. Maybe they’d be 
sued for that reason. But they couldn’t be sued for something 
that they had nothing to do with other than the simple fact that 
they’re on the board of that corporation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 
take this just a little bit further for further clarification and I 
would like to cite some examples of when and when, when and 
. . . when it is and when it is not an individual’s right to sue a 
non-profit organization. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the event that a non-profit corporation would 
neglect to keep its facility in good repair and say someone 
visiting that facility is injured — let’s just say a hypothetical 
example like a light fixture fell on their head and injured them 
— will this amendment prevent an individual from suing that 
non-profit organization that would neglect to keep its facility in 
good repair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The simple answer is no. You can certainly 
sue the non-profit corporation for the non-repair of the property. 
You can do that today, and this legislation wouldn’t change that 
because it doesn’t change any situation where a non-profit 
corporation might be sued. It only says that the director of the 
corporation would not be . . . could not be sued because the 
light fixture fell on somebody’s head. The corporation itself 
could be sued. 
 
(16:00) 
 
It’s possible that someone directly involved in the situation 
might be sued as well, which it could include a director but they 
would have had to have actually done something. For example, 
if I’m a director of a non-profit corporation and I affix a heavy 
light fixture to the ceiling only with a few wires and it falls on 

someone’s head, I may be sued for that but it’s not because I’m 
a director, it’s because I myself was negligent. And the 
non-profit corporation could also be sued, but a director that 
was not involved in that could not be sued. And that is the 
change. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, is there going to be a 
requirement to have patrons enrol in some sort of program or 
sign acknowledgements that . . . to inform the people that they 
are taking to a non-profit organization’s place . . . Would there 
be a requirement by the non-profit organization, rather, to 
ensure that there is full knowledge of what is happening under 
this Act, what changes are being made under this Act? Will 
there be information disseminated to affected parties, for 
instance before they would go to a day camp so that they are 
fully aware of the rules here that are now in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Other than dissemination of information 
about the legislation to the voluntary sector, the answer is no. 
There won’t be any, any real effort made to advise every person 
who might go to a place run by a non-profit corporation that 
this law has been passed in the sense that there are actually a 
variety of rules that would apply with respect to risks that they 
take, who may be responsible for what. 
 
And I believe that the non-profit corporations themselves 
should be informing people of any risks and obtaining 
appropriate waivers and so on. But it is not something that the 
Government of Saskatchewan will be engaged in, other than 
making sure we communicate to the voluntary sector that this is 
the rule. And of course we have been doing that. We’ll continue 
to be doing that. 
 
I should say that this is a recommendation that arises in two 
ways. First of all from the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative 
that was prepared by some of the members of this legislature for 
the Premier — the members from Regina Wascana Plains, 
Saskatoon Idylwyld, and Cumberland; also from the Law 
Reform Commission of Saskatchewan which recommended a 
change in this way. 
 
So we want to publicize the change, for sure. But I cannot 
guarantee that somehow we’ll communicate the change to every 
person that may potentially now or in the future be affected by 
it. 
 
But it will be like a lot of these rules. It will be a part of the 
general state of the law and, to that extent, you’re hopeful that 
people have some understanding of the law, but there won’t be 
any individualized communication effort in that sense. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’d like to thank the 
minister and his official for providing the answers here today. 
And that will be the conclusion of my questions. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I ask the minister to move that the Bill 
be reported without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do that, I’d 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

 

like to thank the member from Humboldt for her very good and 
I think helpful questions. And it’s been an interesting discussion 
about an important topic. 
 
And also I’d like to thank Mr. Epp, the official here today, for 
his very helpful advice. And with that, I’d like to move that we 
report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 

 
Bill No. 29 — The Non-profit Corporations 

Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant 
la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
To my immediate left is Lily Stonehouse, our very capable 
deputy minister; and to my . . . Just directly behind Lily, is Mr. 
Zukowsky, Ron Zukowsky, who is the executive director of 
policy and assessment division. To the right of Mr. Zukowsky 
and directly behind me is Lynn Tulloch, the executive director 
of corporate services division. To my immediate right is David 
Phillips, assistant deputy minister of the operations division; 
and directly behind Dave and in my camera angle behind me, is 
Mr. Rick Bates, the director of communication. 
 
The other officials that are further towards the back, Mr. 

Speaker, are Stuart Kramer, the president of the Watershed 
Authority; Wayne Dybvig, the vice-president of operations of 
the Watershed Authority; Dennis Sherratt, the director of fish 
and wildlife; Donna Johnson, the manager of the corporate 
services; and Dave Tulloch, of the fire management and forest 
protection. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, I’d like to welcome the 
minister and his officials here today. There are many pertinent 
questions that members from this side have for the Minister of 
Environment, and I like to turn it over to my colleague for a few 
questions. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or 
Chair of Committees. I really have one question or one issue, I 
guess, and we went through it last week or two weeks ago 
whenever it happened to be, for kind of a long period of time, 
longer than probably what it needed to be. 
 
But certainly I did hear at the end that your officials would be 
meeting with officials from PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration) and I guess my question is, did that meeting 
take place and what sort of details can you give me from that 
meeting? More importantly, how close are we to a solution on 
the whole Qu’Appelle water level issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I thank the member for the question as well, as I am aware the 
member is quite interested in some of the resolution and 
certainly some of the aspects of this particular challenge. 
 
Again we’ve met, certainly the president of the Watershed 
Authority met with the federal lead negotiator on the QVIDA 
(Qu’Appelle Valley Indian Development Authority) issue, and 
the discussions of course went on from 2 o’clock till 4:30 and I 
believe that this was last Wednesday. And I can report that the 
federal government has put no new offers on the table. Most of 
this time was spent on evaluating how negotiations could be 
moved forward towards a solution. 
 
(16:15) 
 
At the conclusion of this meeting, we agreed on the following 
points: number one, that QVIDA will be asked to put forward a 
final settlement proposal; number two, when we get that 
QVIDA proposal we — and I’m talking about Canada and 
Saskatchewan — will again talk about these proposals. 
 
And until the QVIDA proposal is received and Canada and 
Saskatchewan can discuss it, really we can’t make any 
particular comments on how this could or could not be the basis 
for a solution. And again the idea is to focus on the discussions 
of a solution. But to date we have not got the response and 
certainly a final settlement proposal from QVIDA. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m certainly glad 
to hear that the provincial government has at least gone to the 
table now and had meetings with the federal officials. 
 
And also I know you had talked last time with QVIDA. And I 
guess right now maybe we’re not seeing the effect of low water 
level in the Qu’Appelle chain, but I would say in the next two 
to three weeks it’s critical that those meetings continue, and 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

hopefully QVIDA comes up with a final proposal between the 
federal government and ourselves, the provincial government, 
that we can find some sort of resolution. 
 
Because I can’t stress enough the devastating effect that a low 
water level will have along those chains going into freeze-up 
especially; the amount of money that has been put in to — not 
cottages any more, residences — along that lakefront, whether 
it’s Pasqua, Echo, and then on to Crooked and Round. 
 
So I just can’t stress enough the importance . . . Whatever it 
takes from the provincial government — and I’m not going to 
get into the money issue at all right now — but certainly being 
at the table and pushing the issue ahead is at least some 
reassurance. So thanks for the answer so far. And I guess the 
next time we have estimates I’ll be asking the same question if 
it hasn’t been resolved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again, thank you for your interest in 
this particular issue. 
 
I point out that often in this particular role as minister — and I 
think you know this is something that we want to stress to a lot 
of people that are listening and certainly to the opposition — 
that in the task of being minister and certainly having to find 
resolution to some very difficult issues throughout your tenure, 
or throughout my tenure as a minister, and certainly throughout 
your life as an MLA, that often you’ll run into the challenge of 
hearing many, many speeches. And often we tell folks 
throughout the land that it’s very, very important is that we not 
continue having eloquence on the issue but rather clarity on the 
solution. And I think clearly that’s the premise that we’re 
operating under. 
 
And again we point out to the people of Saskatchewan and all 
the affected stakeholders that it is our role to respect each 
stakeholder’s process and finally provide clarity on solutions. 
And from there then we can begin discussions and negotiations. 
And it’s through that push and pull and tug and give and take, 
and the premise of respect, that we’re able to find the solutions 
that we’re all striving for. 
 
And I hope that over the next short while that all the parties are 
willing to come up with a solution and we can certainly have a 
good summer for the Qu’Appelle Valley people that are 
involved and certainly for the people of Saskatchewan overall. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To the 
minister, I have a number of questions and concerns about the 
status of chronic wasting disease in the wildlife. And I’d just 
like to ask the minister some questions around really the 
statistics as far as testing. How many animals have been tested 
in the wild and could he break that down into species? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I want to point out that we’ve tested the . . . about 
approximately 12,000 animals, and both these are mule and 
whitetail deer. And we don’t have the basic numbers to break 
them down but to be very specific, we’ve tested 11,819 heads of 
animals. And to point out that we want to thank the many 
hunters and the many groups out there that co-operated with the 
collection of heads because without their co-operation we 
wouldn’t have the type of numbers that we do have, to do a 

number of tests on some of the wild animals in reference to the 
deer when it comes to chronic wasting. So again on behalf of 
the department, I want to thank the many hunters and the 
groups out there that co-operated, because without their 
co-operation we wouldn’t have enjoyed the success of testing 
11,819 heads. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. To the minister, could you tell us 
how many have . . . animals from the wild have tested positive 
for chronic wasting disease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I want to point out that of the approximately 12,000 animals 
tested, we’ve had 12 cases that have come back confirmed as 
chronic wasting disease. And if my calculations are right — and 
I want to point out that math wasn’t my strongest subject in 
school — but that would roughly be .01 per cent of the total 
animals tested. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Next question is concerning the 
winter hunt in the Saskatchewan Landing area. Could the 
minister tell us what was the result of the winter hunt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again, thank you for the question. 
We’ve had, at the Sask Landing area for the winter hunts 
between January and March, we’ve had approximately 500 
heads that were submitted. And of those 500 heads, three 
animals were confirmed to have chronic wasting. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. To the minister, I’ve had and 
many of my colleagues have had a number of complaints about 
that winter hunt, and the complaints revolve around the people 
in that area, hunters going in there and doing some damage to 
property, driving around. But I guess that’s possible. That’s an 
individual’s choice, I guess, to do that and how they handle 
themselves. 
 
One complaint that I had, or a number of complaints that I have 
was concerning animals that were shot. The heads were not 
taken; they were just shot and left. And I would just like to 
know if there has . . . any of these complaints have come to 
your department about both damage to private land and animals 
being left without the meat being taken or the heads being 
submitted for testing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. And again one 
of the things we wanted to point out is that in the collection of 
some of the heads, that we wanted to undertake as a result of 
some of the heads . . . some of the hunting seasons — and in 
this case we had an extension of the hunting season — I want to 
point out that by and large most of the groups that we have 
engaged with and most of the folks that have helped us in 
reference to the testing program have been very responsible, 
respectful, and co-operative, and they continue to do so. And 
that’s one of the reasons why I wanted to recognize them. 
 
But I think one of the most important things that we want to be 
careful here is that while this is an extension of the hunting 
season, the same rules would apply where we would say: look 
there’s laws against waste of game, there’s laws against 
trespassing, there’s laws against, you know, unsafe conduct of 
vehicles and chasing animals with vehicles, and so on and so 
forth. And we did have some of the concerns that were 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

 

expressed — this is not a wild-west shootout — there are rules 
and regulations that have to follow. 
 
And in fact we had . . . the landowners that did have concerns, 
we worked very closely with them. Many times the landowners 
co-operated with us and consulted with us in terms of issuing of 
the permits. So landowners have a very close connection to 
some of the exercises that we’re undertaken in reference to 
some of these areas that we’re allowing extra hunting for to 
improve our testing for chronic wasting. So we want to point 
out that respect for the landowners is paramount to some of the 
success, and we want to continue building on that. 
 
And some of the complaints that we did get, our officers are 
following some of these complaints up and if there’s evidence 
that there is some hunting laws that have been broken — such 
as a waste of game — then of course charges will be laid. So I 
want to point out that the relationship and the partnership that 
we’ve enjoyed in reference to testing for chronic wasting has 
been very successful. There are some issues in reference to the 
concerns you raised. 
 
We want to continue working with the landowners and to 
continue stressing upon our partners and people out there 
listening that in the event that you are hunting — whether it’s 
for chronic wasting disease purpose as we have done before — 
please follow the rules. Most of the other people are following 
them. And if you’re not following the rules, then of course our 
COs (conservation officers) will certainly investigate. And 
hopefully, when it comes to things like waste of game, that 
charges will be successfully laid against those that are doing 
that. 
 
But by and large, our partners out there — the hunters, and the 
Wildlife Federation, the folks that are involved — they are 
being very responsible and we want to commend them and 
recognize them for that as well. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Another concern is I would 
assume the department has a rough estimate of how many 
animals were in any particular area, wild animals. And I’ll put 
my question more to the Saskatchewan Landing area. 
 
There is a concern that with the winter hunt that many of the 
animals were really chased out of the area doing that hunt. And 
my question really is, too, does the department know exactly 
how widespread that was, and if these animals have been 
chased onto other areas, how that reflects to the overall plan of 
controlling the disease? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And it was a very good question in the sense of if you’re 
concentrating the hunts in a certain area, wouldn’t that chase the 
animal out and thereby causing the potential for the disease to 
not be contained in a certain area? 
 
I would point out the challenges with the chronic wasting 
disease is that what we’re dealing with when it comes to 
animals in the wild, of course animals migrate. And in the case 
of a mule deer, they’ll sometimes travel 100 miles to some 
traditional fawning area — I think it’s called fawning area — 

but where they’d go and of course have their fawns. And those 
travel patterns are, basically there’s historical perspective in the 
sense that 100 miles of travelling for fawning purposes are 
fairly solid in terms of the distance. 
 
In that particular area we surveyed, before the hunt, 
approximately 3,000 animals, and with the winter hunt we 
harvested 500. And of course during the regular season there 
was, I believe there was 100 that were also harvested, so you’re 
looking at about 600 of the animals were taken in that specific 
area. 
 
And the purpose of having a January to March hunt is that’s 
when they generally congregate in that area. And they’re not 
necessarily stationary but they geographically stick to one 
particular spot. It’s after March, during May and June time 
frame, when they begin to migrate and to travel. So really we 
enter the area when they congregate, we thin out the herd as 
we’ve done in the past to see the prevalence of the disease. 
After March, which is at this time frame, they’re out travelling 
having their fawns. 
 
So again there’s a lot of rhyme and reason and logic as to why 
we have a winter hunt, to look for the prevalence of chronic 
wasting in the time frame of January to March. And following 
that period it’s difficult to track the patterns, but again based on 
our survey of 3,000 animals, we harvested 600 during that 
critical time frame and of the 600, of course three came back 
chronic-wasting-disease positive. 
 
And these are really good practices that we currently employ, 
and we continue doing so to make sure that we hopefully are 
able to nip this particular challenge in the bud before, you 
know, it becomes a major, major problem. 
 
So that work will continue, and I think as much public 
information and awareness that we can disseminate out there to 
the public on this particular matter is, you know, something that 
we want to continually do. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — To the minister. You have samples that are 
submitted from the hunting season, normal hunting season, and 
from the winter kill. Are there heads submitted to be tested for 
chronic wasting disease from road-kill animals as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I can report that the roadkill during the 
summer is not tested. What I think I’ll point out is that often in 
these extreme warm summer days roadkill, you know the 
deterioration of the animal happens very quickly so the testing 
results would not be very helpful. So the answer to your 
question is during the summer months testing of road-kill head 
is not done for that specific reason. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I guess, I guess the animals killed 
in the wintertime could be tested, and I guess if you could give 
me your thoughts on how many of those get tested? 
 
But in more of a general nature, what is the plans of the 
department and the government concerning the future of testing 
in the wildlife? Will there be more winter hunts? Are you 
waiting . . . Are you just going to go along as you are now, 
testing animals from the normal hunting period, or will there be 
any other winter hunts and other programs that may be 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2003 

 

implemented in the future year, regardless if there’s any more 
animals that come down positive with CWD (chronic wasting 
disease)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just want to clarify. Yes, I probably was evasive in the answer 
about the roadkill in terms of the winter months, and I didn’t 
mean to be. The fact of the matter is that during the winter 
months there has been some testing of some of the road-kill 
head, but that has been minimal in comparison to some of the 
testing programs that we’ve undertaken in the last three or four 
years. 
 
I would point out that during the summer that the deterioration 
of the animal happens so quickly that it would be . . . It 
wouldn’t be valuable for us to test some of the roadkill in that 
instance. 
 
But I would point out for this year, no there isn’t going to be . . . 
We don’t have any plans to do any extra hunting seasons for the 
purposes of testing for chronic wasting. What you wanted to do 
was you wanted to confirm that it was indeed in the wild and 
after doing 12,000 heads over a period of three or four years, 
you know, we have confirmed that it is indeed in the wild. 
 
So one of the things we want to do is not only have any special 
hunts of that sort, I think just through the regular hunt if animals 
out there are harvested and hunters want to be assured that this 
animal doesn’t have chronic wasting and there are concerns that 
they may enter the food chain — you know, whatever the 
concern of the hunter may be — then we would undertake to 
have that particular head tested. 
 
One of the reasons we done the extensive head sampling 
exercise the past number of years is to see how prevalent 
chronic wasting was in the wild — well first of all, to see if it 
was there — and since it was confirmed to be there, to see how 
prevalent it was. 
 
And so again, if a hunter asks for testing of a head to assure 
himself or herself and this animal’s taken during regular hunt, 
then we can certainly undertake to do that. But in terms of the 
. . . of extra seasons and so on and so forth, the answer, it will 
be not undertaken extra hunting seasons for chronic wasting 
disease testing. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you to the minister. The next few 
questions concerning the status of the game farm herds in 
Saskatchewan, I’d like to know some statistical information. 
How many game farm animals have been tested for chronic 
wasting disease? What species, if you have the breakdown of 
the species? And what were the results of those tests? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
In reference to the extra . . . Just, I want to add on to the earlier 
point I make about this fall, is that there will be additional mule 
and white-tail deer that will be allowed to be harvested. So 
there’s going to be an increased harvest just to again thin out 
the herds. As we know, that may be a very effective means of 
controlling the spread of chronic wasting. 
 
I would point out in reference to the question that you have 
about the elk farm, we don’t have those statistics. Obviously 

Agriculture and Food would have the specific information. But 
when an animal does die, they do the testing. But that 
information in terms of the specifics and the species 
breakdown, I would ask the member to defer that particular 
question to the Minister of Ag and Food where he can give you 
the very specifics. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Okay if you can’t 
give me those numbers, I guess my next questions really 
revolve around the status of the game farming herd in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Could you tell us about the quarantine herds that are in 
Saskatchewan and the information about how long they’re 
going to be quarantined, and questions revolving around what 
those quarantine farms are able to do as far as grazing other 
species, other animals, and other agriculture enterprises on 
those lands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thanks again for the question. I point 
out to the member opposite that we don’t handle domestic 
herds. Again that particular matter will be best addressed by the 
Minister of Ag and Food. And I understand that there is some 
good collaboration between Ag and Food, the Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency out of Ottawa. So CFIA (Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency) and Ag and Food will have the very 
specifics in the herds that have been quarantined that you’ve 
asked about. 
 
And SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) of course is very aware of what’s, you know, 
what the domestic herds are all about. We stay continually in 
contact and we are involved with the import and export of some 
of the elk to a certain extent. And again, we have a collaborative 
relationship with Ag and Food and CFIA are the lead agencies 
and they’ll be able to give you the specific information. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess that’s one of 
the issues I was leading to, is with the game farm industry is 
having to go to at least Ag and Food and the Environment 
department far as licensing and permitting. 
 
Are you able to supply any information as far as the relationship 
to regulation around game farming? It’s been proposed that 
game farms may need to be double fenced and more regulations 
concerning keeping the wildlife and the domestic herds 
separate. And could you explain some of the regulations, or is 
the government planning any regulation changes concerning 
game farm regulations? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much for the 
question. I’ll point out that one of the things that’s very 
important is that, again, the elk farms are considered domestic 
herds, and they’re under the purview of the Department of Ag 
and Food. And Ag and Food and Saskatchewan Environment 
do have a protocol of working together to talk about issues such 
as double fencing and whether a double fence or a single fence 
is appropriate. And we work with industry as well. 
 
And I think everybody, from the Wildlife Federation to industry 
to Ag and Food and to Environment, are fully conscious of 



June 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

 

some of the challenges of making sure domestic herds and wild 
animals are as healthy as can be, and that our relationship and 
the collaboration has been very beneficial. So we have a 
protocol with Ag and Food in terms of the, you know, just of 
the operation and the safety of animals both outside the fence 
and inside the fence. 
 
Once the animal is in the pen, then they become the . . . under 
the jurisdiction of Ag and Food. So again I’ll point out that 
there has been not a wide scale review of the rules and 
regulations. The relationship we have with industry and with 
Ag and Food has been beneficial. We have a protocol. We 
continue speaking, and we’re in constant communication. And I 
think everybody engaged and everybody involved understand 
that we have to do . . . we have to be very responsible in this 
whole exercise because the people of Saskatchewan demand, 
they need to know, that animals inside the fence and outside the 
fence are healthy as possible. And we’ll continue striving 
towards that goal. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. In the Leader-Post, Thursday, 
May 22, the Sask Wildlife Federation and the International 
Federation for Animal Welfare called on the provincial 
government to ban game farming. 
 
And my next question is, if the minister and the officials know 
this, I was just wondering . . . questions from the government 
scientists. Does the government scientists have any evidence of 
chronic wasting disease be transmitted from a game farm 
animal, let’s use elk, domestic elk to wildlife elk or vice versa? 
Can it be transmitted between species? 
 
And also is there any evidence of a spontaneous, naturally 
occurring chronic wasting disease developing in an animal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. First of all I 
want to point out that with chronic wasting disease, there’s very 
little science associated with studying it and understanding what 
chronic wasting disease is. And in fact, science cannot prove 
where chronic wasting originated. What we do know is that — 
and it’s well documented — is that scientists have been, 
through a test-tube process in a controlled environment, has 
been able to have the chronic wasting disease cross species. So 
that in a very controlled setting, scientists have been able to do 
that. 
 
But again one of the most important thing is people should 
know that the science and research are improving in this 
particular area. A lot of people are quite concerned and they 
want to know more about this. So the good news here is that 
while there’s very little science previously, there’s a whole heck 
of a lot of research and new science being found out about this 
particular challenge of chronic wasting. And you know that’s 
always, on an optimistic note, always very important to point 
out. 
 
I would point out as well that prudence would suggest that, for 
example, if you see an animal that doesn’t look too healthy, that 
you don’t eat it. Prudence would suggest that in the event that 
there is chronic wasting in natural herds, that you would thin 
out the herds. Prudence would suggest that in the event that 
there is chronic wasting found in a domestic herd, that you’d 
take the necessary precautions. 

So we’re being very cautious. We’re being very prudent. And 
hopefully that as time goes on, that we’ll begin to eradicate the 
problem or at least prepare for it. And again, hopefully, science 
will come across with better information, better technology, 
perhaps treatment and so on and so forth. 
 
So there’s always prudence and there’s always optimism. But 
we are fully aware of the challenges associated with chronic 
wasting. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Has your government in your 
department and . . . had any discussions with your department 
and with the Agriculture department concerning, or have any 
intentions or discussions around banning game farming in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The simple answer is no. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess going back to 
what your scientists have been able to supply you for 
information, as we know in the BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) situation, there is talk of a spontaneous 
development of BSE. Could you be more specific and do you 
have any knowledge concerning that possibility? 
 
And why I go back to that, there is . . . Well I believe it’s the 
officials from the Saskatchewan game farm association are 
stating that there is some evidence that there’s possibly 1 per 
cent of chronic wasting disease or BSE developed 
spontaneously. Could you elaborate on that? And is that a 
possibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I just want to 
point out that between BSE and chronic wasting, they are not 
considered a related disease. 
 
In reference to the chronic wasting disease I can point out that 
there’s, again, science cannot prove where CWD originated. 
And I can point out that we are, we have been in constant 
communication and constant contacts with the experts of the 
world in reference to chronic wasting. So when it comes to 
chronic wasting we can certainly point out to people that we 
have been diligent and certainly we know that there’s an 
incredible challenge with chronic wasting, and that we’ll do all 
we can to assure people of Saskatchewan that we are aware of 
the dangers and the challenges. 
 
But we’re also aware that there could be some good science that 
will come out in the future. And we offer people hope that we 
can resolve this matter by working hard on this angle. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d just like to wrap up. I’d just like to thank 
the minister and your officials. We certainly have many more 
questions in the Environment area, so we hope that we will 
have another opportunity to speak to you before this sitting 
ends. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, and I want to 
also thank my officials and report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1452 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Special Committee on Regulations 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1460 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1460 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1460 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1460 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1470 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1470 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Show 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
 Luther Academy Building 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1454 
 Swift Current Petitions for New Scanner 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1454 
 Vehicle Idling Campaign 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1454 
 YWCA Gala Evening of Cinema 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1455 
 Regina’s 36th Annual Mosaic Festival 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1455 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Professional Legislation for Paramedics 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1455 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1455 
 Regina Sound Stage 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1456 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1456 
 Galleria Real Estate Study 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1456 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1456 
 Sex Offender Registry 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
 Ethanol Industry 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1458 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1459 
  
 



 

 

 Automated Land Titles System 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1459 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1459 
 Ambulance Service in Saskatchewan 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1459 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1459 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine Renewal Plan 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1460 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1461 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1461 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1461 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 15 — The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1461 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1461 
 Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
 Bill No. 29 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2003 
 Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1471 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1471 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 15 — The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1473 
 Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1473 
 Bill No. 29 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2003 
 Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1473 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1473 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1473 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1473 
 


