















































Hansard: May 12, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1013 
 May 12, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open today’s sitting. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
deplorable and unjustifiable lack of a hemodialysis unit in the 
city of Moose Jaw. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Carlyle, Bellegarde, and the city of Moose 
Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once 
again I’m pleased to rise with a petition from citizens of rural 
Saskatchewan who are very concerned about access to adequate 
health care. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen, and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of 
Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition from people from west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with the state of health care. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure that current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks 
from Smiley and Kindersley. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition signed by residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
regarding Highway 49 from Kelvington to Highway 35. The 
petition notes that there is an urgent need of construction repair 
and without it future economic development in the area will be 
hindered and safety imperilled. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Okla, Kelvington, and Lintlaw. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today I’m 
standing to present a petition on behalf of citizens from the 
community of Cabri concerning the issue of Crown grazing 
land renewals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Deputy 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of constituents 
concerned with a section of Highway 22 between the Junction 
of No. 6 and Junction 20. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey, Earl Grey, and Bulyea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition here today dealing with the Crown land leases and the 
handling by this government. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, St. Walburg, Mildred, Glaslyn, Hafford, and 
Glenbush. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 10, 12, 35, 36, 40, 90, and no. 100. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 42 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Corrections and Public 
Safety: for fiscal year 2001-2002, what was the total 
overtime cost at each of the province’s four correctional 
facilities; and further to that, for the same fiscal year what 
was the budgeted overtime cost for each facility? 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a similar question for fiscal 
year 2002-2003. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 42 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Corrections and Public 
Safety: what were the total costs associated with the facility 
lockdown following the March 16, 2003 escape of five 
inmates from the Regina Correctional Centre; and further to 
that, what were the cost breakdowns? 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 42 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SPMC: did the corporation 
commission any feasibility or business plan or consultant’s 
report for the sound stage located at the corner of Broad 
Street and College Avenue in Regina; if so, will the 
minister table copies of those documents in the legislature? 
 

Mr. Speaker, there’s similar questions for the Minister of 
Industry and Resources and the minister for Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
I so present. 
 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have 
a very special guest — two special guests — in your gallery, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I want to introduce to the House 
today. 
 
Former Capitol recording artist, Stu Mitchell, in some regards a 
rock and roll legend, recorded at the famous Norman Petty 
Studio in Clovis, New Mexico, along with Buddy Holly. Stu 
Mitchell is with us in the gallery today. 
 
And those who will have memory of the great dance hall 
traditions will — here in Regina at least — would remember the 
many engagements that Stu played at the Regina Trianon 
Ballroom. 
 
With Stu is his son, Kyle, who is a stage, movie, and television 
actor, who some will recognize starred in the Global series, 
Jake and the Kid. 
 
Stu and Kyle are on a rediscover your roots tour through 
Saskatchewan. They visited the homestead where Stu’s parents 
lived at Mervin, and the Clover Lake School where Stu’s 
mother attended as a child. And they’ve been to Waskesiu and 
Prince Albert, Stu’s hometown of Saskatoon, and now here to 
Regina. 
 
And so I’d ask all members to welcome these two guests to our 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well, on 
behalf of the official opposition, we’d like to welcome Stu 
Mitchell and his son back to the province as they discover their 
roots. 
 
And I’m certain that over the years we’ll probably hear much 
more of them and their music and their acting. And we certainly 
welcome them to this province and wish them well in their 
future endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Hon. members, it’s my great pleasure 
. . . Once again it is orientation day in visitor services. Of the 
six tour guides working the summer schedule, three of them are 
returning this year and three are brand new. 
 
We welcome back Shawn Keough, if Shawn could give a wave; 
Salema Forrest, if she could give a wave; and Sonia Millette, if 
she could give a wave. And joining this team . . . the team this 
year are Jonathan Epp, Ryan Malley, and Jesse Michaud. 
 
The summer staff join our full-time guides, Arnold and Theresa 
— Arnold, if you could wave; I think Arnold’s on the right and 
Theresa’s on the left — in greeting our many visitors and 
providing tours of the Legislative Building through our summer 
season. 
 
Lorraine and Marianne are also very proud of this fine team. 
The guides are excellent ambassadors, not only for our beautiful 
Legislative Building, but also for our province. And I know all 
hon. members would like to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Humboldt Broncos Win Royal Bank Cup 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Oh, Mr. Speaker, this 
was a jubilant weekend for the sport of hockey. Canada won 
gold at the World Men’s Hockey Championship in Helsinki. 
And more importantly, the Humboldt Broncos tasted something 
this past Sunday that a Saskatchewan Junior A hockey team 
hasn’t tasted in 15 years. And that, Mr. Speaker, was sweet 
victory at the Royal Bank Cup in Charlottetown, Prince Edward 
Island. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — So, Mr. Speaker, the Broncos are heading home to 
Humboldt as the exuberant and proud national champions. 
Finishing tournament play with a 2-2 record, the Broncos went 
on to defeat the Wellington Dukes 3 to 2 in the semifinals, 
pitting the Broncos against the Camrose Kodiaks in the 
Sunday’s final. 
 
And what a final it was, Mr. Speaker. Everyone was glued 
either to the radio or to TV watching this game. Humboldt took 
an early lead in that game, with two goals in the first period by 
Matt Brown and Kris Kasper. Camrose responded late in the 
first period and after a pointless second period, Brown scored 
on an empty net in the final seconds of the game. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is the Bronco’s first appearance in the RBC 
(Royal Bank Cup) finals since 1987. The community of 
Humboldt will be welcoming the Broncos home tonight with 
festivities at the Humboldt Uniplex at 11:30 p.m. 
 
And I’d like to ask all members of this House to join me in 
congratulating the Humboldt Broncos; the players; the coaches, 
Bob Beatty and Dean Brockman; and the staff on their 3-1 
victory over Camrose. And, Mr. Speaker, I would invite all 
members of this House to maybe travel to Humboldt tonight to 
welcome the Broncos home. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Wide Open Week 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, May 12 to 16 is Saskatchewan 
Wide Open Week, or WOW. The week is a collaborative effort 
between the public and private sectors and is designed to 
complement the province’s Future is Wide Open campaign. 
 
Saskatchewan WOW will get underway with two innovation 
showcases, the first in Regina on Tuesday and the second in 
Saskatoon on Thursday, where a host of manufacturers will 
showcase their successful products and services. Also in Regina 
on Tuesday and Saskatoon on Thursday, Jim Bottomley, a 
marketing specialist, will deliver a luncheon presentation on 
how smaller centres can compete against big cities and succeed 
using cluster strategies. 
 
At Regina Exhibition Park on Wednesday, the 
Saskatchewan-Made Products Trade Show and Sewn-Products 

Showcase will feature an incredible array of 
Saskatchewan-made products that are available from provincial 
manufacturers. 
 
And on Thursday, the Saskatchewan Research Council will lead 
about 1,500 grade 4, 5, and 6 students in Canada’s biggest 
science experiment. The experiment will take place in Regina 
and Saskatoon simultaneously and could have great benefits for 
the energy and environment sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a lot to say wow about. With 12 
straight months of job increases, with growing sectors like oil 
and gas, with mining and forestry building momentum, we truly 
have a future that is wide open. 
 
And so I urge everyone to celebrate our businesses and people 
during Saskatchewan Wide Open Week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Police Week 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re on the job 365 days a year, 7 days 
a week, 24 hours a day. To this group of dedicated men and 
women there’s no such thing as 8 to 5 with evenings and 
weekends off. They’re usually the first ones we turn to for help 
if there’s been an accident or disaster of any kind. In fact, we’re 
so confident in their training, skills, and abilities, that not only 
do we entrust them with our own personal safety but also the 
safety and protection of our children, our communities, and our 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m of course referring to the loyal and 
hard-working members of Saskatchewan’s police forces. And 
today I ask all members of the House to join me with 
recognizing May 11 to 17 as National Police Week. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the idea behind National Police Week is to 
increase community awareness and recognition of policing 
services while strengthening police-community ties. And it is 
clear that here in Saskatchewan our police forces have 
repeatedly proven just how integral their actions and their 
services are to our communities. 
 
From La Ronge in the North, to Lafleche in the South, from 
Kamsack in the East to Kerrobert in the West, Mr. Speaker, we 
take comfort in knowing that the hundreds of brave and loyal 
members of our province’s police forces are on the job. 
 
(13:45) 
 
We’d be remiss, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we didn’t also note that 
most of this work is done under adverse conditions and is often 
taken for granted or simply dismissed. 
 
To the police forces across Saskatchewan during National 
Police Week and for the other 51 weeks of the year, from all 
members of the House, our sincere thanks and appreciation for 
a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

Great Weekend for Saskatchewan Hockey Players 
 
Mr. Trew: — Wow, what a great weekend for hockey, 
particularly for Saskatchewan hockey players. First of all, Mr. 
Speaker, there were five players with Saskatchewan 
connections on Team Canada that won the World Hockey 
Championship in Helsinki yesterday. 
 
Jamie Heward of Regina stepped in at defence in the final game 
and just played a rock-steady game. Patrick Marleau of Aneroid 
had a particularly strong game in the semi-final to get Team 
Canada to the gold medal game. And Team Canada members 
Kyle Calder, Ryan Smith, and Barry Trotz all played their 
junior hockey right in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, slightly different, the Humboldt Broncos are this 
year’s Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League champions and 
wow — wow — they won the 2003 Royal Bank Cup 
tournament yesterday to become the Canadian Junior A 
champions. 
 
The Broncos were lead by their captain, Matt Brown, who 
scored first and last in the final game against Camrose, Alberta, 
Kodiaks to help the Broncos to their 3-1 victory. Kris Kasper 
scored the winning goal. 
 
Also deserving mention are the Broncos’ assistant captain, 
Craig Olynick, who was named the tournament’s most valuable 
player and the tournament’s top defenceman, and Jeremy Wray, 
who played the entire tournament with a broken wrist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Team Canada and the Humboldt Broncos on 
their respective championships. Wow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recognition of Nurses 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week is National Nurses Week and I would like today to 
recognize the importance of nurses and the essential work that 
they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses are the nucleus of our health care system. 
Without them the system falls apart, waiting lists grow, 
surgeries get cancelled, and hospital beds close. The shortage of 
nurses in Saskatchewan adds to the workload and stress of those 
who work in our system. And as a result, many nurses are 
looking for early retirement or leaving the province, or are 
simply leaving the profession altogether. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the next five years Saskatchewan will lose 
almost 40 per cent of the nurses. By the year 2012 it is 
projected that 60 per cent of our current nurses will no longer 
be nursing at all. Mr. Speaker, these statistics are alarming. 
 
The nursing shortage is only going to increase despite an 
interest in the profession by many young people. Last year 
almost 800 students applied for the nursing program but only 
260 seats were available. Many were turned away. The lack of 
training seats forced them to leave the province and go 
elsewhere. 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, we lose young people now and many will 
not return. Mr. Speaker, not only do we as a province need to 
expand nursing education seats, we need to give young people 
encouragement to stay in this province and work in the health 
care field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party values nurses, and if 
elected, we will deliver on the quality workplaces that this 
government promised in 1999. I’d like to ask all members to 
join me in thanking and recognizing the value of nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On a 
different note. Registered nurses, registered psychiatric nurses, 
nurse practitioners, and licensed practical nurses are all valued 
members of the health care system, and they play an important 
role in delivering quality health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as this is International Nursing Day, this is 
their day and their week, and the first day of International 
Nursing Week. I would like to take this opportunity to honour 
these important health care providers. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
year’s theme, Nursing: At the heart of health care, is well 
chosen. 
 
Nurses are on the front lines of health care services and are 
committed and dedicated to the people who need their special 
care, expertise, and compassion. Every day we see powerful 
examples of nurses working in every area of the health care 
system — from attending to a sick newborn in a neonatal 
intensive care unit, to nursing an older person through home 
care services, to assuming a leadership role in providing 
primary health services across the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I extend my best wishes for a successful 
celebration of International Nursing Day and Week. And I ask 
all my colleagues to join me in thanking the nurses for their 
dedication, commitment, and contribution to quality health care 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Chancellors’ Scholarship Awarded to 
Eston Area Student 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with 
great pleasure today to applaud the achievements of a young 
woman from the Eston area. Alana Ormsby is a grade 12 
student at the Eston Composite School and was recently 
awarded the Chancellors’ Scholarship from the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Alana was one of 15 successful applicants to receive the 
$20,000 bursary with a high school average of 98.1 per cent. 
The awards were presented by John Manley at a luncheon held 
at the university in late April. 
 
Not only does Alana excel at academics, but will attain her 
teacher’s status in dance this spring, has her grade 8 in piano, 
was a member of the Eston senior girls curling team, which 
placed fifth in the high school provincial curling championships 
this year, and she was a member of the Eston school drama, 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

 

which received a certificate of merit for their effort at the 
provincial drama festival held recently in Regina. 
 
Alana plans to obtain a math-science degree and then look at 
options for the future, further education here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating this 
outstanding young woman and wishing her every success with 
her future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Contract Negotiations with Medical Profession 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Health. Over the weekend Saskatchewan 
doctors rejected the province’s latest contract offer. However, 
the president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association said that 
the SMA would stay at the bargaining table. He said they 
wanted to resume negotiations as soon as possible. But now 
some media outlets are reporting that the two sides will not 
return to the bargaining table until after an emergency meeting 
by the SMA tomorrow night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is in the best interests of the health care system 
and of the people of Saskatchewan that a fair settlement is 
reached with the province’s doctors and that job action is 
averted. 
 
Is this just a short break, Mr. Speaker, in the process, to allow 
this meeting of the SMA to go ahead, and will the two sides 
resume negotiations Wednesday morning? Will the minister 
please explain to the people of Saskatchewan what the status of 
contract negotiations with the SMA is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 
Thursday I had dinner with members of the SMA. On Friday I 
spoke to the SMA and answered questions for quite a length of 
time and had a very fruitful time with them, talking about all of 
the issues in the province. 
 
On Friday I said very clearly to the press that our people were 
ready to talk with the SMA Friday, Saturday, Sunday, or 
Monday, and basically they then met as a group on Saturday 
morning and they’ve now been in contact with the people who 
represent the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
These discussions take place in formal places, they take place in 
informal places, but the talks continue because I know the 
doctors and the government and the whole health system want 
to resolve this matter in a way that’s fair for the doctors but also 
fair for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, job action by the province’s 
doctors is of concern. But so is the idea that health interns and 
residents at the University of Saskatchewan are also considering 
job action in an effort to speed up their contract negotiations. 

Members of the Professional Association of Internes and 
Residents have been without a contract for 16 months and are 
the lowest paid interns and residents of any university residency 
training program in Canada. 
 
It seems ironic that the issue of recruitment and retention of 
doctors in Saskatchewan is a big part of what the SMA wants 
addressed by the government, yet this government has let 
negotiations with the doctors we are actually training in this 
province drag out for 16 months. The interns and residents are 
now saying that they may join the SMA in job action, not only 
to support the province’s doctors, but also to speed up their own 
contract negotiations. 
 
So my question: will the minister explain the status of contract 
negotiations with the province’s residents and interns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the contract 
negotiations with the interns and residents takes place between 
their organization, PAIRS (Provincial Association of Internes 
and Residents of Saskatchewan), and the University of 
Saskatchewan. And so that discussion takes place there. 
 
But it’s very clear that a number of the issues that relate to these 
graduate doctors who are doing their internships and their 
residencies do tie in with the SMA discussions. So practically 
they know that a number of the things that will be resolved at 
the SMA table will also be dealt with at the PAIRS table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday I talked to a number of the 
representatives from PAIRS. They are in the process of getting 
these matters resolved through the negotiating table. We will 
address the issues for them in the same way that we’ll address 
the issues for the doctors because they’re all valuable members 
of our health care system and it’s important that we get these 
things resolved in a way that satisfies all of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Water Levels in Qu’Appelle Lakes 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for 
the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. 
 
The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority took out an 
advertisement in Saturday’s edition of the Leader-Post 
outlining the dispute between a number of First Nations and the 
federal government. The dispute is over access to water control 
structures on the Qu’Appelle River system. 
 
According to the government advertisement and previous 
government news releases dated April 17, failure to resolve this 
dispute will result in serious decline in water levels this summer 
on Pasqua Lake, Echo Lake, Mission Lake, Katepwa Lake, 
Crooked Lake, and Round Lake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is the minister doing to intervene in this dispute to ensure 
water levels in the Qu’Appelle Valley? 
 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I have before me, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve had letters that 
we’ve sent to the Hon. Robert Nault, Minister of Indian Affairs, 
from myself advising of the situation. We have a letter going to 
the Hon. Ralph Goodale, the federal minister, also talking to 
him about some of the challenges that we have met, and some 
of the challenges that have been met on this particular matter. 
 
We have also got a letter going out to David Millette, the 
director of negotiations for Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, 
and this is coming from the president of the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority, talking about some of the need to resolve 
this matter ASAP (as soon as possible). 
 
And one of the things I think is very important, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we point out to the people of the Qu’Appelle Valley Indian 
Authority and the people affected that this is a very serious 
matter. We’re on top of the issues. And what I would ask the 
member of the opposition, that Sask Party, is besides sitting 
back criticizing and complaining, is don’t compromise the 
provincial government when it comes to discussions by 
insisting that we pay some of the costs associated with settling 
this tremendous challenge. We are working very hard, we’ll 
continue working hard, and don’t interfere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the lakes along the 
Qu’Appelle River system play a critical role in economic 
development around the Qu’Appelle, Fort Qu’Appelle area. 
Lakes such as Pasqua Lake, Echo Lake, Crooked Lake, Round 
Lake, are major tourist destinations. The Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority says that if the water management 
structures are not operating soon, water levels along those lakes 
can drop as much as a metre or more throughout the summer. 
 
And yet it appears that the federal government and First Nations 
have stalled. All we hear from this minister is that they sent a 
few letters saying, we’re concerned, Mr. Speaker. Will the 
minister guarantee that they will get to the table and help 
resolve this dispute before the economic structure in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley system is severely affected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what this minister will 
guarantee is that this government will not be paying federal 
government bills when it comes to this whole matter. And I 
would ask that member across the way, besides whining and 
complaining and moaning every time this government does 
something, is if he’s prepared, if he’s prepared to pay the 
federal government bills. Then that Saskatchewan Party 
opposition should stand up in their places and say, our solution 
is to pay the federal government bills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we are going to protect 
Saskatchewan government’s interests, we are going to work 
with all the parties involved, and we’re not going to 
compromise this government and the people of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, people in the 
communities of Fort Qu’Appelle, Lebret, and B-Say-Tah are 
looking for answers, not excuses that that minister has just 
given. But today it looks like all they’re going to get from this 
provincial government is a couple of letters and a cold shoulder 
— it’s somebody else’s fault. If the water levels along the 
Qu’Appelle River drop to projected levels, more than a metre 
this next summer, fish stocks will be threatened, tourism will be 
devastated, and local business owners throughout the valley will 
have to pay a heavy price because of this government’s 
inaction. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what assurances can the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) give cottage owners, residents, and businesses in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley that they’re doing something other than 
sending letters to guarantee the water levels will be at their 
correct levels through the rest of the summer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I would point out is that we have taken a very proactive 
position on this matter. We have sat down with QVIDA 
(Qu’Appelle Valley Indian Development Authority), Mr. 
Speaker. We have asked them . . . we will sit down and talk to 
you about a water management strategy. We’ve written letters 
to our federal counterparts. We’ve engaged in a number of 
groups. We’ve advertised the challenge we may face this 
summer, Mr. Speaker. We have not hidden anything on this 
particular challenge. 
 
But what I’ll point out is that opposition is standing here today 
and I would ask that member, I would ask that member . . . On 
this side of the House we’re saying we are not going to settle 
and pay off federal government bills. This is our position on 
this side. Now I want to ask that member from the 
Saskatchewan Party, that member from the Saskatchewan Party, 
if he is prepared to pay the federal government bills. If he is, 
stand up in his place and say so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the impact of falling 
water levels on the Qu’Appelle Valley system is devastating to 
local businesses and local communities throughout the 
Qu’Appelle Valley system, and all we’re getting from this 
government is, it’s somebody else’s fault. 
 
I challenge the minister to earn his paycheque, call the parties 
together, and make sure they understand the impact that falling 
water levels have in this province and in the Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — We have maintained that this particular 
challenge is of a significant risk to a number of tourism 
opportunities in the area. We have advised the cabin owners and 
the cottage owners of all the challenges that we’re going to face. 
We have engaged with QVIDA in terms of discussion on water 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

 

management. 
 
We are fully aware of the issues. We are corresponding with the 
national government and a number of ministers involved with 
this particular circumstance. And we agree with all that — it is 
devastating. 
 
But my question to that member, to that Sask Party opposition, 
once again doom and gloom and whine and moan, Mr. Speaker 
— no solution. On our side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we are 
going to protect Saskatchewan people’s interests. We’re going 
to work with the First Nations involved. We’re going to make 
sure people are aware of what’s happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the question I have of them is, do you believe that we 
should pay the federal government’s bills in this regard? Yes or 
no, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Promotional Activities 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, we’d like 
to congratulate the Minister Responsible for SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) today, who 
apparently he’s been just named the minister responsible for 
government golf ball distribution in the province of 
Saskatchewan as SPMC, Mr. Speaker, will now be distributing 
government golf balls around the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister: how much money has the 
NDP government budgeted to spend on government golf balls 
this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I appreciate the 
question because obviously it’s very near and dear to the heart 
of the members in opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are 
promotions that our Crown corporation carry out, Mr. Speaker. 
The members opposite know that very well, as SaskEnergy, 
SaskTel, all our Crowns have promotions. They put aside in 
their budgets monies for promotions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
think this is part of doing business. Those are the Crown 
corporations that do very well on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the minister of 
SPMC thinks that — he’s not sure, but I think he believes — 
his Crown corporation, SPMC, is distributing government golf 
balls or SPMC balls. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the truth of it is they’re only going to be 
distributing them for The Future is Wide Open campaign. 
According to an internal government memo obtained by the 
Saskatchewan Party, every government department and Crown 
has been ordered to start putting the NDP’s The Future is Wide 
Open slogan on every piece of government communications — 
that’s highway signs, park entrance signs, book covers, bill 
inserts, liquor store signs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, liquor board 
signs as well, and government cheques, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

The question is this: how many taxpayers’ dollars are going to 
be spent on this particular branding initiative on putting this 
slogan on all the government signs? And in addition to that, Mr. 
Speaker, will the minister confirm whether or not the 
government will be selling these golf balls or will they be 
giving them away for free, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do 
not have privy the cost of placing the Wide Open Future logo 
on a variety of government publications. We’ll get that 
information for the member. 
 
But let me say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am prepared to stand 
any platform in this country, any town hall in this province, in 
this legislature, and say to the people of Canada and the people 
of Saskatchewan, the future of this province is a wide open 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the 
member indicates, if in fact that the Wide Open Future will be 
declared on welcoming signs to our province, if the Wide Open 
Future will be displayed on government publications, Mr. 
Speaker, I support it. I don’t oppose it; I support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Wow, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the Premier has it half right. The future for this 
province will very much be wide open, just as soon as he calls 
an election and the government is replaced, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this internal document 
that the Saskatchewan Party has received clearly highlights the 
fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they’re not putting the slogan on 
all government communications pieces. They’re putting the 
slogan on good news pieces, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they’re 
saying, if it’s bad news leave the slogan off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it says — and it gives an example, it gives an 
example — it says, if a letter’s describing a fee increase or that 
a request has been denied, don’t put the slogan on, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s what it says. It says it . . . Isn’t that interesting. 
It goes on good news, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not going on bad 
news. That sends a different message to those getting bad news. 
The message is, our Future is Wide Open; yours not so much. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: why 
wouldn’t the slogan go on both the good news items of the 
government and the bad news items that the government sends 
out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it is as the 
member indicates it is, the fact of the matter is then the Wide 
Open Future branding and slogan and visual will be going on 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

much, much more of what’s coming from this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — If it’s going on the good news, it’s going 
on the majority. Mr. Deputy Speaker, why does this opposition 
oppose celebrating the province? Why does this opposition 
oppose talking about the future of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is exactly why, this is exactly why I 
am tempted — I am tempted — to go to the people for a 
mandate because what we’ve got . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . is an opposition in total disarray, an 
opposition in total disarray. They don’t know what they 
support. They don’t support the forestry in the North 
apparently. I am told, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 4 to 500 
people gathered in Prince Albert right now — right now — 
saying they want us to build that forestry centre in downtown 
Prince Albert because they believe in the future of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It seems we’ve only got a small number of people left who 
don’t believe in that future. They’re all members of the 
Saskatchewan Party and they all sit in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there’s a reason 
that the Premier just now refused to answer the direct question, 
why do you put the slogan only on the good news and not on 
the bad news? The answer to the question of course is that if 
they only . . . If they put the slogan on both the good news and 
the bad news, Mr. Speaker, if they eliminated the bad news, the 
reason is because the minister responsible for SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) and the 
Crown Investments Corporation wouldn’t get to send anything 
out at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re also putting the government 
slogan on toques and on visors, tattoos, and pens, and yes, even 
golf balls — at 75 bucks a dozen, by the way, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now a few years ago the rules of the Assembly were changed 
so that MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) were no 
longer allowed to use taxpayer dollars to buy and distribute 
promotional items like golf balls. This was seen as an unfair 
advantage for the incumbent MLA. But that’s exactly now what 
the government appears to be ready to do — using tax dollars to 
buy things that promote their message. 
 
The question, the question, Mr. Speaker, to this: how does 
spending taxpayers’ dollars on government golf balls help grow 
the province? And how is that fair in light of this recent change 
in the rules of this Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure if this 
branding signal is going on golf balls or not. We’ll find that out. 

We’ll provide the information. 
 
I do know one thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If any of those golf 
balls — if they are going to exist — if any of those golf balls 
should ever end up in the possession of the member from Swift 
Current, those golf balls are going to have wide distribution. 
You can be sure about that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have undertaken in the fall of last year, 
a program — not a three-week program, not a three-month 
program — a three-year program to celebrate the future of 
Saskatchewan to tell the nation, to tell the world, to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan about the future of this great province. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. To do that, to do that in these times in 
which we live, takes promotion. It takes willingness to step 
forward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are in a very competitive world. Not 
just a competitive world in the private sector, but a competitive 
world among jurisdictions, each trying to tell their story. We are 
going to tell the good news. We’re going to tell the story. We’re 
not going to be deterred by the doom and gloomers that sit over 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, just for the 
record the Premier’s wondering if I’m interested in any NDP 
golf balls. The answer is no, I’m not interested in any NDP golf 
balls. I’m already a left-handed shot and I have a bit of a slice, 
Mr. Speaker, so in other words my drives are already going off 
to the left without using NDP golf balls, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m not interested. 
 
Now we also know that the government is going to be printing 
T-shirts under this program. And the T-shirts say, 
Saskatchewan: hard to spell but easy to draw. I guess that’s why 
the NDP didn’t call us the Saskatchewan Party for the first three 
or four years; they couldn’t spell Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how much money, how much money in 
The Future is Wide Open campaign has been allocated to golf 
balls, toques, visors, and T-shirts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve assured the 
member opposite, the members opposite, we’ll get this 
information. I don’t have this information now. We’ll get this 
information in full detail and provide it to the members. 
 
But I will repeat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will not stop this 
Premier or this government or the people of Saskatchewan from 
telling the world about the great future that’s here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what we’re going to 
be telling the world. What we’ll be telling the world is that in 
this province over the last 12 months we have generated 12,900 
new jobs — 12,000 of them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, full-time 
jobs; 5,400 of them for young people in our province. 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

 

We’re going to be talking about the change in the oil and gas 
industry in this province for the last year where we have seen, 
where we have seen expansion in the oil and gas exploration 
over 12 months of 72 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 
what we’re going to be talking about. 
 
And we’ll be talking about the forestry, the innovative work 
that’s going to be done in a forestry centre in downtown Prince 
Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wow. It’s the Premier’s 
contention then today that by putting The Future is Wide Open 
on some golf balls at 75 bucks a dozen, and by putting that 
slogan on some toques and some visors, that is the 
government’s plan to promote Saskatchewan around the world, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There is though, there is a very . . . some serious questioning in 
all of this. MLAs, by agreement of this Assembly, MLAs by 
agreement of this Assembly for some time have been restricted, 
have been restricted from using taxpayers’ money to buy these 
kinds of promotional items for giveaways. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, now the government through . . . this isn’t 
a Crown, this is . . . its department-wide Future is Wide Open 
campaign will be doing exactly that. How does the Premier 
justify those two developments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, many people, many 
in this province will recall that, yes indeed, it was this 
government that made changes to what was available to 
members of the legislature by way of promotional activity. And 
do you know why? Do you know why this government did that? 
In reaction to what went on when those people occupied the 
government benches. It took a fair bit of cleaning up, if I may 
so, after that group of men and women got a hold of the public 
treasury. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a significant difference, there is a 
significant difference in promotion activity . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Would members please 
come to order. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it appears I have 
touched a nerve over there. It appears I would have touched a 
nerve over there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me make this point. There is a 
considerable difference, if I may say, in promotional activity for 
one who is running in a partisan election, between promotional 
activity there and promotional activity that will celebrate and 
market our province to our people, to Canadians, and to the 
world. 
 
And I repeat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will not stop this 
government from celebrating the future of this province and 

telling that story across the nation and telling that story across 
Saskatchewan. We will not be stopped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this is about, this is 
about a government 10 points behind in the polls, beset, beset 
by scandal after scandal after scandal. And so in their warped 
sense of what might work, what might be to their partisan 
advantage, they decide they’re going to give out toques and golf 
balls to the people of the province, and say that’s how they’re 
promoting Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s absolutely ridiculous and it’s why this 
government is heading for an electoral defeat, the likes of which 
we haven’t seen in some time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Premier, to the 
Premier: why did this Assembly, and presumably he himself, 
vote in favour of making rule changes to the use of promotional 
items? Why would he vote in favour of that and just a few years 
later, as Premier, in his future wide open campaign, go against 
those very principles, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the preamble to 
the member’s question is indicative of his grasp of numbers, 
then I think every citizen in the province should question 
anything else he says. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, soon enough we will be going to the 
people and seeking a mandate for a new majority government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the meantime we are not going to cease doing what is correct by 
way of public policy. 
 
It has been the decision of this government that we are going to, 
for the first time in this province’s history, take our story and 
tell it to the nation. We’re going to tell it to the nation. We are 
going to tell it to potential investors. We are going to tell it to 
immigrants, and we’re going to tell it to Saskatchewan people 
because this is a government and this is a party that believes in 
something. We believe in the people of Saskatchewan. We 
believe in the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
We do not believe only in seeking power for power’s sake, 
which is what we see daily evidenced by the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to be able to have the opportunity today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to respond to the second reading of The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act. 
 
But I just want to quote something that the minister said, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when he gave second reading. And I quote: 
 

In the last two years ongoing consultations with 
stakeholders have led to some suggestions for 
improvements. 

 
He goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The proposed amendments will: firstly, provide certainty 
with . . . definition of expression, legal description; 
secondly, provide flexibility in requiring a surveyor to 
conduct a field inspection . . . 

 
And on it goes. But what he’s talking about is reliability, and 
that is certainly not, when it comes to ISC (Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan), Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what is happening today. 
 
We have checked with stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, and found 
that many stakeholders have no problem with this Bill. But 
when you get to the part where you’re dealing with ISC, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a number of stakeholders that have a problem 
with what has happened with ISC. First over is the $107 million 
that it’s cost to put this new program in order, one that isn’t 
working to this point and doesn’t look like in the near future to 
have the problems ironed out. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve talked to municipalities that have 
found that the costs have risen from municipalities all over the 
province as soon as they’re dealing with land titles and land 
registrations. 
 
Financial institutions, Mr. Speaker. Every financial institution 
in this province, whether it’s training of their staff or dealing 
with the change in land titles for people that have bought or 
sold property, it’s costing them more. There’s extra paperwork. 
The time that it takes seems to be twice as long as it was before 
and there’s no improvement to anywhere in this system for 
$107 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The idea was for ISC changes, to computerize it, was to be 
cheaper, faster, and more efficient, Mr. Speaker. And to this 
point, we haven’t seen any part of this happen in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also see the problem, and it’s arose a 
number of times now, where a person with the same name is 
getting confused with someone else in the province because ISC 
cannot differentiate between the two people with the same 

names. 
 
And now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re talking about changing 
the way land descriptions are described in this province, giving 
them a number instead of the normal land description, whether 
it’s rural agricultural land where we have the old southwest of 
10 whatever, or if we have block numbers from urban 
municipalities. 
 
Now we’re going to go to a number, where anyone with the 
same name, if there’s twenty of them across the province, ISC 
cannot differentiate between any of these properties or property 
owners. And it’s going to do nothing but create more confusion, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are checking with stakeholders. We have 
seen no problem to this point with Bill No. 17, The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, but we are still checking with more 
stakeholders and at this point would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 20 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment 
Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
join into the debate on Bill No. 20, The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Amendment Act. 
 
This Act is coming about mainly because of the anticipation of 
rule changes that were proposed in the Third Report of the 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures. That report, of 
course, has taken a couple of years to develop and to be put to 
this House. And one part of that has needed some changes and 
that’s what this Bill speaks to. 
 
The rules have not been passed as of yet but once they are 
passed, there needs to be an amount paid to . . . There needs to 
be some adjustment with the Board of Internal Economy. This 
Act defines committees under the new structure and provides 
for payment to the chairperson and deputy chair of the new 
committees, which will reflect a greatly increased workload by 
those members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it should be noted, and it should be duly noted by members 
opposite on the government side and especially of Crown 
Corporations, these are rule changes that will be taking place 
into the future. These are not rule changes that have taken place 
now. There’s absolutely no reason why committees such as 
Crown Corp Committee could not meet, or Public Accounts 
could not be meeting at this very time. 
 
We’ve have a lot of annual reports been presented in the House. 
Unfortunately, a number of the ones, through SaskTel for 
example, when you look at their foreign investment, have seen 
a lot of red ink. And it’s only fair that the Crown Corp 
Committee . . . Corporations Committee should be meeting 
under the old structure because this new structure has not been 
put into place. 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

 

This is talking about a structure that will be put into place into 
the future, and that’s what this Bill speaks to. But it is very 
important that the government realize that, until that process is 
put into place and until we are operating under the new rule 
structure, the old rule structure is in place and there’s absolutely 
no reason why committees cannot meet to discuss annual 
reports that have just recently been tabled over the last three or 
four weeks in this Chamber. 
 
I guess perhaps there is a reason why the committee and the old 
structure would choose not to meet, and that would be if the 
annual reports of some of these Crown corporations were less 
than favourable. 
 
And I think that’s certainly what we’ve seen over the last 
couple of weeks as we’ve been raising issue after issue 
regarding investments by the Crown corporations that have lost 
money. 
 
And I guess I can see why maybe there’s a bit of a delaying 
game because of not wanting to discuss these annual reports. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the rule changes that have been presented 
under this third report of the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures is in place but not implemented. 
 
And it will be into the future before it will be implemented, and 
there’s a number of reasons for that. And I think the Rules 
Committee has met enough times to realize that until all the 
groundwork and the infrastructure work is done properly, that 
the rules . . . it would really be, I personally, I think 
counterproductive to put them into place until we have the 
foundation in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Once that foundation is in place, this Act would then be 
applicable because it deals with remuneration to the Chairs and 
Vice-Chairs of the various committees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have certainly had enough time over the last two or three 
years, as rule changes have been discussed, to kind of get our 
minds around this and how this is all going to work. We don’t 
have any hesitation at all with the amended Act as put forward. 
So, Mr. Speaker, if we do have any further questions, we’ll 
handle that in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 21 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 21 — The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had to 
look around and see who is the member from Milestone. But a 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly to speak to Bill 21. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the changes to this piece of legislation are 
certainly welcome, and it’s probably appropriate and about time 
that these changes were implemented and brought forward. Mr. 
Speaker, what this piece of legislation is specifically doing is 
giving spouses of retired public employees the opportunity to 

benefit and to actually have . . . become eligible for the benefits 
from that individual’s pension plan. 
 
Up until the provisions of this piece of legislation, if a member 
retired from the public service and had a pension plan and a 
member was married or had a spouse and that member passed 
away, that member’s spouse would then have the ability to gain 
and actually be eligible for the benefits of that member’s plan. 
However, if that member retired and unfortunately his spouse 
passed away and then the member remarried, the member’s . . . 
the new spouse would not qualify for the benefits of that 
pension plan. 
 
And I think what this piece of legislation is basically saying, 
indicating that it certainly would be unfair for a member who 
retired and lost a spouse and then remarried to find that pension 
plan that he had . . . he or she had been paying into over a 
number of years, would not qualify for those benefits, having 
. . . after they had paid into a pension plan through that period 
of time. 
 
And so it certainly appears, Mr. Speaker, that the changes that 
are being implemented as a result of this piece of legislation are 
long overdue, certainly are appropriate, and it would be . . . it is 
certainly fair, it would seem, that those benefits would then pass 
on to that spouse of that member who had retired and 
unfortunately at a point in time where they would pass on, that 
their benefits would indeed pass on to their spouse. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the Bill itself is fairly straightforward and 
speaks to a number of issues that are before us. And it would 
appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a piece of legislation that 
we certainly need to allow to move forward. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I am aware of the fact that some of my 
other colleagues would like to express some of their opinions in 
regards to the Bill and to some issues that they have, questions 
that they would like to raise. And therefore at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(14:30) 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 8 — The Youth 
Justice Administration Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish I 
could stand here today and say that it gives me great pleasure to 
enter the debate on this particular piece of legislation, but I am 
afraid that after having looked through the legislation and some 
of the notes associated with it and some of the material that has 
appeared in the newspaper and other publications concerning 
this particular piece of legislation, I don’t think anybody could 
be real enthused about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is certainly an attempt at compromise and I 
think that would be one of the most positive things you could 
say about this piece of legislation. 
 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

As I mentioned, there’s been considerable publication on this 
particular subject. I have in front of me here probably half a 
dozen to a dozen different articles that have appeared in 
publications around the country, some of which are local, some 
of which are national. 
 
But I know that this particular piece of legislation grew out of 
the frustration of the Canadian public with the Young Offenders 
Act. And the Young Offenders Act, if I recall correctly, was 
supposed to be an improvement on a previous piece of 
legislation but it proved to be a dismal failure. 
 
And frankly the people of the country, this province included, 
felt that the Young Offenders Act failed miserably on all 
counts. It failed the individuals who were charged with offences 
as a result of youthful indiscretions; it failed the people who 
were most significantly harmed by those indiscretions; it failed 
society on a larger basis; and in some instances it failed to 
produce any positive results for the most serious offenders. 
They were often let go with a slap on the wrist. That was the 
general consensus; that was the perception that came about as a 
result of the Young Offenders Act. 
 
So what we had here was a piece of federal legislation that tried 
to address the inequities and the lack of consequences 
associated with the previous Young Offenders Act, but tried to 
remove from the tougher requirements and penalties for repeat 
offenders those young people who were first-time offenders or 
whose offences were less significant in terms of damage or 
reparations or consequences. So what we got was a situation 
where we tried to be all things to all people in this particular 
piece of legislation. 
 
Now as I understand it, the federal government wasn’t satisfied 
with trying to accomplish all these different things in one piece 
of legislation. They decided in their wisdom to make the 
implementation of this legislation the responsibility of the 
provinces and the territories. And as a consequence there are 
certain applications, certain additional requirements that might 
be made in this province that would differ from other provinces 
throughout the country. The implementation might be rather 
unique for each jurisdiction in the country. 
 
And what we have before us, Bill No. 8, An Act respecting the 
Administration of Youth Justice Services and making 
consequential amendments to other Acts, Mr. Speaker, is the 
Saskatchewan version of the implementation of the federal 
legislation on this issue. 
 
If I might just take a minute, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to refer to an 
editorial that appeared in the Leader-Post on the second of 
April of this year, where it says here that: 
 

. . . (the) Youth Criminal Justice Act makes a decent 
attempt to address the perception that young offenders have 
often been treated too lightly. 

 
And that’s especially in view of the fact that, according to 
statistics, Canada has locked up almost twice as many young 
offenders under the previous Young Offenders Act than any 
other country including the United States. 
 
And they go through to describe some of the changes in the 

provincial legislation here, but at the end they say: 
 

Generally, however, the new act strikes a fair balance 
between competing demands for tougher sentences and 
giving young offenders a second chance. 

 
And I look at another piece of media on this particular 
legislation, headlined, “(The) Sask justice minister pleased with 
balance offered by (the) new law.” But I’d like to refer to just a 
part of this particular article where they quote Corporal Rob 
Willis, a spokesman for the Regina Police Service, and he says: 
 

For police, the new law will mean little change other than a 
closer look at alternative measures programs as an option 
instead of laying . . . criminal charge(s). 

 
He says: 
 

“We won’t, probably, be laying as many charges on 
first-time offenders under the (new) . . . act . . . We’re 
looking at alternatives to charging, and that’s the scope of 
the new act. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this particular piece of 
legislation meets the objectives of providing more rigorous . . . 
and scrutiny and oversight for offenders depending on the type 
of offence they’ve committed, it remains to be seen. It sounds 
like the police are not thinking there’ll be a whole lot of change 
as a result of this legislation, just maybe some new alternate 
measures that might be available to them. 
 
The Leader-Post thinks it strikes a good balance, this particular 
piece of legislation. 
 
But I found an article written by the Canadian Press, or for the 
Canadian Press, in which some other concerns are expressed, 
and I’d like to quote this one line from a gentleman who is a 
specialist in youth crime. He’s quoted in this article as saying: 
 

It’s not surprising many people don’t have a good 
understanding of . . . (this Act). It’s been a struggle even for 
professionals to figure out what it means. 

 
And he goes on to say here that: 
 

Ottawa can’t solve all the problems. It’s . . . up to the 
provinces, to (the) schools, to families. (And) we have to be 
realistic about what any legislation . . . (can actually do). 

 
Presenting a bit of a contrary view, an opposing view, is the 
Justice critic for the official opposition in Ottawa, and he says: 
 

What we are doing is breeding a disrespect for the law in 
ignoring the so-called minor offences, usually relating to 
property or break-and-enters. 
 
This legislation will reduce the statistics of crime, but only 
because there will be fewer crimes reported and prosecuted. 
The criminal activity will continue. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can see from the comments I’ve presented 
to the House this afternoon that there is certainly a divergence 
of views on this particular piece of legislation. 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

 

There was plenty of hope that it would address the problems of 
the Young Offenders Act, but there are concerns that not only 
will it not address those problems that the Canadian public so 
clearly found disturbing, but it will maybe create even greater 
difficulties in the administration of justice. 
 
One of the problems I think that the critic for the official 
opposition alluded to, and which is overlooked so frequently in 
these issues of justice, is the problems for young people and the 
societal circumstances they find themselves in. And it’s usually 
related most specifically I believe, Mr. Speaker, to the quality 
of their relationships. 
 
You know, young people require guidance; they require 
wisdom; they require encouragement; sometimes they require 
constraint. And it’s the quality of their relationships that will 
help them develop properly as they grow up. And what has 
happened so often is we have seen family breakdowns; we have 
seen societal pressures; we have seen other kinds of pressures 
brought to bear on young people, quite often peer pressure 
which is quite likely the most serious issue a young person can 
address in their life. 
 
And we’ve seen these pressures applied to young people in 
situations where they have not been able to cope adequately 
with the circumstances they’re faced with. And they often make 
poor decisions. And unfortunately those poor decisions 
sometimes lead them into situations where they would rather 
not be and where the consequences can be very difficult and 
painful for the people that are either affected as victims or as 
individuals participating in a particular activity. And what I 
would like to see happen, Mr. Speaker, is that we would address 
some of these issues; that as a society, we would come to grips 
with the real problems that are facing our youth. 
 
You know, I often hear that poverty is the reason for all ills in 
this world. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s simplistic. There’s 
no doubt that poverty plays an incredibly important role in the 
lives of people, but it is not the single most determining factor. I 
believe that poverty is a result of so many of the other factors 
that come to play in the positive development of young people 
and that it’s one of many, but there are others that are just as 
important, maybe more important than poverty, in whether or 
not a young person is going to develop a strong set of societal 
responsibilities and ethics that will allow them to function 
adequately in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if poverty was the number one contributor to poor 
social behaviour, we’d have seen the highest crime rates ever in 
Saskatchewan during the Depression, during the dirty thirties. 
Poverty by itself is not the determinant that people say it is. And 
I know for a fact, Mr. Speaker, that out of the Depression, out 
of the abject poverty of the people of this province in that era, 
we had many good things, many positive things develop. That 
poverty was what brought people together, to work together to 
benefit their communities, to participate in a meaningful way, 
whether or not there was a lot of money associated with their 
endeavours. 
 
And I think that we can address the issues of poverty, but until 
we develop a very clear understanding of the importance of 
quality relationships for young people in particular, we will 
never ever address the problems of youth crime. 

I’m saying this as a matter of my own experience, Mr. Speaker, 
but I think this particular view is held by a number of other 
people. And just as an example, I pulled this particular item out 
of the March 21 edition of The StarPhoenix in which it says, 
“Youth in justice system lack positive role models: (quoting an) 
expert.” And I won’t read the whole article but I would like to 
just mention a few, a few points of view that were expressed by 
this individual: 
 

Long-term relationships are key to preventing youth crime 
and to rehabilitating youngsters who have already broken 
the law, the aboriginal justice reform commission heard 
this week. 

 
Troubled youth need stable, long-term relationships with 
adults, including teachers, social workers, foster parents, 
lawyers, probation officers and other professionals in their 
lives . . . 

 
This is a claim made by Richard Rothenburger, the co-ordinator 
for the Saskatchewan Youth in Care and Custody Network. 
 
I could go on to a . . . at great length to quote from here but he 
says: 
 

Stable relationships with those adult workers give youth 
positive role models, supportive listeners and guiding hands 
. . . 

 
Youth in justice and child welfare systems are often denied 
the opportunity to develop strong long-term relationships, 
as they are moved from one facility to another and from 
one foster home to another. Even those youth fortunate 
enough to stay in one place can be affected by a high 
turnover of professionals in their lives . . . 

 
This challenge robs young people — many of whom are 
already vulnerable — of the relationships that can help 
them to cope, to surpass and to succeed, the report states. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation, while it might 
in fact help individuals who are first-time offenders, might not 
provide jail as an instant and immediate consequence of their 
behaviour, I suspect will be relatively positive. And I hope that 
it will have the impact that obviously the federal government 
and the provincial government thinks it will. 
 
But on the other hand, I hope that it is not sending the wrong 
signal. I hope it is not saying to young people who are first-time 
offenders, this situation is not serious and we aren’t going to 
treat it seriously so we’re going to minimize the consequences 
of your behaviour. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, that would be a 
serious mistake on behalf of the society as a whole, but more 
importantly, it would be a serious mistake on the part of the 
long-term consequences for that individual. 
 
I think these situations are very delicate, and need to be treated 
with the utmost of discernment and careful consideration by the 
individuals who are working with the individuals who are 
charged with youth crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to wrap up some of my comments on 
this particular piece of legislation by reviewing what it is this 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

Bill purports to do. 
 
Like I said earlier, it’s a broad-ranging Bill that takes into 
consideration a number of definitions and tries to outline some 
of the activities of the provincial legislation as it will relate to 
the federal legislation. 
 
Actually what it does simply is tries to define custody facility 
and also talks about how the federal legislation will be applied 
in the province of Saskatchewan. It deals with powers allocated 
to various individuals responsible for implementing the 
provincial and federal legislation. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And of course it has the usual regulations section that this 
government is so fond of including in every piece of legislation 
they bring forward. Frankly, the legislation . . . the regulations 
section is often more detailed and specific than the legislation 
itself. But we haven’t seen those regulations as yet, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’ll be interested in seeing what is entailed with 
the regulatory part of this particular piece of legislation. 
 
And a transitional section, that is included here, essentially 
provides for the period of time that will elapse before the new 
provincial legislation is proclaimed. 
 
So while it appears here that Ottawa is giving the provinces 
some latitude in adapting the new federal legislation, it’s also 
clearly leaving it up to each province to try and figure out how 
it’s going to implement the various programs and services that 
will be required while working without adequate funding or 
resources at this point. That’s one other problem with this 
particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While we see what is being attempted here, we don’t know how 
it’s ever going to be put into working mode because no 
indication, that I know of, has been given to how these 
programs will be funded and carried forward into the future. 
 
As I indicated at the outset, there is much about this Bill that 
deserves discussion. And I think over the last number of weeks 
many members of the official opposition have spoken to this 
particular piece of legislation, and I think that it is the intention 
of several others to speak on behalf of their constituents. 
 
Just as a final, as a final comment, Mr. Speaker. The reason I 
participated in this debate today was a call to my office by one 
of my constituents. And I do want to get this on the record 
because I think this expresses sort of the frustration of 
individuals in a anecdotal way but it’s a very real indication of 
how youth crime affects everybody. 
 
This individual has a daughter who moved to the city here and 
took up a job and had her own vehicle. And in the short time 
that she was here, she had her car broken into on two separate 
occasions. 
 
Now because of those two instances . . . No one was ever found, 
no one ever was made or held responsible for the crime, none of 
the possessions were ever located and returned to the 
individual, but the person whose car was broken into had to pay 
an increased insurance deductible. Their insurance costs went 

up. This was a single, young lady working in the city, who 
through no fault of her own had her car broken into and 
possessions stolen twice. And on each instance when insurance 
claims were placed with the insurer, her insurance rates went 
up. 
 
Now if that wasn’t bad enough, the young lady went home over 
the holidays and because she didn’t have an appropriate vehicle 
to return to the city, her father gave her a vehicle as a substitute 
in the meantime. And shortly after the young lady arrived in the 
city and using her father’s vehicle while she was making 
arrangements for her own vehicle, her dad’s vehicle was stolen. 
And I don’t know if they ever recovered it or not. I never got to 
that point. The constituent, when he phoned me to complain 
about this situation, was just exasperated enough to give me the 
bare facts and not all of the extenuating circumstances or 
details. 
 
But nevertheless what he tells me now is that instead of having 
a $200 deductible they had to go to a $50 deductible in order to 
try and protect themselves to some extent. And now they are 
paying up to . . . I’m sorry, they used to have a $500 deductible 
when they lived in rural Saskatchewan, but now they are paying 
insurance premiums based on a $50 deductible and they’ve had 
two break-ins and a vehicle stolen, and absolutely no indication 
that anybody will be held responsible for that crime. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you have those kind of anecdotal 
situations, you say, well that’s an exception, that’s an unusual 
situation. But you know, if you have, Mr. Speaker, one 
anecdotal situation after the other, pretty soon you have a trend 
and then you have a public response and then you have a public 
outcry. I certainly hope this legislation will go to some distance 
to help address the issues, but I’m not so certain they will, 
having looked at some of the implications of this legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this point I would like to move we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise and move second reading of Bill No. 26, to 
amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2000 budget announced this government’s 
plan to reform Saskatchewan’s personal tax system. Our 
objective was to achieve a simple, fair, and competitive tax 
system that would be more responsive to the needs of 
Saskatchewan people and also strengthen the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
To meet this objective our government introduced a multi-year 
tax reform initiative as part of our long-term vision for growth 
and opportunity in Saskatchewan. On January 1, 2001 the 
determination of Saskatchewan personal income tax was 
simplified. The flat tax, the debt reduction surtax, the high 
income surtax, and the Saskatchewan tax reduction were all 
eliminated. These have now been replaced with a simple 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

 

three-rate tax structure and provincial tax credits which 
generally parallel the federal tax credits. 
 
The new provincial income tax system has also introduced a 
universal dependent child tax credit and a universal supplement 
to the age tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The tax reform plan included tax rate reductions in each of the 
years 2002 and 2003 taxation years through reductions to 
income tax rates and increases to the senior supplement and 
dependent child tax credits. The 2003 changes have now been 
implemented, Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan’s new personal 
income tax structure is fully implemented. 
 
The 2003 changes included a significant expansion in the 
income tax brackets, in addition to the reduction in the tax rates 
and the increases to the child and senior tax credits. Mr. 
Speaker, all income tax payers have benefited from tax reform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our multi-year personal tax reform initiative 
delivered meaningful tax relief to Saskatchewan residents. The 
introduction of higher personal tax credit amounts removed 
thousands of lower income earners from the income tax rolls. 
Income tax reform has put over $400 million per year into the 
hands of Saskatchewan people. An average Saskatchewan 
family is paying $1,030 less in provincial income tax today than 
they did in 1999 and a full third less than they did in 1993, a 
total savings of almost $1,500 each and every year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now this government has also introduced a number of 
initiatives to improve the competitiveness of Saskatchewan’s 
business tax regime. We have reduced the small-business 
income tax rate from 10 per cent in 1991 to 6 per cent today. 
We have increased the annual amount of income eligible for 
this rate from $200,000 to $300,000. 
 
We have significantly reduced corporate capital taxes for 
Saskatchewan-based businesses. We have also introduced a 
number of tax incentives targeted to specific segments of the 
provincial economy, including manufacturing and processing, 
the film industry, and the resource sector. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
will continue to do more for families and businesses as our 
fiscal resources permit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces amendments that will 
implement the small-business tax reduction announced in the 
2003 budget, as well as provide several technical clarifications 
and corrections to references to the federal Income Tax Act. 
 
As I’ve already described, the small-business corporate income 
tax rate has been reduced from 10 per cent in 1991 to 6 per cent 
in 2003. This Bill implements a further reduction to five per 
cent by 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this initiative builds on the government’s previous 
measures to improve tax competitiveness and encourage 
Saskatchewan-based small businesses. Since 1991, the 
small-business tax rate has been cut in half. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate that a personal tax reform and 
our business tax initiatives are part of a long-term vision for 
growth and opportunity in the province of Saskatchewan. A 

competitive tax regime is a central part of our plan to create the 
economic growth needed to secure our Saskatchewan quality of 
life. 
 
We believe we are doing what is right, what is fair, and what 
makes sense for our province and our people — building a 
stronger, more prosperous Saskatchewan for all of us to enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be pleased to answer questions concerning 
the amendments to The Income Tax Act, 2000 when discussing 
this Bill at Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Act to amend The 
Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand and speak to this piece of legislation, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
is right when he talks about reducing income tax and what the 
government has done over the past few years. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think if you look very carefully, we 
look back to prior to the 1999 election and the call from the 
Saskatchewan Party at that time for a reduction of the personal 
income tax, and the Finance minister of the day basically is 
saying that this opposition was being irresponsible in 
suggesting that reducing your personal tax should be a priority 
or it should be a measure that any government or the current 
government of Saskatchewan should even take a look at. 
 
But what we have seen, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 1999 
election when the NDP just were elected by the skin of their 
teeth — in fact, received fewer votes than Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition — the minister of Finance and the premier at the 
time had an about-turn. And while I think even . . . I think I’ll 
have to admit that even during the election campaign, the 
government of the day recognized where the electorate was on 
the whole income tax issue and decided they’d better come out 
with an income tax statement as well. 
 
And then since the 1999 election, as the minister indicated, the 
government has moved in the direction of reducing personal 
income tax. And, Mr. Speaker, we have given the government 
and the Finance ministers in charge credit for the fact that they 
have listened very carefully to the cries of the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer and have begun to reduce the personal income tax. 
 
Now I think one of the arguments we heard from the former 
premier, we heard from the former Finance minister, that they 
could not afford to reduce personal income taxes because it 
would cost the government, and they had to provide funding for 
health care, they had to provide funding for education, and they 
had to provide funding for highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the current budget 
statement, we look at what’s happened over the past three years, 
if I’m not mistaken, the reduction in the personal income tax in 
fact has not reduced the revenues the government has been 
taking in through taxes. 
 
If I’m not mistaken, Mr. Speaker, we’ve actually seen an 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

increase which I think is an indication that when a working 
person has more money in their pocket, that individual or those 
individuals or homeowners or family units are more than 
prepared to invest more in their own personal lives and in their 
community and in their province than if the government 
endeavoured to increase their revenues by increasing taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the announcement in this 2003 budget of reducing the small 
business tax, here again, Mr. Speaker, is just another idea that 
the Saskatchewan Party certainly went to the polls with in 1999. 
And we agree with the fact that it’s time. Maybe it’s been a 
long time coming; it’s taken the government some time to 
realize. 
 
When they’ve got a promotion right now talking about a 
wide-open Saskatchewan . . . The facts are, Mr. Speaker, I think 
the government’s getting the same message that the 
Saskatchewan Party and their Grow Saskatchewan plan have 
been catching the attention of the electorate of the province of 
Saskatchewan and so the government have come out with their 
own catchy phrase of a wide-open province, a province to 
invest in. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, when they were talking about a 
province that was wide open to business, they realized, began to 
realize that in some ways there were a number of impediments 
that were in — and obstacles — that were in place that were 
hindering and certainly would continue to hinder investment in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we talk about corporate taxes. We talk about 
small-business taxes and as we look across the province of 
Saskatchewan, the businesses that employ the majority of 
people across the province of Saskatchewan are small 
businesses. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that won’t change a lot. We’ll have some 
large corporations hopefully coming to the province, investing 
in the province and generating job opportunities and good 
quality job opportunities. But the realities are the larger portion 
will continue to be the small-business sector that will grow this 
province and help grow this province. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at small communities across our 
province and the provincial government’s initiative in trying to, 
trying to grow rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it will not 
grow on the backs of large, the large corporate sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will grow on the basis of the small family 
business community that we continue to see thrive in the 
province of Saskatchewan — whether it be a farming operation, 
a family farming operation, or a small agricultural implement 
dealers operation, or whatever the business, Mr. Speaker. That 
small business is the catalyst that will help build our economy. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s appropriate that the government have 
recognized that and are taking steps to give some recognition to 
the small-business community by addressing the issue of the tax 
on small business. 
 

And while the reduction, there is a reduction coming, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, our caucus continues to believe we need 
a further reduction on the small-business tax if we’re going to 
encourage investment in our province and in our communities, 
Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to encourage growth, if we’re going 
to encourage job opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, as we look across our province and there 
isn’t a small community today that isn’t facing some major 
challenges and some of the challenges that we’re facing in our 
small communities is the loss of families and young people as 
they look further afield for job opportunities because they aren’t 
there. And in many cases unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, what 
we’re seeing is people are not just looking to the larger 
communities within the province; they’re looking outside of the 
province. They’re looking beyond the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And in many cases the majority happen to be going to the 
province to the west, the province of Alberta. And a lot of it has 
to do, Mr. Speaker, as a result they’re looking west because of 
the tax, tax that they would be paying — whether it would be a 
business, whether it be personal income tax — and the fact that 
they will have more dollars left in their pockets at the end of the 
day. 
 
And so I think what this government is beginning to realize is 
the fact that the more money you leave in people’s pockets — 
as they’ve seen through their own revenue that’s been generated 
from taxes — the more money you leave in people’s pockets, 
the more money will be generated through employment 
opportunities and expenditures which will result in higher 
revenues for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d have to say my colleagues, while we’ve 
got a lot of questions as to the direction the government is 
going, and we’ve got a lot of questions as to why it’s taken the 
government a long time to begin to recognize the importance of 
addressing these issues, however, Mr. Speaker, we realize and 
recognize the reluctance they’ve had because their views have 
always been: but if you are able to make some money, then it’s 
for us to tax so we can help look after people who are the 
lower-income or the less fortunate, providing their health care 
or their education or whatever need there be out there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is an important piece of legislation. I 
think, Mr. Speaker, it will take more discussion and more 
debate before we get into line-by-line discussion in committee. 
And therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 
sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de 

hasard 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to introduce the amendments contained in Bill No. 
31, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 
2003. 
 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act in 1997, Mr. Speaker, 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

 

provides the statutory basis upon which the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority, or SLGA, regulates gaming and 
the distribution and consumption of alcohol in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will provide the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Licensing Commission with the legislative 
authority to hear appeals of licensing and regulatory decisions 
made by First Nations gaming licensing authorities, GLA, 
respecting on-reserve charitable gaming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is as a result of the renewed 25-year 
Gaming Framework Agreement signed last year between the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. This agreement, Mr. Speaker, is 
significant for both the people of Saskatchewan and our First 
Nations partners. 
 
The FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), 
through the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority, has 
already created significant jobs and economic spinoffs 
throughout the province. The renewed agreement ensures these 
continued opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Gaming Framework Agreement also 
establishes a number of important provisions to enhance First 
Nations participation in Saskatchewan’s gaming industry. An 
important part of the agreement is the inclusion of First Nations 
in the regulation and licensing of on-reserve charitable gaming. 
As you will be aware, Mr. Speaker, the regulation of on-reserve 
First Nation charitable gaming in the province is the 
responsibility of SLGA, the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority. The renewed Gaming Framework Agreement 
provides for a process leading to the eventual delegation of 
licensing and regulatory authority for on-reserve charitable 
gaming to the First Nations gaming licensing authorities, or 
GLA, the gaming licensing authorities. 
 
The eventual regulation of First Nation on-reserve charitable 
gaming by First Nations will be a positive development for our 
province. For its part, the FSIN has established Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Licensing Inc. The goal of this body, Mr. 
Speaker, is to eventually fulfill the primary charitable gaming 
licensing function within First Nations communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that SLGA and the 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing continue to work 
together to build SIGL’s capacity to eventually assume the role 
of First Nation GLA in the province, the gaming licensing 
authority. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you will also know that all regulatory and 
licensing decisions made by Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority are subject to appeal to the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Licensing Commission. The commission’s primary 
role is to serve as an independent, fair, quasi-judicial body 
mandated to ensure property application of the legislation and 
the regulations. 
 
So then, Mr. Speaker, the intent of this Bill is to provide the 
commission with the authority to eventually hear appeals of 
licensing and regulatory decisions made by First Nation GLAs, 
such as the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing respecting 
on-reserve charitable gaming. 

These amendments will ensure that First Nation GLAs are 
accountable to the commission just as the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority is. For its part, Mr. Speaker, the 
government committed to First Nations that it would 
expeditiously bring to this Assembly the amendments to the Act 
that facilitates First Nations regulation of on-reserve charitable 
gaming. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move that Bill No. 31, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003, be 
now read a second time. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to be 
able to speak to Bill No. 31 this afternoon, An Act to amend 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one very important piece of information or 
thought that comes from my constituents and people of 
Saskatchewan concerning gambling and liquor and gaming and 
its relationship to the people of Saskatchewan, in particular the 
First Nations of this province, is accountability. As we’ve seen 
in the past, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a real problem in that area 
— money being misspent by those involved. And we are very 
concerned, as the people of Saskatchewan are very concerned, 
that money earned from gambling, liquor, and gaming gets to 
the people that it is most needed and that’s to the everyday First 
Nations people on- and off-reserve. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as is noted, the government has signed a 
25-year framework with FSIN. And it’s very important that 
within this framework and within the rules and regulations and 
the amendments that are coming forward, that the 
accountability side to the First Nations people is looked after, 
and these people’s voices are heard, and their wishes and 
concerns and needs and wants are looked after because it’s very 
important that this money is not wasted, so it’s used for the 
purpose that it was intended, for the First Nations people of this 
province. 
 
Other aspects of gambling of course, as we know, is addiction 
to gambling. And it’s not only the personal addiction of 
individuals but also the gambling addiction of governments. 
And we have seen that this government has relied on revenues 
from gambling in a big way to finance parts of government 
expenditures. And, Mr. Speaker, that always is a concern that 
this addiction, both at the personal level and at the provincial 
level, is becoming a greater and greater problem. 
 
As we’ve noted in the past, that the government has been asked 
and was expected to put money towards treatment for addictive 
gamblers and to date the government has not lived up to that 
commitment in any sense. And so this is also a concern when 
there’s new agreements, new amendments coming forward, that 
these commitments by the government have not been met. And 
it’s a concern — the people of Saskatchewan are very 
concerned about what the intent of the government . . . The 
government continues to take its full share, put it towards 
general revenue. And of course, as we know, the government 
isn’t the greatest body to spend its money properly as well. 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

And as we see, the losses in — well up to $85 million losses 
now in Crown losses — in outside-of-the-province investments. 
One wonders that possibly some of these losses should not have 
been . . . Well no losses should have been contemplated and 
these investments should have been kept in the province and 
some of this money put towards gambling addicts and to try to 
help the everyday person in this province to help with and cope 
with their problems. 
 
As we have seen, Mr. Speaker, as the people of Saskatchewan 
and the Saskatchewan Party has stated many times, the 
Saskatchewan Party policy is to grow this province by 10,000 
people over the next 10 years for a total of 100,000 people. 
 
And the First Nations of this province is a vital part of that plan 
of the Saskatchewan Party. And we believe that the groundwork 
needs to be done properly at this stage of development for the 
First Nations concerning this Bill. And in future agreements and 
in future endeavours, that the First Nations of this province be 
an important part of the growth and development of this 
province. And liquor and gaming and casinos is a source of 
employment to First Nations and we must ensure that that 
continues for the benefit of everyday First Nations people and 
for the benefit of the province as a whole. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to . . . we will . . . the critic for the 
Saskatchewan Party will certainly do a lot of work on this. We 
will send this Bill out and ask the stakeholders what they think 
of it — the First Nations people. Also get a legal opinion on all 
the different amendments. And we will certainly have many 
questions later on and there’ll be many more speeches made by 
Sask Party members concerning these amendments. 
 
So at this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural Safety Net 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 
end of my remarks I will move second reading of the 
amendments to The Agricultural Safety Net Act. The 
amendments to the Act are needed so that Saskatchewan can 
meet the national parameters of the revised safety net 
stabilization account program, NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) under the agricultural policy framework, APF. 
 
(15:15) 
 
We believe that the APF is good for Saskatchewan for several 
reasons. Business risk management is one of the five founding 
pillars of the new APF. Federal funding under the policy will be 
used to finance two main national programs — the revised 
NISA program to both stabilization and disaster protection and 
a crop insurance program to provide protection against producer 
losses. Both of these programs have national parameters. 
 
The federal government has indicated that their goal is to treat 
farmers across the country in similar circumstances in the same 
manner. Obviously, we support that goal. Allocation of federal 
funding will be on a demand-driven basis. That means that the 
pool of federal money to producers will be based on 

participation and national programs and not based on the 
relative size of the agricultural industry in each province. This 
change should result in Saskatchewan receiving about 10 
million to 12 million more than our current allocation in our 
first year. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan could receive even more 
federal funding as a demand-driven policy is fully implemented. 
The federal government has allocated significant funding for the 
crop insurance program that will allow for enhancements to the 
program in Saskatchewan. Some of these enhancements were 
announced this year, such as the updated yield coverage and 
improved forage coverage levels and there . . . also the 
opportunity to make more improvements into the future years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, the amendments to the 
agricultural safety net will allow Saskatchewan to participate at 
the national risk business program under the APF. The new 
programs have the . . . The new programs have key changes 
over the former programs and they include these: they will 
provide both stabilization and disaster coverage within one 
integrated program; provide deeper coverage during the 
downturns in farm income; and provide similar levels of 
coverage regardless of farm size. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I wish to emphasize that we need to make 
the changes to the APF to meet the guidelines of the revised 
national program. We believe we have taken the first step into 
the future of the new agricultural policy framework. The APF 
and its coordination and collaborative approach will have a 
positive impact on the agricultural sector, on rural 
Saskatchewan, and on the provincial economy for years to 
come. 
 
Therefore I move the amendments to the agricultural safety net 
to be read a second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again it’s 
a pleasure to stand in the Assembly and speak to a piece of 
legislation that has been brought forward by the, in this case, by 
the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re aware of the fact that agriculture plays a 
vital role in the economic activity and the economy of this 
province. It has, while it’s . . . Over the past number of years 
it’s taken on a reduced role as we see other sectors of the 
economy start to rev up and become important players in our 
economy. It still, nonetheless, is a major contributor to the 
economy of this province, not only in dollars and cents but also 
in manpower hours. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that since 1992 and the 
elimination of the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
program, the agricultural community of this province has 
certainly been looking for some leadership and for some 
direction in arriving at a federally and provincially funded farm 
stabilization program. And I might also add, producers will be 
involved and they have been over the years. 
 
I think one of the misconceptions we have when it comes to 
agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan is that, here the 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

 

government goes again. It’s bailing out producers as a result of 
circumstances that were the producers’ control, like it didn’t 
rain. Well that’s the producers’ fault. Or there’s too much rain. 
Or it froze too early. Whatever the circumstances are, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s important for the taxpayers of the province to 
recognize the fact that the agriculture community through the 
years has been very involved in any of the safety nets through 
premiums. And while the premiums, there’s a balance between 
federal and provincial funding and agriculture . . . and the 
producers, it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we arrive at a safety 
net that will be fair to all. 
 
I think I can say, Mr. Speaker, certainly in my area we’ve seen 
the NISA program that was implemented a number of years 
ago, and it took the place of the western . . . another program of 
its nature where you had a check that, not really a check off, but 
you could, as you deliver a product to market, you could put 
money into this . . . into a stabilization account somewhat 
similar to NISA. And then when that was done away with, the 
NISA program came into place. And NISA, by and large, Mr. 
Speaker, has been an asset to a number of producers. 
 
Now the federal minister has argued over the past number of 
years that, well the problem with NISA is there’s too much 
money sitting in the account. The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker 
— and I’m not sure whether the minister has pointed this out; I 
would be surprised if the minister hasn’t taken the time to point 
out to the federal minister — while there may be money in the 
NISA accounts, if you take a look at who holds those accounts, 
most of the money in those NISA accounts where the accounts 
haven’t really been drawn on are basically farmers close to and 
into retirement who were able in some of their last few years, 
and had excellent years, were able to contribute to NISA, 
however have, due to circumstances they didn’t have a lot of 
control over, really didn’t qualify for NISA. 
 
But for the producers that were in situations as a result of crop 
loss or income loss, certainly — and a lot of the new producers 
— those producers through the years have taken advantage of 
the NISA program and have used the NISA program for what it 
was meant to be and what it was intended for. 
 
And we have some major concerns with regards to changing the 
NISA program. Now if the minister is telling us that at the end 
of the day this is going to be a much better program, a fairer 
program, fine. We want to see exactly what this no agriculture 
policy framework is going to be, what the new safety net 
program is going to have for the agriculture producers of 
Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, as I 
indicated, agriculture does play an important role. 
 
And we’re looking to bring younger people into the agricultural 
field. And we look at the age of the farm community in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and unfortunately over the past 
number of years the average age of a farmer in Saskatchewan 
has risen dramatically. I believe it’s well into 40s or low 50s, 
the age of the agriculture producer in Saskatchewan. 
 
And if we’re going to, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to see our 
rural communities revitalized, if we’re going to see our 
agricultural community revitalized, Mr. Speaker, we need 

avenues whereby young people can look at agriculture as a 
place to invest. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have seen and are seeing today areas 
where younger families are looking at agriculture as a real 
opportunity, but not in the numbers that we’ve seen in the past 
and which is unfortunate. 
 
And so I think a lot of producers and a lot of young families, a 
lot of young men and women will certainly be looking at what 
we have coming down the pipe in the way of safety nets that 
they can be . . . participate in that will carry them through that 
difficult year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the current program, we look at 
the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) program, we look 
at the AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) 
program, and while I’ve talked to some producers who have 
said they’ve done very well as a result of those two programs, 
the majority of producers I’ve talked to haven’t even qualified. 
 
And one has to ask the question . . . And here again, Mr. 
Speaker, I think certainly our Department of Agriculture, the 
minister responsible, as the minister and his department 
officials are talking to federal officials and talking to other 
agricultural ministers across the province, as they’re looking at 
developing the farm safety net, I think what’s important, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we develop a safety net that cannot be farmed. 
 
And one of the biggest problems with CFIP, one of the biggest 
problems with AIDA, Mr. Speaker, if you learned how to farm 
the program, you did very well at it. And it many . . . But the 
producer who really endeavoured to make his or her farm go 
and survive on its own didn’t qualify for either CFIP or AIDA. 
And I think that’s important, Mr. Speaker, and that’s something 
that we’ll certainly want to quiz the minister on. 
 
If indeed this is going to be a truly fair and equal stabilization 
program for all producers — and as the minister I believe 
indicated, they’re looking at not only enhancing it but making it 
a program that will respond to the economic need rather than 
the ability of a producer to farm a program — then I think we’re 
probably going in the right direction. I think we will certainly 
all agree with that. And it’s imperative that we really work to 
establish a firm national stabilization program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister is right when he talks about a 
federal agricultural program that would be fair to Saskatchewan 
producers as well. Because we look at Canada, we look at the 
vastness of our country, we look at the types of agriculture that 
we have, and we look from the East Coast right through to the 
West Coast and there’s a vast difference in the way agriculture 
and farmers function across this country. 
 
From the . . . whether you call them from the fishery or from the 
Atlantic region, they have the fishery, they have vegetables, 
they . . . and they have fruits; and Ontario, you’ve got small 
market gardens as well; and the Prairies is noted for its wheat 
production, its large acreage farming operations. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s no doubt it takes time and it’ll be a while to come up 
with a fair and national safety net program. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that in many ways this 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

government has been dragging its feet in being at the table. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the current minister had no control 
over it but we all know back in the mid-’80s where one of the 
. . . an Agriculture minister was not at the table when he should 
have been, and as a result, Saskatchewan producers are paying 
for his lack of being at the table to argue on behalf of 
Saskatchewan producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, the minister talked about increased 
protection under the crop insurance program. And I think as 
agriculture producers were going through their crop insurance 
information this year, the increased protection is certainly 
something that was welcome, was looked forward to. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, one of the big concerns regarding crop 
insurance was the substantial increase in the crop insurance 
premiums. And I think in the long run we’re better off to, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re better off to design a program and have a 
premium that is fair and reasonable and maintain that premium 
to the point where, if an insurance program reaches a certain 
level of protection and there’s a fund available, you may reduce 
the premium somewhat. But you want to maintain that fund so 
that the crop insurance program doesn’t find itself, as it is this 
year, really behind the eight ball because of the draw as a result 
of drought across the vast region of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that need to be 
raised in regards to this piece of legislation. We need to 
certainly question the minister and the department regarding 
how the stabilization program will work, what it’s going to cost 
producers, what it will cost the province to be part of the 
stabilization program, whether or not the program will really 
address the disastrous needs that arise every once in awhile, and 
whether it will indeed provide the coverage that producers over 
the years have found they’ve needed during downturns. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, regardless of your farm size you will have 
the same equal level of support. And I think that’s important, 
Mr. Speaker. I think over the past few years many producers 
have looked on the fact that if they added acreage, they would 
have better coverage under the safety net programs that 
currently are available. And I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
message we necessarily want to send. 
 
We’re not saying that you shouldn’t be able to expand, but if a 
person chooses to be a smaller . . . farm on a smaller scale, they 
should have the same level, equal level, of protection regardless 
of their farm size. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having listened to the minister and having 
listened to the debate that’s been taking place and we’ve 
listened to agricultural groups and everyone has a different 
sense of where the province should be going, what direction we 
should be taking when it comes to farm safety nets, I think, Mr. 
Speaker, this piece of legislation is something that we want to 
look to in more depth, in greater depth before we get to 
Committee of the Whole and debating it. And therefore at this 
time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:30) 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 
of amendments to The Crop Insurance Act. 
 
On March 11, 2003 the province of Saskatchewan signed an 
agreement with the Government of Canada to participate in the 
agricultural program under the agricultural policy framework. 
Saskatchewan is committed to moving the agricultural sector 
forward on the five key pillars of the APF. Saskatchewan crop 
insurance falls under the APF’s business risk management 
chapter. 
 
The federal and provincial government are in the process of 
restructuring business risk management programs. There is a 
need to ensure crop insurance . . . that The Crop Insurance Act 
provides for the type of crop insurance programs being 
developed under the APF, as well as ensuring it provides a 
scope of future enhancements. 
 
The amendments proposed will provide for the use of new 
technology such as satellite imagery technology that can be 
used to measure yields. Other proposed amendments to The 
Crop Insurance Act include these: authority for the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation to levy 
administrative fees. We do not intend to implement 
administrative fees at this time but because provinces use the 
option within the 60/40 government/producer cost-share 
formula . . . In other words, producers pay an administrative fee 
which offsets their share premiums. If at some point in the 
future Saskatchewan farmers recommend this option, we want 
our legislation to be able to enable that to happen. 
 
Another amendment would allow the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation to enter into contracts with other 
organizations to administer the program in areas related to crop 
insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, producer groups and the Farm Support Review 
Committee have been consulted with respect to the future 
direction of crop insurance and business risk management 
programs under the APF. On their direction we made 
improvements to crop insurance for 2003. We have committed 
to working with the industry to make future improvements and 
we are working together with their neighbours, Manitoba and 
Alberta, to look at innovations to provide better products to 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes will ensure that The Crop Insurance 
Act provide the basis for crop insurance program we need in the 
21st century. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move amendment to The Crop . . . I 
move that amendments to The Crop Insurance Act be read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m . . . pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 37, An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act. 
 
The crop insurance of course is a very valuable tool to the 
producers of this province. In the past, and as we know in the 
last couple of years and particular last year, that there was an 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

 

increase in the enrolment in crop insurance because of the 
severe drought situation, and it has some failings but the crop 
insurance has certainly been a support to producers in many 
years. Of course always, premiums concerning crop insurance 
are always an issue. 
 
The minister speaks about the APF and, as is noted, the 
government has committed to the APF. There’s been a lot of 
discussion and concern about going to the next stage and 
whether the province should sign on to the next stage of 
implementation with the APF immediately, as the federal 
government and other governments want and have done. 
 
I believe the producers of this province and certainly the 
Saskatchewan Party has been saying that there should be a 
year’s delay in joining up for the implementation phase because 
of so many uncertainties and questions that remain in the APF. 
 
The minister of course speaks to some amendments concerning 
the use of new technologies, satellite imagery technology that 
can be used to measure fields. This is an important feature 
nowadays in crop insurance and in measuring fields and for 
claim positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other areas. The minister talked about allowing 
crop insurance to enter into contracts with other organizations 
to administer programs in areas related to crop insurance. I 
guess there’s a question there. Is the minister referring to 
co-insurance and offsetting some of the risk and liability to the 
province and to the plan by getting co-insurance from other 
insurance companies? And questions around who that could be 
— would that include private insurance companies or would it 
include other jurisdictions? So there’s many questions 
concerning that. 
 
I think it’s important that Saskatchewan work with its two 
neighbours, Manitoba and Alberta. Working within the crop 
insurance could be many benefits from exchanging information 
and possibly working together towards a larger plan in the crop 
insurance if that’s feasible in the future. 
 
Of course there’s an area which allows fees to be charged to 
producers, and as I mentioned earlier, the cost of the crop 
insurance is always a factor. And as we see, the government 
raised the crop insurance premiums this year by 52 per cent on 
the average. And that’s only on the average. I’ve seen some 
individual crops be raised 70, 80 per cent. So that’s quite a hike. 
 
There’s no guarantee that we’re going to have a good crop to 
offset these large expenditures in crop insurance, and that’s 
always a concern to the producer. And that’s one of the reason a 
number of producers have backed away from crop insurance in 
the past because of the . . . because of the cost of the program to 
their individual businesses and farms. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe, when we talk about the APF and 
crop insurance and changes, I believe the stakeholders in this 
province have said they should wait one year before 
implementing the next stage. And as we see, the government is 
just in the process of bringing in amendments and some 
changes to crop insurance and the previous Bill. 
 
So I think that might be a wise decision to make on the 

government to sit back and get this, get it right because it’s very 
important for the future of Saskatchewan agriculture and the 
grain producers of this province to get this Act and this APF 
plan in place and get it done right. 
 
Our critic for Agriculture, the member from Watrous will be 
asking the stakeholders and discussing this Act in more depth, 
and we certainly will ask many questions in Committee of the 
Whole. So at this time I would like to adjourn debate . . . move 
to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 
of amendments to The Farm Financial Stability Act. The 
amendments make these sets of changes. 
 
First, an existing section of the Act is being changed to allow 
feedlots to participate under the enhanced feeder option. The 
enhanced feeder option allows a feedlot along with a group of 
individual members to form an association. 
 
This association gives both the feedlot member and the 
individual member the ability to borrow money and purchase 
feeder cattle. The association members will typically be able to 
finance their purchases at preferential rates at the strength of the 
25 per cent government guarantee provided to the participating 
lender. The key benefits of this new option is the availability of 
feedlot members to increase its borrowing limit. 
 
The second amendment to existing sections will facilitate 
administration of the program by allowing the association to 
brand program cattle, enhanced warrant provisions by clarifying 
that any provincial supervisor is included in an application for a 
warrant and allowing more than one provincial supervisor to be 
included on the warrant, and it also provides access to records 
of any operator that has been approved as a custom operator of 
the program to be available for inspection. And finally, it 
clarifies exemptions to The Personal Property Security Act. 
 
Thirdly, a new section is being added to provide for the 
development of new individual feeder option. This program 
option will allow individual feedlot loan guarantees for the 
purchaser of feeder cattle without the requirement to form an 
association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are the direct result of a series 
of consultations with key stakeholders who worked with the 
government to improve the strength of The Farm Financial 
Stability Act. These stakeholders provided their expertise and 
thoughtful advice. They spoke, we listened, and today we act 
with the introduction of the amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consultations were conducted with representatives 
from a variety of the agricultural lenders. Producers’ Advisory 
Committee to the Livestock Loan Guarantee Program were 
consulted with, the Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association, 
and the feedlot working group that we’ve been working with. 
 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

We will continue our collaborations and consultations with 
these groups to develop regulatory regulations that will support 
the amendments. These regulations are the details . . . in detail 
are the nuts and bolts of how the amendments will be 
implemented in the real-life situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly will have an 
opportunity to debate and review the line-by-line amendments 
during committee. My purpose today is to provide an overview 
of the amendments to part IV of the new section and part IV.1 
or — sorry — VI.1. 
 
The amendments of part VI.1 are administrative. They are 
identified to clarify authority of the officials from my 
department by carrying out their duties in administering the 
livestock loan guarantee program under the Act. 
 
In addition the changes conform, by exemption from The 
Personal Property Security Act, 1993, do in fact apply to the 
transition in place from the time exemptions become effective. 
 
Access will be provided through records of feedlots and 
participating in the program to confirm management of 
financial liability. And the last key change in this section will 
allow a producer association to brand cattle and to apply offsets 
between options in order to recover shortfalls from a member. 
 
The new part of the Act will expand the program to allow 
feedlots direct access to the livestock loan guarantee program as 
individual entitles. These new parts are required to allow 
feedlots to obtain a loan guarantee without having to join the 
association that pools resources, assurance fund deposits to 
purchase cattle. Individual loan guarantees will be provided. 
 
We believe that the efforts of these changes will be to facilitate 
continued expansion of the Saskatchewan feeding sector. 
 
Under this new option, loan guarantees will be provided to 
lenders on loans made directly to feedlots for the purchase of 
feeder cattle. Guarantees to lenders will be at 25 per cent of 
loans outstanding at the time of the loss. 
 
And finally, the new part will allow the creation of pooled 
assurance funds containing contributions by all participants in 
the feedlot, as well as an individual assurance fund for each 
participant. Increased assurance fund deposits will be required 
from the operator and monitoring of operations and financial 
status of the feedlot will be carried out to a limited risk . . . to 
limit the risk of the guarantee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that these changes will have a positive 
impact on the livestock sector in rural Saskatchewan and on the 
provincial economy for years to come, and assist us in growing 
the livestock industry in Saskatchewan into the future. 
 
Therefore I move that amendments to The Farm Financial 
Stability Act be read a second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this piece 
of legislation that the Minister of Agriculture has brought 
forward, I think certainly has some positive changes to the 
legislation, especially when it comes to feedlot . . . feeder cattle 
and feedlot operations in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, over the past number of years and in the 
constituency of Moosomin and certainly along the eastern side 
of the province, we’ve seen a real expansion of feedlot 
operations. We’ve seen many producers moving into the area. 
 
And those producers, Mr. Speaker, are coming into the area and 
turning what some producers thought was good grain 
production land back into livestock production as they’ve 
realized the benefits of some of this marginal land that was put 
into . . . under cultivation a number of years ago as being 
actually parcels of land that contributed much greater to 
livestock development and enhancement. 
 
And as a result, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve seen producers moving 
back into the livestock sector, we have certainly as well 
experienced co-op . . . feeder co-operatives in our constituency, 
and what it has meant for many producers, agriculture and 
non-agricultural individuals, who have invested in these feeder 
feedlot operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently we have a feedlot operation just in 
working . . . In fact, it just opened south of Grenfell this past 
spring, and a feedlot that I believe today has roughly the 
capacity for some 6,500 head. And I understand they’re moving 
ahead with an expansion that will raise the level of livestock in 
that feedlot by another 1,500 head to 8,000 head, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, I’m sure the investors in that cattle feeder program will 
be looking at this legislation. They’ll be looking at the changes 
that have been made. And they will be determining whether or 
not the changes are adequate enough to protect them and to 
protect their investment in the livestock sector, and certainly in 
this feeder operation that they’ve all become members of. 
 
(15:45) 
 
I say that, Mr. Speaker, because as well in our area, certainly up 
in that Moosomin-Rocanville area, there was a cattle feeder 
operation a number of years ago — actually not that long ago 
— that ran into a major problem. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest problems and one of the 
biggest hurts that came about as a result of that feeder operation 
was that there were a number of producers who invested and 
became members of the co-operative. Unfortunately, when the 
co-operative started to experience problems and losses and 
declared bankruptcy, the lending institutions, Mr. Speaker, went 
back after the individual producers and their own individual 
livestock herds, even though they weren’t tied to this feeder 
operation. 
 
And I think that, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, the fact that one of 
the amendments is going to facilitate the administration of the 
program by allowing the association to brand program cattle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this program would have been in place, in order 
to . . . If the association would have been allowed to or if the 
association would have branded the cattle, and specifically 
branded the cattle based on the investor and their investment in 
those livestock, I think it would have protected a lot of 
individual producers from the lending institutions then coming 
back at them for their own personal livestock herds, which at 
the end of the day resulted in not only a loss in their investment 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

 

in that feeder operation but it also meant that it cost them in 
their own personal operation, as the lending institutions went 
after them to recover the losses that resulted as a result of the 
feeder operation facing difficult times. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister has talked about, the 
government has talked about, my colleague caucus members 
have talked about as well, that a livestock investment in the 
province is one of the areas that we will see a major change in 
and this province is going to have to move in the direction of, in 
order to see an enhanced economic growth in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and certainly in the agricultural sector. 
 
And I believe what we will see, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve seen in 
the number of hog operations that have sprung up across the 
province of Saskatchewan, we see many situations where 
individuals have become shareholders in hog operations. We’re 
going to see more feeder cattle operations where businessmen 
and women, where in farm families or individuals are going to 
become members of feeder operations. 
 
And each and every one of these individuals are going to look 
at that particular operation that they become a member of, they 
are going to take a look at the viability of that operation, 
whether or not that feeder feedlot option is something that is 
worthy of their investment in, and whether or not it’s an 
investment that in, over the long term . . . Well it’ll take some 
time, Mr. Speaker, and we’re all aware of that. Whenever you 
invest in something it takes a period of time for your investment 
to begin to return dividends and rewards on your investment. 
 
And so I think it’s important and we believe it’s important that 
we have safety features in place that will ensure that these 
feeder operations indeed will meet the expectations of the 
investors and will give people the confidence to invest, not only 
in a local enterprise but also to begin to invest in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
For you see, Mr. Speaker, when individuals invest in feeder 
operations across the province, it’s not just investing in a local 
economic and job-creating investment or enterprise in their 
community, but it’s an investment in our province as well, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s an investment in the youth of our province and the 
job opportunities for young people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I look at this piece of legislation, I look at a 
number of the amendments that the minister is suggesting that 
we need to look at, we need to come forward with. I look at the 
number of groups that the minister is telling us that he and his 
colleagues and the Department of Agriculture have had 
discussions with, in coming forward with these amendments to 
this piece of legislation. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, what we see here is we certainly see that a 
number of people have shown a great deal of interest. We’ve 
seen individuals show interest in enhancing livestock 
investment opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But we also see, Mr. Speaker, that individuals themselves have 
been willing to come forward and, where there’ve been 
mistakes made in the past, bring forward these suggestions as to 
how we can better serve the agriculture community and the 

livestock sector and the feeder operations in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that there will be a number of questions 
that will arise as we enter into further debate on this piece of 
legislation. However I believe at this time, in order to facilitate 
greater discussion, and discussion with the concerned groups 
and individuals, that it would be appropriate for us at this time 
to adjourn this piece of legislation. 
 
So at this time I move that we adjourn the debate on The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2003. Mr. Speaker, this Act governs the 
creation and administration of condominium developments and 
condominium corporations, of which there are hundreds if not 
thousands in the province. 
 
The Act establishes the rights and responsibilities of developers, 
condominium owners, and condominium boards, and attempts 
to balance different and sometimes competing interests. 
 
Since the Act is used on a daily basis by non-professional 
condominium owners and boards, the provisions of the Act 
must respond to their concerns and provide clear guidance. The 
Act is amended every few years to address the issues raised by 
persons living in and managing condominiums, of which as I 
said, Mr. Speaker, there are thousands and thousands in our 
province. 
 
The Condominium Property Act, 1993 currently provides that 
the entire condominium complex constitutes one parcel for the 
purposes of property tax assessment. Each owner’s individual 
share of the property taxes is then determined by that owner’s 
unit factor. 
 
Unit factors are established by the developer at the time the 
condominium is registered at the land titles office and are 
usually based on the size of each unit relative to every other 
unit. Generally speaking, unit factors govern an owner’s share 
of the votes in the condominium, an owner’s share of the 
common expenses for maintenance, an owner’s share of 
insurance premiums, and the owner’s share of property taxes to 
be paid. 
 
And I think you can see, Mr. Speaker, that the unit factor 
probably makes sense in terms of determining the number of 
votes, the share of common expenses, and the like, but it does 
not necessarily make sense with respect to the share of property 
taxes to be paid. Because in other areas we determine property 
taxes on the basis of market value. 
 
So although the method of apportionment on the basis of unit 
factor is equitable and fair for most condominium owners, it is 
not always fair. For certain types of developments and some 
condominium owners, it is inequitable. And the proposed 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

amendment incorporates a more equitable assessment approach 
by providing for assessment based on the value of each unit, 
which is what we do for others as well, other homeowners. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the provision in the current Act providing 
that only the corporation can appeal the taxes, is removed. The 
general rule in assessment legislation is that a person with an 
interest may appeal property tax respecting a parcel. In the case 
of a condominium unit, an owner, similarly to any other 
residential property owner, would have an interest and may 
appeal. If all the owners wish to appeal, the corporation could 
act as an agent on behalf of the owners. No specific legislative 
changes are required for this to occur, but an amendment will 
clarify the matter. 
 
An amendment will also clarify the insurance provisions for 
condominium corporations regarding the corporation’s duty to 
ensure insurance deductibles and annual reporting requirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, insurers and condominium experts have requested 
that the insurance provisions be reviewed to add clarity. The 
current provisions give rise to a lack of consistency in insurance 
coverage. Attempts by condominium boards to apply the 
provisions in a way that maintains premiums and claims at a 
lower level may be resulting in underinsurance by corporations 
and condominium owners so that some corporations and 
individual owners risk financial losses in the future. 
 
The current provisions also do not address the issue of 
insurance deductibles or who must pay the deductible in the 
event of loss or damage. A provision is added to allow the 
insurance deductible to be charged back to unit owners in 
particular circumstances. 
 
Although the Act currently requires condominium corporations 
to have adequate reserve funds for major repairs to and 
replacements of common facilities, many condominium 
corporations have totally inadequate funds. A provision is 
added requiring condominium corporations to have a reserve 
fund study done on a periodic basis. Regulations will prescribe 
the specifics respecting time periods between studies, persons 
who may do the studies, and the information the studies must 
include. 
 
The regulations may provide for certain types of condominiums 
that will not be required to do reserve fund studies. Some 
exemptions may be, for example, non-residential 
condominiums, bare land condominiums — these are 
condominiums where the only common property is an access 
road — and apartments converted to condominiums where none 
of the units are being sold. 
 
Other amendments address the difficult problems condominium 
corporations face when one or more owners do not pay their 
share of the common expenses. The corporation is obliged by 
the Act to maintain and insure the common property and 
common facilities, so if some owners do not pay their share 
other owners subsidize them. 
 
Currently the corporation can place a lien against the owner’s 
title, which assists in collecting the outstanding expenses. An 
amendment gives priority to a condominium corporation’s lien 
where the corporation has notified holders of other interests on 

the owner’s title, such as a mortgage company, of the 
condominium corporation’s lien. 
 
The Act will also provide that a mortgage lender with a 
mortgage on an owner’s unit can pay condominium fee arrears 
and add this amount to the mortgage. To ensure that 
condominium corporations do not unduly penalize the owner 
with fees in arrears, a provision is added to provide that the 
regulations can prescribe the maximum interest rate on overdue 
payments. 
 
Another amendment, Mr. Speaker, provides that a 
condominium corporation may have bylaws respecting an 
owner’s right to vote where his or her condominium fees are in 
arrears. Where the condominium corporation has not passed 
bylaws dealing with this matter, the Act includes provisions 
restricting an owner’s right to vote when condominium fees are 
in arrears. In other words the general rule will be, if you haven’t 
paid your dues you can’t vote unless the condominium 
corporation self-decides that you should still have the right to 
vote. 
 
Condominium corporations typically use the name the 
developer gave to the project as their official name. The Act 
provides that the legal name of a corporation is, quote, “The 
Owners: Condominium Corporation” plus a nine-digit number 
assigned by the corporations branch. So for example, usually, 
The Owners: Condominium Corporation No. 123456789, for 
example. 
 
There have been numerous requests over the years to allow 
condominium corporations to use the name that they call their 
complex as their legal name. The condominium corporation’s 
registry has been created by the corporations branch. The 
existence of this registry provides a process to allow a 
condominium corporation to change its legal name from the 
number to the actual common name that is used in everyday life 
by the owners. In most cases this will be the name the 
corporation commonly uses. 
 
(16:00) 
 
There are a number of amendments in the Act to improve 
consumer protection, clarify procedures for amending the 
condominium plan and titles, and facilitate administration of 
condominium corporations. 
 
An amendment responds to problems sometimes encountered 
by condominium corporations because the Act does not have 
rules respecting proxy voting by owners. The Act will provide 
guidance to the corporations and to condominium owners 
respecting the form and effectiveness of a proxy. 
 
The Act allows regulations to be made requiring the approval of 
other owners in a condominium complex where one owner is 
planning to redivide his or her unit. 
 
The proposed amendments are expected to result in more 
financially stable condominium corporations and fewer disputes 
with these corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments were developed with assistance 
and co-operation from a large group of consultees respecting 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

 

individuals and organizations with an interest in condominiums. 
Consultations have occurred with representatives from the 
Canadian Condominium Institute, individual condominium 
owners, property managers, the insurance industry, municipal 
assessors, the Saskatchewan Home Builders’ Association, the 
mortgage lenders’ association, and lawyers with expertise in 
condominium law. 
 
These amendments represent a significant consensus in the 
approach to address concerns raised by condominium owners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, living in condominiums is becoming more and 
more common in our province. We are working with people 
that reside in condominiums to make the Act more workable 
and sensible for them. 
 
And I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to amend 
The Condominium Property Act, 1993. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before I 
speak to this piece of legislation, I’d like to ask leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to the members of this Legislative Assembly an 
individual who really isn’t . . . that most members are quite 
familiar with and have had the opportunity of working with. 
 
Well one of the members says, not most members, but I think 
most members would recognize the former member from 
Weyburn who served in many cabinet positions and . . . namely 
Education and Finance. 
 
And I’d like the members, as we’ve already heard already from 
across the floor some of the comments, remembrances of this 
member, I’d like to introduce to the Assembly — reintroduce to 
the Assembly — Mr. Lorne Hepworth who served in this . . . so 
ably in this Assembly. I’d like to invite members to welcome 
Mr. Hepworth back to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2003 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Toth: — We talk about condominiums and the use of 
condominiums and, Mr. Speaker, the minister has already 
indicated that we are beginning to see more and more 
condominium properties being developed across the province of 
Saskatchewan, most notably in our large urban centres, as more 
and more people reach the age of retirement. 
 
We see, Mr. Speaker, many individuals who are actually fairly 
young as they hit the retirement years and maybe not 

necessarily always that young, but are probably a lot healthier 
than they have been in the past. And many people are looking at 
ways in which they can live in properties in the province of 
Saskatchewan and yet look at retiring and doing some 
travelling, whether it be worldwide or across certainly to the 
southern parts of the southern states or indeed to properties in 
say, Mexico and South America in their retirement years. 
 
And as they do this, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing it and they 
don’t like, they really don’t want the hassle of a private 
property that they have to ask someone to be looking after. So 
they look at properties like condominium properties which are 
very well looked after, are very comfortable to live in, Mr. 
Speaker, and it gives these retirees the ability to go away for a 
period of time, knowing that their individual property is being 
well looked after. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know some of my colleagues have looked 
at condominium properties. And needless to say that my 
colleague, the critic for Finance, has also . . . I think one of the 
questions he will be asking of the minister is, is the protections 
that are there. And I’m not exactly sure if this piece of 
legislation identifies some of those needs. 
 
But I do notice that one of the areas that certainly is being 
spoken about is the level of taxation on property and 
condominium properties. I believe the minister is right when he 
speaks about the fact that there are different levels of 
condominiums, the size of the condominium you buy. 
 
And if the property that you purchase happens to be 
considerably larger than your neighbour’s condominium unit, to 
be taxed at the same level, I think we can hear and understand 
why some people may say, well that’s not necessarily fair, my 
property is maybe 1,000 square feet whereas my neighbour’s 
property happens to be 1,700 square feet. And it would only 
seem legitimate that while you pay more for the unit, that it’s a 
larger unit, therefore you would assume that you would have a 
larger tax burden versus the person with the smaller property. 
 
What I’m seeing in this piece of legislation to date, Mr. 
Speaker, is the amendments are addressing some of the 
inequities in the current Act. Certainly the areas when it comes 
to insurance, we see some changes that will bring about some 
equities in regards to The Condominium Property Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had an opportunity to go in-depth 
and to review the Act in-depth to have a total knowledge of a 
number of the changes that the minister is talking about. I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, there are issues here that we need to look 
at very closely, take a little more in-depth look at, review of 
The Condominium Property Act, 2003. 
 
And therefore, having just made a few short comments, I look 
forward to addressing at greater length some of the other issues 
in regards to this Act, but at this time I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

Northern Affairs 
Vote 75 

 
Subvote (NA01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
To my immediate right is Alan Parkinson, deputy minister. And 
right directly behind Mr. Parkinson is Cheryl Stecyk, the 
business manager for Northern Affairs. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, it 
certainly is a pleasure and as I hear from the House this 
afternoon, Mr. Chair, it’s a pleasure on everybody’s behalf that 
I’m here this afternoon to spend a few moments with the 
minister and his officials. Welcome, Mr. Minister, and welcome 
this afternoon to your officials. It’s a pleasure to be able to 
continue on where we left off about a month ago, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to review some of the areas that were 
covered last time. There was some incomplete answers. You 
were unable to provide answers at that time because you 
weren’t sure at that time and wanted to be able to have some 
time to be able to review them. And I think what we’ll start 
with, with the easy one to begin with, Mr. Minister, in the area 
of municipal housing for . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. As interesting . . . Order. As 
interesting as the conversations are, the item before the 
committee are the consideration of estimates for the Department 
of Northern Affairs. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. Well, Mr. Minister, it’s certainly creating a lot of 
enthusiasm in the Chamber this afternoon, the Northern Affairs 
estimates, and so we’ll try to keep that enthusiasm up. 
 
I want to, Mr. Minister, go back to the area of municipal 
housing, and certainly in the specific area for northern . . . in the 
northern part of the province, in the northern administrative 
district. And, Mr. Minister, you didn’t know at the last time 
what effects the reduction in the budget for municipal housing 
was going to have in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m wondering if you’d be able to provide for us to date, 
Mr. Minister, has the Department of Northern Affairs been 
informed by the Minister for community relations — I believe 
it’s called now, Mr. Minister — as to the effect of the reduction 
in spending for low-cost and affordable housing in this province 
and what effect that’s going to have on northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. And welcome back. I just wanted to welcome the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers back to the Assembly. It’s 
nice seeing a familiar face in the Northern Affairs critic area. 
 
But in reference to the Community Resources and Employment 
department, when it comes to housing in general I would refer 
all issues of housing to the appropriate minister — you know, 
the minister from Moose Jaw Wakamow . . . or Moose Jaw 
North, sorry. Of course he is the minister and certainly he puts 

the North in many of the things that he’s doing. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And I can point out that some of the programs that we’ve 
enjoyed seeing in the North and continue to see is the remote 
housing program. I think we’ve had well over 100 houses built 
in northern Saskatchewan. And that is certainly something that I 
think that the people of the North continue to appreciate and 
support. 
 
And for example, one of the communities that has taken full 
advantage of the remote housing program — as the member 
may or may not know and probably doesn’t know — has been 
the community of Buffalo Narrows, where we’ve seen a great 
number of families that have taken advantage of the remote 
housing program, and where this program really allows them to 
establish home ownership. And the home ownership aspect of 
course promotes pride and independence, and being able to do 
your own thing. And that’s exactly what we envision here on 
this side of the House. 
 
And Northern Affairs certainly supports that as well because 
throughout our many travels people have told us certainly 
there’s social housing needs which the government has met. 
There’s always the demand for that because there’s a lot of 
young families and people. Of course, the northern 
Saskatchewan communities are growing so the social housing 
aspect is very important, that we continue building on that 
particular stock, so to speak. But as well there also has to be 
families that are working. They’re looking forward to owning 
their own homes. 
 
So there’s a wide variety of processes that we undertake, 
everything from, you know, from the remote housing program, 
to the home adaptations for seniors, to social housing.  
 
We look at a number of other aspects such as the mortgage 
reduction program where people are finally getting recognized 
for some of the challenges of providing housing in the North. 
Now as well, we have the centenary affordable housing 
program, which is a $6 million program. And again those are 
just a brief sketch of what we’re trying to do in . . . when it 
comes to housing in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And again, as Minister for Northern Affairs, we have this very 
good working relationship with the minister responsible for 
housing, and he would be able to give you a more in-depth 
answer as to the wide variety of programs we have right across 
the North. 
 
I think the premise, and I can quote the minister on this one, 
when him and I had discussions and I asked him as the minister 
responsible for housing, as Northern Affairs minister, I’d like to 
know what your position is when it comes to the housing stock 
of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And the minister in his exact words said this, and he said, he 
said: 
 

I support 100 per cent the people of northern Saskatchewan 
having home ownership and will exhaust every avenue to 
make sure that happens. 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

 

And those were his words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Chairman, certainly I want to point out to 
the member opposite that this is some of the things that are 
going to . . . is going to happen, and I make reference again to 
the remote housing program. It’s a fantastic program. People 
have been asked to continue on the program, and by golly, 
we’re going to continue on with the program. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, I’ll first ask this question. On April 14 I had made the, 
I guess, false assumption that you would have maybe talked 
with the minister in between and maybe with his department 
and tried to glean from him just where the municipal housing 
portfolio was at in regards to northern Saskatchewan. After all, 
we have been led to believe on this side of the House, Mr. 
Minister, that Northern Affairs acts as a liaison between 
northern Saskatchewan and the provincial government. 
 
And yet, we find out today that you still have no answer as to 
what effect, from a Northern Affairs perspective, this reduction 
in municipal housing is going to have on northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think now that we’re done with that one, I 
want to move on to a specific issue in the mining sector and if 
you’d be able to inform the House today, from a Northern 
Affairs perspective, Mr. Minister, what you know or what your 
department knows about the issues surrounding the flooding of 
the mine in northern Saskatchewan, the uranium mine in 
northern Saskatchewan. And would you be able to indicate to 
the House what state of success the mining company is having 
at clearing the water out of the mine and how soon your 
department . . . Has your department, Mr. Minister, been 
informed as to how soon this mine might be starting up again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
What I want to point out is the . . . As we explained and the 
member very well knows that in the event that we do have 
questions in reference to housing or questions on highways or 
questions to health care, that the appropriate minister will of 
course be answering questions in this Assembly. 
 
As Minister of Northern Affairs, we do liaison with the various 
departments and explain to them what our strategy when it 
comes to northern Saskatchewan is. And we certainly have and 
will continue to press home . . . forward the whole notion that 
Northern Affairs and northern Saskatchewan people are very 
important. 
 
So I guess my point being is that if you have questions specific 
for Sask Housing then I’d ask you to refer the appropriate 
questions to the appropriate minister. That’s how the Assembly 
works. 
 
And secondly, in terms of the . . . when you say you’re under 
the false assumption that I’d have answers for you in reference 
to how the housing budget works, well as we all know in this 
Assembly, the member from Saskatchewan Rivers operates 
under false assumptions on many occasions in the Assembly 
and certainly I think on a few fronts you have been caught 
red-handed using the false assumption argument. 
 

And the other issue, in reference to the mine site, again I’ll 
point out that we are in constant communication with Cameco. I 
understand now that the amount of water coming into the mine 
shaft is a lot less than it originally started off with and they’re 
having success at draining the, draining the mine site. And all 
that information certainly is being forwarded to Environment to 
make sure there are no environmental concerns. 
 
We do monitor the surface rights agreement as Northern Affairs 
and we’re encouraging them to continue employing northerners 
and keeping northerners on staff. We understand there may be a 
six-month delay to restarting up the mill and the whole mine 
site, and we understand that there’s been better progress than 
anticipated. But still, while they’re optimistic that perhaps they 
can shorten that time frame, they’re still holding the six-month 
time frame as to when the mine might be starting up again. 
 
And again, we want to see the mining sector in northern 
Saskatchewan continue to grow and to continue to prosper and 
to continue hiring northerners because mining activity, as you 
know, in the province of Saskatchewan is certainly a very, very 
big employer and a very, very big industry. And we in Northern 
Affairs want to continue to support them. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess, you know, 
previous statements by previous ministers in this House . . . A 
previous minister has indicated to us that the Department of 
Northern Affairs was on top of issues in northern Saskatchewan 
and I’m glad you corrected that for us. For you know, we were 
certainly hoping that that would have been the case but, you 
know, certainly there are other departments that look after these 
issues. And so I think you’ve helped us fill in that void very 
adequately at this time and we certainly thank you for that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you raised an issue that I wanted to get to 
also, was the surface rights agreement that the Department of 
Northern Affairs negotiates on behalf of the province. I think 
everyone needs to clearly understand that mining companies in 
northern Saskatchewan have to deal with the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management, they have to deal with 
the Department of Industry and Resources, they have to deal 
with the Department of Northern Affairs, and certainly they 
have to also deal with a myriad of Crown corporations in order 
to be able to establish a mine in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talked about the land agreements that you 
negotiate on behalf of the province with the uranium companies 
for mining in northern Saskatchewan. Would you be able to 
indicate to the House today that, because of the complexities of 
trying to establish a uranium mine in northern Saskatchewan, 
the doubling up, Mr. Minister, of reviews of the uranium 
process in northern Saskatchewan, has there been any 
movement by your government through the Department of 
Northern Affairs to try to streamline the system, to have 
uranium mines come on stream at a quicker pace than we have 
in the past, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
One of the things I think is important is when we start talking 
about particular processes, is that the member very well knows 
is that in this day and age environmental rules and regulations 
are very important. And I’m hoping that member is not 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

suggesting that we lessen some of the environmental rules and 
regulations. 
 
And from our perspective we just want to make sure that we 
assure the public that industry and government are working 
very closely and working very co-operatively and ensuring that 
they do a number of things, whether it’s labour standards to 
protect workers’ health or whether it’s environmental standards 
to protect the environment, certainly moving the economy 
forward, the creation of jobs. All that is very important from our 
perspective in Northern Affairs when we talk about mining 
companies and their role to stimulate the economy in the North. 
 
Through the surface rights agreement we also are very careful 
in Northern Affairs to ensure one thing, and that’s totally 
contrary to what that member’s cousins done in the 1980s when 
they come along and they said, look, mining companies, as 
Tory government, as Saskatchewan Party, Sask-a-Tory 
government, we don’t believe that northerners should be 
positioned well when it comes to employment in some of these 
northern mines. That member knows that, that member knows 
that. That member knows that very, very clearly. 
 
When they say today, what are you doing to help the northern 
. . . Let me explain what they’ve done, Mr. Chairman. They 
come along and they say to us, in northern Saskatchewan, these 
surface lease agreements, we’re not going to guarantee 
employment for northerners. So bang, went down from 50 per 
cent down to 18, 19 per cent northerners working at these 
northern mines. 
 
And they all of a sudden said, oh contractors, we’re not going to 
work with you as well; we’re not going to work with the 
northern contractors. They lived there all their life but it doesn’t 
mean anything to us. Bang, went down to 18 or $19 million 
worth of northern contractors’ work in northern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why this morning when that member talks about 
credibility and arguing some credible facts, I say to the people 
of Saskatchewan that there’s a lot of things that flip-flop in this 
world from pancakes to eggs and to the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
But I’ll point out this, that as a result of some of the surface 
rights that we have negotiated, this administration and this 
government has negotiated, we have went from 18 to 19 per 
cent employment by northern Saskatchewan people in the 
1990s up to well over 50 per cent, Mr. Chairman. And not only 
that. When it comes to northern contractors, Mr. Chairman, we 
went from 18 or $19 million to well over $200 million in 
northern contractors. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker, why did we do that? Because we felt if 
they’re going to have activity in northern Saskatchewan’s 
backyard, then northerners should be positioned just as well, if 
not greater, than southerners when it comes to sharing the 
employment opportunity of some of the resources in their 
backyard. And isn’t that fair, Mr. Speaker? Isn’t that social and 
economic justice that we often talk about? That is the right 
thing to do. 
 
So when that member comes along and says, what are you 

doing to help out, what are you doing to streamline, well let me 
explain it to you. We continue to hold the core values that we 
have as a government and ensuring that we have good 
environmental protection, that we have northern participation, 
and that we continue stimulating the economy. And that takes a 
lot of work. That takes a lot of balancing and certainly takes a 
lot of commitment, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Right now we have an individual, Carol Rowlett, and Carol is in 
constant communication on behalf of Northern Affairs with the 
mining companies to talk about surface rights. 
 
And we’re also engaging with the environmental quality 
committees to make sure that they’re aware of some of the 
challenges that some of the mining companies face, and as well 
some of the opportunities that they may present to the North. 
 
The whole notion here, Mr. Chairman, is to make sure that we 
don’t put undue and repetitive processes in front of the mining 
companies. We want them to know that we’re creating an 
atmosphere for business to thrive and to exist, all the while 
making sure we have that balance. And that’s why we’re 
constantly engaged in some of these processes of we’re sitting 
down with the federal government and saying, can we in some 
way, shape, or form coordinate better approval processes — not 
diminish them nor lessen them, but make it more streamlined so 
that the mining company is able to come to one place and say, 
this is where I’m coming to get my approvals. And that the 
federal and provincial governments don’t have to have separate 
processes, thereby time-consuming processes, frustrating the 
mining companies. We want to work very closely with that. 
 
(16:30) 
 
But that member knows when it comes to organizations like the 
Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission that it doesn’t matter if 
we issue a licence; if they don’t have a licence from the federal 
regulator, then no uranium company can open up that particular 
mine. That member understands that, he knows that. 
 
So today I tell him — and he knows very well, Mr. Chairman, 
he knows very well — that we’re doing our very best to 
streamline those processes in Northern Affairs, all the while 
protecting the core values of working with the northern 
contractors, of employing northern people, of making sure that 
you watch the environment, and of making sure that they 
continue telling the mining companies that they’re welcome in 
northern Saskatchewan, their investment is very much needed 
in our province, and together we will build this province. 
 
And together, there’s no question in my mind that our future is 
wide open. If you’d quit the politics and stop putting these 
supposed theories up from the opposition . . . And people in the 
North say, when are these guys going to stop their whining and 
complaining and their complaining and their whining and their 
doom and gloom? 
 
And I sit there and I go, oh my goodness, when are you guys 
going to have a bit of optimism? Like people don’t want to see 
whiners and crybabies talking about the North; they want to see 
people that are optimistic, people that are aggressive, and 
people that believe in Saskatchewan. That’s the message of 
northern Saskatchewan people. 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

 

And I look across the way, and I look across the way, Mr. 
Chairman, and all I see is a big bunch of whiners and a bunch of 
crybaby flip-flops. And I say, shame on them. Have confidence 
in your province, have confidence in your people because at the 
end of the day, we don’t have that confidence, your credibility 
is shot. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, their credibility is — is 
shot. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: Mr. 
Minister, it . . . certainly we touched on a hot button here. I 
didn’t realize that Greg Ross from Pinehouse was creating so 
much problems for you up there, and obviously we’re on this 
side of the House, the members here are not going to apologize 
for that in any way, shape, or form. 
 
I think it’s clear to understand, Mr. Minister, that what is 
happening is that — and you illustrated this very clearly — is 
that the province can issue a permit for . . . make sure 
environmental concerns are within satisfactory parameters in 
regards to uranium mining, but it holds no water unless the 
federal government also approves the process. 
 
So what we’re trying to understand, Mr. Minister, on this side 
of the House, from the perspective of Northern Affairs when 
you talk about job creation in northern Saskatchewan, we see 
this as a roadblock, is that fewer people are going to get to the 
workplace because of the holdups that are being put in place by 
your government. 
 
And has your government looked at the regulatory review 
process for the opening up of new mines, so that once the 
federal government has approved it — because we know that 
they are ultimately responsible for the uranium industry in this 
country — is that, is the province looking at knowing and are 
comfortable with their review process for the establishment of 
uranium mines, Mr. Minister? So that we don’t have to go 
through . . . so that once the federal government goes through 
the regulatory review, that you also have to go through the 
exact same process all over again. 
 
Has your government looked at helping to reduce the steps and 
working in conjunction with the different departments that are 
involved so that we have kind of a one-stop shopping centre as 
you alluded to, but we know very well, Mr. Minister, it’s not in 
place in this government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Once again, I’ll advise that member that we are constantly 
engaged in making sure that we’re able to refine and to limit 
duplication of some of the review processes that are necessary. 
 
And some of those questions in reference to the environmental 
approvals are best handled under Saskatchewan Environment’s 
regulatory process, of course, which will come when the 
Saskatchewan Environment’s estimates are in place. And we’ll 
give you exact play-by-play, day-by-day scenario that we have 
drawn out for folks in Saskatchewan to understand what we’re 
doing as a government and as a province to work with the 
mining sector. 
 
As you mentioned before, we think that it’s incumbent upon us 

and the federal government to have a process that is refined and 
that meets the obligation of both provincial legislation and 
federal legislation when it comes to the . . . especially when it 
comes to the operation of some of the uranium mines in 
Saskatchewan. We think that certainly the people of 
Saskatchewan need to have extra assurance that the activity 
happening with the uranium mining industry is there from the 
environmental perspective, worker safety, etc., etc. We feel that 
all mines . . . gold mines, you know, whatever mines that are 
out there, you know that they certainly have to have an 
environmental component to them. 
 
But they needn’t have five or six different regulatory review 
processes by the federal government, by the provincial 
government, by other agencies, and so on and so forth. If we 
can find ways in which we can streamline those processes, we 
will undertake to find every possible way. 
 
And we can give you more detailed information through the 
Saskatchewan Environment’s estimates, at which point I would 
have access to all the officials that are working under EMPA, 
which is The Environmental Management and Protection Act. 
They would give us detailed information. 
 
Of course this is during Northern Affairs estimates and we are 
primarily concerned with the surface rights agreement that 
talked a lot about the EQCs’ (Environmental Quality 
Committees) role and the employment and so on and so forth. 
So we can certainly do that then if the minister so wishes. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, this 
whole series of questions certainly does lead around to the 
responsibilities of your Department of Northern Affairs and its 
role that it plays in the nuclear industry in this province. 
 
You talk very clearly, you’re leading the House to believe, Mr. 
Minister, that your department is playing a leading role in 
ensuring that northerners are going to be employed with the 
opening up of these new mines, that surface rights agreements 
are signed that ensure that the people of northern Saskatchewan 
are not left out of the process. 
 
So on the one hand you’re saying one thing and on the other 
hand your government’s doing another. 
 
If you’re working towards a process to increase employment in 
northern Saskatchewan, but what you do is that you put 
roadblocks in the way to delay employment for people of 
northern Saskatchewan, we’re not sure that, Mr. Minister, that 
you’re completely onside with your government on this issue, 
because your government has clearly stated that they are going 
to bog down the process as much as they can, to throw as many 
roadblocks up that will impede the development of uranium 
industry in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And so then maybe you might want to have a chat with the new 
Industry minister to find out just where all that is at and he’ll be 
able to inform you as to the process that’s going on inside your 
government. Because I think, Mr. Minister, the people of 
northern Saskatchewan clearly understand that the uranium 
industry is not being taken advantage of to the degree that it 
could, that the roadblocks that have been put in place by the 
people . . . by your government, Mr. Minister, is impeding the 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

opportunities for job creation in northern Saskatchewan — job 
creation for the people of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so I’m wondering if — the comments that you have made 
today — you can assure the Assembly today, Mr. Minister, that 
these comments are not only being said here in the House but 
are actually being said at the cabinet table. 
 
And that the cabinet table is actually starting to think that the 
minister from Northern Affairs is right — that the regulatory 
process is too expanded right now, that you can meet all the 
concerns that you’ve talked about, that jobs are going to be 
created in northern Saskatchewan, that people from northern 
Saskatchewan are going to be able to participate in that job 
creation, that the environmental concerns are going to be met to 
ensure that workers’ safety is also going to be met without the 
entire expanded review processes that mining companies have 
to go through now for expansion of the nuclear industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much. And I’d 
like to challenge the member on a couple of points. 
 
First of all, I would ask the member not to put words in my 
mouth because I didn’t say it was too expanded right now in 
terms of the regulatory process that mining companies have to 
go through. What I’ve said is that there is processes in place 
that look at a wide spectrum of things or a host of concerns that 
the mining company has to go through to ensure that we have a 
very thorough public process and public knowledge 
undertaking, so that people understand what is being proposed 
and what is being developed at a particular site. 
 
Now what I’ve said, for the member’s information, is that I said 
that we need to look and continually look and strive for a more 
refined system where we’re not having duplication of some of 
the processes that the federal government and the provincial 
government take. Now there are obviously a relationship that 
we have to continue building and we will continue building. 
 
And I’ll give you more details on the manner in which we 
refined those processes through the Saskatchewan 
Environment’s estimates where we’ll have access to the 
officials who can give us, quite frankly, very good knowledge 
on some of the activities happening right to the minute. So I 
wanted to correct that as well. 
 
And secondly, when you mentioned, you want to bog down 
development of the North or you want to put up roadblocks, 
where is your evidence of that when you mention that? You 
know, I questioned the member’s . . . his whole notion of his 
credibility when he makes statements of that nature. Like does 
anybody hold you accountable for saying those statements? 
 
So today when you say your government wants to bog down 
and put up roadblocks in northern development, where is your 
information? Like what is it exactly are you saying today? And 
that is the question I have of you. And I want to challenge you 
on that in terms of the credibility. Where is that we’re stating in 
this government that we want to do that? There is no evidence 
whatsoever of that. And I would ask the member today why he 
would continue making some of the statements that aren’t quite 
factually on target on many fronts. 
 

And that’s one of the areas where we as a government have not 
bogged down developing the North; where we as a government 
have not put up roadblocks. I continually say that because that’s 
a fact. 
 
And our Minister of Industry and Resources has done more to 
create jobs. We talk about the thousands of new jobs this year. 
Well that’s not bogging down, that’s stimulating. On this side 
of the House it’s called stimulation; perhaps on that side when 
we see great progress it’s called bogged down. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, I believe this government 
has done a tremendous job to work with the mining sectors. 
And people, especially the mining sector themselves, they say 
to us, environmental protection is very important. We take that 
role seriously as a province. Worker safety is very important is 
what the mining companies say. Well we agree and we concur. 
 
They say economic stimulation is also very important — 
absolutely. Diversification of our economy — absolutely. 
You’re talking about creating an environment for business 
that’s thriving to exist— absolutely. We believe in that as well. 
 
So we all have the same vision, the same goal for 
Saskatchewan. And about the only people that come along and 
say you’re trying to bog down the industry is you guys. Now 
where’d you get that information from? I’d really like to know 
where you got that information from. If you have a letter or if 
you have something in Hansard or if you have some process in 
place, just let us see it. And for once then I would guarantee 
you, I would accept some of your criticism. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, that member talks a lot about different 
scenarios over here. And I would ask him, if he has the courage 
to stand up and say some of these things, then he should have 
the conviction to provide some of that proof to us here in the 
Assembly that our government said some of these things. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, and 
certainly after the next provincial election there will be a few 
members left on the government side of the House that’ll be 
able to ask the next member from Athabasca, Greg Ross, all 
those questions and Greg will certainly be pleased to provide 
those answers. Because we know quite clearly that this 
government’s on its way out. 
 
And as much as they enjoy that they want to participate in 
estimates from the opposition side, Mr. Chair, we’ll certainly 
want to provide the NDP lots of opportunity to do that right 
after the next election. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is one more issue I’d like to get covered 
before the end of the day. Mr. Minister, there’s been a concern 
that’s been raised about fishing in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And we know that the Department of Northern Affairs, Mr. 
Minister, provides to northern fishermen a subsidy because your 
NDP government has decided in their wisdom to close down 
fish plants in Saskatchewan and have all fish processing done in 
Winnipeg. You’ve agreed to that. There’s certainly plenty of 
evidence that it’s not well supported, that notion, in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 



May 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you specifically about one area 
in northern Saskatchewan that has been brought to my attention, 
and that’s Lake Athabasca. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if 
you can inform the House today the amount of the quota for 
fish to be taken commercially on Lake Athabasca and roughly 
the percentage that your department is aware of, of the success 
for commercial fishing on Lake Athabasca. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
What I would point out first of all is — it’s very important for 
people in northern Saskatchewan; I think they understand this 
as well — is once again when his cousin, Grant Devine, was in 
power, they tried to do away with commercial fishing. 
 
And once again that member stands up in this Assembly and 
says to the people of Saskatchewan, this government tried to do 
away with commercial fishing. Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, 
we have not done away with commercial fishing. We have in 
fact enhanced commercial fishing. 
 
And some of the things we’re working on, Mr. Speaker, we 
spent over $1 million — $1 million — on trying to upgrade 
some of the fish plants throughout the North; we have not 
closed any fish plants in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And if he were to contact his candidate, Mr. Ross, and ask these 
questions before he comes into the Assembly, Mr. Ross I’m 
sure would concur with him that they have not shut down any 
fish plants. In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we are trying to do, what 
we are trying to do is we’re trying to protect lakes, we’re trying 
to protect quotas. We’re actually trying to bring a fish 
processing option, a plant from Winnipeg to Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is to enhance commercial fishing, Mr. Speaker; it’s not 
to do away with commercial fisherman. 
 
And everybody knows in northern Saskatchewan that the 
commercial fisherman industry is strong, it’s vital, it’s going to 
continue to grow, and it’s going to continue to match what the 
tourism fishing industry is doing, much like . . . much unlike the 
Grant Devine Tories when that member was proudly carrying 
the banners in the 1980s, when they tried to do away with 
commercial fisherman. 
 
And the commercial fisherman said to them, no way José. And 
guess what? Today the commercial fisherman and their industry 
is strong, it’s vital, and it’s building. And this government and 
Northern Affairs will continue to help. 
 
And for clarification purposes, Mr. Speaker — and that member 
talks about credibility — when he introduced his candidate here 
several weeks ago, he mentioned that Mr. Ross was the mayor 
of Pinehouse. And I got a news flash, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Ross 
has not been the mayor at Pinehouse for a number of years. The 
mayor of Pinehouse is Cecile Caisse. 
 
And I’m going to forward Hansard to Ms. Caisse and tell her 
here’s what these guys are doing to prop up their candidate at 
your expense. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is the mayor of Pinehouse is 

Cecile Caisse, and no, Northern Affairs is not doing away with 
commercial fishing, they’re not shutting down fish plants. Yes, 
Northern Affairs is going to build and help work with the 
mining sector. And again that flip-flopping member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers should get it right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m going to 
. . . I’ll have to repeat the question, I guess, to the minister. And, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, maybe what I’ll do is I’ll speak a little 
slower so that he doesn’t get confused by the question again. 
 
The question, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister was, how many 
pounds of fish are allotted for commercial fishing in Lake 
Athabasca each year and what percentage of that commercial 
catch is taken advantage of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Okay. I’ll try and write a letter to the 
minister in big, bold letters identifying the amount that we have 
identified for the commercial fishing, the commercial fishermen 
take. And I believe — and I could be corrected on this — it’s 
roughly 1 million pounds that we allow to harvest from Lake 
Athabasca for commercial fishing purposes. And I could be 
corrected on that, and I’ll forward to the member a nice, big, 
bold, printed letter indicating the exact amount that Lake 
Athabasca gets in terms of allocation for commercial fishing. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister, I think we’ll 
just wind this up and I’ll ask one question. And I’ll accept that 
he doesn’t know the answer to this, and of course as we found 
out this afternoon, the minister hasn’t known the answer to 
hardly any questions. So we’ll give the minister ample 
opportunity to come back in the future and be able to answer 
these questions because Northern Affairs is supposed to be the 
representative department for the people in the . . . that live in 
the northern administrative district, and so we want to give him 
ample opportunity to get caught up on what goes on in that area. 
So we’ll, in the future, we’ll give him an opportunity to be able 
to come back and to do that. 
 
And I want to thank the minister. At least he was honest about 
one thing, is that he didn’t know the answer to how many fish, 
the quantity of fish that come out of Lake Athabasca every year. 
And maybe at the same time he could find out for us, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, the percentage of that allotment that is taken out 
every year by the commercial fishermen on Lake Athabasca. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Chair, we also want to point out to the 
minister that according to the figures that we have had . . . And 
I want to give the minister an ample opportunity in the future to 
be able to respond when he comes back up again in estimates, 
the subsidy that the governments — provincial government — 
provides to the fishermen in northern Saskatchewan to move 
their product from northern Saskatchewan to Winnipeg. And if 
he could provide that information for us, what the exact amount 
is and if he could indicate to the House if that amount is an 
adequate enough amount to cover the cost of transportation 
from the Lake Athabasca region. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Okay. Very quickly, thank you so 
much for some of the questions. As I mentioned, I’m positive 
that the amount that we’re looking at for harvesting is 1 million 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2003 

 

pounds from Lake Athabasca. And no, we’re not trying to, you 
know, continue taking our fish to Winnipeg. We’re trying to 
bring it closer to the commercial fishermen of northern 
Saskatchewan. That’s our goal and that’s our objective and 
we’ll continue working forward to that. 
 
And we’re all looking forward to some more questions about 
Northern Affairs because we don’t enjoy that privilege during 
question period — that during estimates is the only time we 
seem to have any focus on Northern Affairs. 
 
And I would point out as well, in my closing comments, I want 
to thank the member for some of his interest in commercial 
fishing. And of course the mining activity, that’s something that 
we want to continue to strive from this end, that we’re going to 
focus on. So when they pick it up they obviously are taking a 
lead from the government side to push some of these things. 
 
And I want to ask the people of northern Saskatchewan a couple 
of things before I close here, Mr. Speaker. Number one, who is 
promoting a $50 million cut in social services to the disabled 
groups and to the least advantaged in our community? The 
Saskatchewan Party. Who’s trying to do what commercial . . . 
away with commercial fishing? The Saskatchewan Party. Who 
wants to do away with some of the activities we have with the 
mining sector to promote jobs and to promote contractors? The 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Who wants to do away with . . . Who wants to push things like 
bulk water exports? There’s a lot of rumours out there about 
bulk water export, shipping our water to the States — a lot of 
people asking questions about what the agenda is. And those 
guys have not said one word about what their agenda is. 
 
And people of the North are going to start asking questions, is: 
do you guys support things like bulk water, do you guys export 
to the States, do you guys support a number of other things that 
you want to not tell people about now and then, oh, ask us after 
the election? 
 
Well I say northern Saskatchewan is not going to tell you guys 
anything. They’re going to send you a loud and proud message 
that we don’t want to see any of your waste nuclear sites. We 
don’t want to see any of your bulk water exports. We don’t 
want to see any of your $50 million cuts to the disadvantaged 
people of the province. We don’t want none of the Sask Party. 
 
And I say, next election, we’ll bring it on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
just to wrap up I want to thank the minister and his officials for 
being here today. I know many times in the past that the 
officials used to have to come from La Ronge and of course 
that’s not the case any more as they have taken up offices here 
in Regina. And it certainly must make it a lot more convenient 
for the minister that his deputy minister is a lot closer to the 
action here in Regina. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the House, it was a great pleasure to 
be able to take part in debate this afternoon in regards to 
estimates for Northern Affairs. 

And it was certainly interesting to have the minister get up in 
his final diatribe and explain to the people of Saskatchewan the 
misinformation that the government is quite willing to spread 
out there in the upcoming provincial election. We’re certainly 
going to be quite willing to be able to get into public debate 
when the Premier calls the election, when he finally screws up 
his courage. 
 
And from this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Chair, we want to 
. . . we want the people of Saskatchewan to know that the 
Premier can screw up his courage at any time. He can, in fact 
this very day if he wants to, contact the Lieutenant Governor to 
call a provincial election. The Saskatchewan Party is ready to 
fight the election right now. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:57. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1013 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1013 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1013 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1013 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1013 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1013 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1013 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1013 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1014 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1014 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1014 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1014 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1014 
  Deputy Speaker .......................................................................................................................................................................1014 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1037 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Humboldt Broncos Win Royal Bank Cup 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1015 
 Saskatchewan Wide Open Week 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1015 
 National Police Week 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1015 
 Great Weekend for Saskatchewan Hockey Players 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1016 
 Recognition of Nurses 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1016 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1016 
 Chancellors’ Scholarship Awarded to Eston Area Student 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1016 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
Contract Negotiations with Medical Profession 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
 Water Levels in Qu’Appelle Lakes 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
 Government Promotional Activities 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1022 
 Bill No. 20 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2003 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1022 
 Bill No. 21 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1023 
 Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1023 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 26 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1026 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1027 
 
 



 

 

 Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1028 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1029 
 Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural Safety Net Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1030 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1030 
 Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1032 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1032 
 Bill No. 38 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
 Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1037 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Northern Affairs — Vote 75 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
 


	GOVERNMENT ORDERS
	GOVERNMENT ORDERS

