















































Hansard: April 28, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 733 
 April 28, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
another petition signed by citizens here in the province of 
Saskatchewan regarding an issue with the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation who announced that the 2003 premiums 
charged to farmers will increase by up to 52 per cent and 
further. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Lucky 
Lake, Macrorie, Birsay, and Beechy. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people in my constituency who are 
very concerned about the high cost of education tax on their 
property. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
rise on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw concerned about a lack 
of hemodialysis services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Moose Jaw, and I’m proud to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me honour 
again to stand today to present a petition on behalf of producers 
in the Cypress Hills constituency. This petition refers to the 
Crown grazing lease renewals that has been such a controversial 
issue in my constituency. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 

current Crown land lessees maintain their first option to 
renew those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by citizens of the 
community of Mendham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the astonishing lack 
of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose Jaw. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of farmers in my area, very 
concerned about the huge increase in crop insurance premiums. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Estevan, 
Bienfait, Torquay, and Grenfell. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition again from citizens of rural 
Saskatchewan who are extremely concerned about the lack of 
access to adequate health care and emergency services. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause the Five Hills Health District Region to provide 
better information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
Rockglen, Fife Lake, and Lisieux. 
 
I so present. 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine who are 
worried about rural depopulation and small school closures. The 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reverse its position on the isolated schools grants and have 
them reinstated for negative grant divisions; and further, 
stop the discrimination against the rural citizens by 
supplying a quality education central in their community. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is signed, Mr. Speaker, by the good folks from Major, 
Macklin, and Compeer. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition today to present on behalf of citizens who continue to 
be concerned with the condition of Highway 22 between the 
junctions of Highway 6 and Junction 20. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey, Strasbourg, Moose Jaw, Markinch, 
Regina, and Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned with the 
2003 crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from my home 
centre of Spiritwood and also Shell Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the provision of adequate medical 

services in Rockglen; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 7, 12, 13, 18, 19, 27, 35, 36, 40, and 42. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 32 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: on 
what date was the final agreements to implement mega 
bingo adopted and who was the minister of Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming when this occurred; who sits on the 
board of Western Canada Lotteries Corporation as 
Saskatchewan’s representatives and when were they 
appointed and by who; what is the provincial marketing 
organization; what is its mandate and organization 
structure? 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: what is the total 
dollar amount, including monies invested in equity, 
working capital, loans and/or loan guarantees that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has invested into the OSB 
plant at Meadow Lake? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce three individuals seated 
in the east gallery. One of the people doesn’t need a great deal 
of introduction to people here in Regina because he lives here in 
Regina. He’s the senior manager with KPMG, and of course he 
served as the Deputy Chair of the Boundaries Commission. And 
as a result of the work of that Boundaries Commission, the two 
people that are seated with him now have become constituents 
because they live in the community of Kamsack. And I’m 
referring to Stu Pollon of course, here in Regina, and Mary and 
Harry Pollon who live in the community of Kamsack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve contributed to the population of 
Saskatchewan and I want to indicate that six of their children 
live in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s a great number. 
But, Mr. Speaker, seven also live outside the province of 
Saskatchewan. So I’m not indicating how large their family is, 
but I’m sure that people would recognize that total. 
 
But a very special event is occurring this summer, Mr. Speaker, 
for the Pollons, their upcoming 60th wedding anniversary this 
August. And I’d like all members to join me in welcoming Mr. 
and Mrs. Harry Pollon and their son, Stu, to the legislature this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had to work 
hard to find this group, Mr. Speaker. They seem to be redirected 
to other members earlier and I would apologize to them for a 
mix-up that had occurred. 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

 

But I want to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Assembly, students from the SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) Wascana 
Campus, English as a second language program. There are 15 
adult students, Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Ron Mang. 
 
I’m looking forward to being able to visit with them for a few 
moments after question period. And I’d ask all members to join 
with me in greeting the students from the English as a second 
language program at the SIAST Wascana Campus. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this Hon. 
Assembly, two gentlemen seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker 
— Mr. Bill Baker and Mr. Gary Bosgood. That’s Bill Baker, 
Mr. Speaker, the undertaker of Saskatchewan Roughrider fame 
and Gary Bosgood, recent recipient of the National Aboriginal 
Achievement Award in business and technology. 
 
Bill and Gary are partners in many ventures, among them 
bringing clean coal technology and pilot projects to 
Saskatchewan. I hope all members will extend a warm welcome 
to these fine gentlemen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to extend our welcome to the 
English as a second language participants that have attended the 
House this afternoon. 
 
I understand Saskatchewan has developed an exceptionally 
good reputation as an ESL (English as a second language) 
training area. We have several institutions that participate in 
that program and we’ve welcomed students from around the 
world, and we’re happy to welcome this group of students to 
the legislature today. And once again I’d like to extend our 
warmest welcome to them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Day of Mourning 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s been 15 years since Nadine Hunt, who was then 
president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, asked me 
to introduce a private members’ Bill to make April 28 a 
statutory Day of Mourning for people who are killed and 
injured on the job . . . for workers who are killed and injured on 
the job. 
 
I was proud to do that, Mr. Speaker, and prouder still that this 
Assembly passed the Bill unanimously, making Saskatchewan 
the first jurisdiction in Canada to observe this day. Now it is 
recognized across the country, and today our flags fly at 
half-mast at the Legislative Building and government buildings 
across the province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day the Minister of Labour 
will read 20 names into Hansard. These are the names of the 20 
people who died in the province this last year due to 
work-related injury or illness. It’s five fewer than last year, but 
unfortunately twenty more than any of us would want to accept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is a day to remember all the people who 
have lost their lives in the building of our communities and our 
province and our nation. It’s also a time to renew our 
commitment to ensuring the safety of workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone involved in the workplace is responsible 
for identifying and controlling health and safety hazards in the 
workplace. And, Mr. Speaker, it is our roles as members of this 
Assembly to support workers’ rights and safety through the 
legislative tools at our command. So on this Day of Mourning, 
let us recommit to keeping strong our occupational health and 
safety legislation, and all other laws that regulate conditions in 
the workplace. For the working people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, we can do no less. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
join with the minister in recognizing a National Day of 
Mourning to remember workers who have died on the job, who 
were disabled or injured in the workplace, or have been 
afflicted by industrial illness. 
 
Twenty people died in Saskatchewan last year due to 
work-related incidents. An unsettling fact of these incidents is 
that they were preventable. They were preventable and are 
preventable into the future. Across Canada about 800 to 1,000 
employees lose their lives on the job each year. 
 
The importance of workplace safety cannot be stressed enough, 
but education is the key — education of employers, education 
of employees, of workplace hazards, especially young 
employees who are starting their first jobs. We must not only 
set good examples as community leaders, but we must 
encourage safe workplaces through legislation. We must make 
efforts to improve health and safety standards across this 
province, and we must take steps to ensure that workers’ 
compensation system is working for employees who need it the 
most. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Today is an appropriate time to renew our commitment to 
safety in the workplace, and I ask all members of this 
Legislative Assembly to join with me in promoting safe and 
healthy workplaces through our communities and through our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

In Motion Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In keeping with 
this government’s commitment to healthy families and vibrant 
communities, we have a plan to make Saskatchewan the 
healthiest, most physically active province in Canada by our 
centennial year of 2005. 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few years ago the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority began its In Motion program which, since its 
inception, has increased the level of physical activity amongst 
Saskatoon residents by 13 per cent. 
 
Our plan is to build on the huge success of that program. 
Through an innovative partnership, we will build In Motion into 
a province-wide initiative. Our goal is to help Saskatchewan 
people increase their level of fitness by 10 per cent by 2005. 
This provincial partnership is unique in Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
and focuses on the promotion of good health and active living. 
 
I’d particularly like to acknowledge the Saskatoon Regional 
Health Authority and their In Motion partners — the city of 
Saskatoon, the University of Saskatchewan, and Participaction. 
 
And I’m extremely proud that John Lake School in my 
constituency was chosen as the site of the launch, as John Lake 
is one of the original In Motion schools. The dedicated people 
at John Lake strive to create a healthy, happy environment by 
students and staff walking 15 minutes each day. Last year the 
school’s goal was to walk the equivalent kilometres to go 
around the world, a goal they surpassed. This year they are 
challenging staff and students to see how many times they can 
walk across Canada. 
 
We can all learn from the examples of schools like John Lake 
and I wish our In Motion partners the best of success in their 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

100th Birthday Celebration 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and members of 
the legislature. Today I ask you to join me in wishing Mrs. 
Nettie Rolph a happy 100th birthday. 
 
Nettie was born in Manitoba to farming parents and a family of 
nine brothers and sisters. Circumstances did not allow Nettie to 
go further than a grade 4 education but that didn’t stop her from 
completing a stenographer’s course and getting work as a 
stenographer with the man who would soon become her 
husband. She continued working at the same time as they raised 
their son, Newburn Jamieson Miller. 
 
In 1942, Nettie joined the air force. As a sergeant stationed at 
Dafoe, she was an aircraft recognition instructor teaching 
hundreds of pilots, including her own son, how to distinguish 
aircraft between friend and foe in the air. 
 
After her discharge, she lived the next 30 years in Vancouver 
and worked as a legal secretary, but she was never quite 
comfortable with the threat of earthquakes and returned to the 
security of Saskatchewan. 
 
A friend is quoted to say: 
 

Nettie has a very sharp and detailed memory for things past 
and carries on a wonderful conversation. She is in 
exceptionally good health for these years and plays a mean 
game of cribbage. 

 

Happy birthday, Nettie, with warm wishes from everyone in the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Volunteer Week 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the 
beginning of National Volunteer Week 2003. Saskatchewan has 
the highest percentage of volunteers in Canada. One reason for 
that, Mr. Speaker, may be that there’s so much opportunity here 
we don’t want to miss out, or it may be because we learn at a 
very early age that it’s both a duty and a joy to work with our 
neighbours for the good of all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work of our voluntary sector reflects who we 
are and the values that are important to us here in 
Saskatchewan. We have a vibrant voluntary sector which is a 
valued part of the social fabric of our province. 
 
Because this government recognizes the invaluable 
contributions of our volunteers, we’ve established the 
Voluntary Sector Initiative to enhance the co-operative 
relationship between the public sector and the many 
components of the voluntary sector. This initiative will also 
serve to build capacity within Saskatchewan’s voluntary sector 
and create awareness of the benefits of volunteerism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s future is wide open and one of the 
reasons for that is the province’s voluntary sector. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Legislative Building 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I well 
recall my first visit to this building. It was on my first date with 
a beautiful lady who is now my wife. We climbed the dome to 
take a look at the city of Regina. It was obviously a long time 
ago. 
 
I well recall the first time I came to this building as a new MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly). I was impressed. The 
flags were snapping in the wind. The pigeons were doing what 
they do best on the Premier’s office windowsill. 
 
I love the warmth of brass, Mr. Speaker. The outside front 
handrails are impressive. They’ve been touched and polished by 
the hands of hundreds of MLAs coming in to the building; by 
thousands of school children coming to learn about government. 
They’ve felt the rough hands of farmers wondering why their 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts were torn 
up. They’ve felt the caring hands of nurses wondering why they 
were being locked out or sent back to work. Those handrails 
hold a physical biography of this great province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today I came again to this building. The flags were snapping in 
the wind. The pigeons were again on the Premier’s window 
ledge. But all was not the same. Today the front of the 
legislature looks more like IPSCO’s backlot, Mr. Speaker. 
Today those handrails are scratched and dented and marred. 
Cheap orange and blue plastic covers the warm brass. It is a 
shame. It is a disgrace. It distorts what this building is all about. 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

 

The responsibility for that degradation, Mr. Speaker, sits there 
in the Premier’s chair — wee leadership, Mr. Speaker, wee 
leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bursaries for Students in the Health Care Professions 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 
actively investing in people. Part of Saskatchewan Health’s 
action plan includes more student bursaries. Mr. Speaker, our 
government is investing $4 million on more than 500 health 
care professional bursaries. These bursaries will go to students 
in health care professions where there are or soon could be 
shortages. The bursaries are in exchange for an agreement to 
work in Saskatchewan after they graduate. This is real help that 
deals with retaining and recruiting health care professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than 200 bursaries will be targeted to 
Saskatchewan students studying nursing. Five will be offered to 
nurses in graduate studies who agree to teach at one of 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary educational institutions upon 
graduation. Fifty bursaries will be offered to students and 
residents studying medicine, 80 to those studying to be 
emergency medical technicians, and 60 to students in various 
other health science professions. 
 
And there’s more, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud these bursaries 
will help tomorrow’s health care workers today. The future is in 
fact wide open in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Development of Feedlot Industry in Redvers Area 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday 
I had the opportunity to visit the community of Redvers where 
the co-op was organizing a meeting to try and develop a feedlot 
industry in our area. 
 
Now I know that the members opposite love it when you say 
the word, co-op. Well this, Mr. Speaker, is a very, very capital, 
interested co-op. They believe, Mr. Speaker, that there is a need 
for everyone to make a profit. And they organized their co-op in 
that manner. And that’s why they were putting on this seminar 
to try and get a new feedlot going in the area. 
 
The Department of Agriculture was there, Mr. Speaker, with a 
presentation — and I have to say an excellent presentation — 
on the benefits of feeding cattle, Mr. Speaker, and one that the 
people in the community were very interested in. There was 
approximately 80 people there that were interested in the 
project. And a good number of them, Mr. Speaker, are prepared 
to invest their own money — not the government’s money, Mr. 
Speaker — because these people also believe in making a 
profit, Mr. Speaker, not in simply making a donation. 
 
So I’d like to congratulate the Redvers Co-op and the people 
that put on the seminar, Mr. Speaker. And hopefully they will 
be able to get a new feedlot operating. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Participation in Potato Industry 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
A full exposé of the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) failed 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) venture by the Saskatchewan News Network this 
weekend provided a thorough account of events leading up to 
the ultimate collapse of the company and the loss of 28 million 
taxpayers’ dollars by the NDP government. But it also 
accurately portrayed the depth of hurt, frustration, and betrayal 
felt by local people and communities most impacted by 
SPUDCO’s failure. People lost their jobs. They lost their 
investments. They can’t sell their homes and their businesses 
are struggling. 
 
But instead of admitting their mistake, the NDP — and 
particularly the Minister of Agriculture — continues to turn the 
knife, claiming the potato industry . . . that these people and 
these communities are better off today than before the NDP got 
involved. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker: will the NDP admit finally that they 
not only failed at growing potatoes, but they also failed the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity 
— and I thank the member opposite for the opportunity to 
respond to his question — I had the opportunity a couple of 
weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, to visit that area of the province, and 
had an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to meet with about a dozen 
people who are in the business today, Mr. Speaker, of growing 
diversification of agriculture in that part of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to say and quote a couple of things that I have 
before me, Mr. Speaker, that was provided for me last 
November by the Irrigation Crop Diversification Corporation 
that said this. They said that: 
 

. . . everybody knows that the industry around (the) Lake 
Diefenbaker (area) is (not) dead . . . Harvest was a pain this 
year . . . (and its) yields were . . . (very) good, around 15 
(million) tonnes per acre. 

 
That’s about $20 million on 4,000 acres, Mr. Speaker. People in 
November said to us, and they say again today, that we have a 
thriving industry in potatoes — seed potatoes in particular in 
that area of the province, Mr. Speaker — and what we need to 
see, Mr. Speaker, a continued support of the irrigation industry 
and the potato industry in that part of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if the minister came to town he certainly didn’t make 
his presence known to the people who were hurt by the 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

decisions made by his government. And that’s why the article is 
here: “When the spud’s a dud,” or in the The StarPhoenix I 
think it was called “(Un)Lucky Lake.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a recent ratepayers meeting in Lucky Lake, 
members of the rural municipality expressed their frustration 
with the NDP government. In fact Reeve Bill Sheppard 
challenged the minister and the Premier to come and visit them. 
I don’t think the minister has yet visited the reeve and his 
colleagues in Lucky Lake. He said, and I quote: 
 

Tell us why you misrepresented things. Tell us why you 
cancelled the crop sharing agreement and left us holding 
the bag . . . 
 
(The) misrepresentations began in 1996 and continue today. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister take up Mr. Sheppard’s 
challenge? Will he and the Premier go and visit the people that 
were hurt by his decisions and will they explain the SPUDCO 
venture to these people and why the truth was hidden from them 
for six years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I was in the Sask Party 
leader’s backyard and I did meet with people, Mr. Speaker, 
there. And I did meet with the mayor of Outlook, Mr. Speaker; 
he was at that table. And I did meet with the reeve, Mr. 
Speaker, of Fertile Valley, Mr. Speaker. And I met with a 
number of the leaders who were involved in the REDAs 
(regional economic development authority) in the area. 
 
And I have a list of all the people that I met with, Mr. Speaker, 
and every one of them to a T said this, Mr. Speaker: we want 
this meeting to be a discussion about how we grow the 
irrigation and the industry here. We do not want this to be a 
political exercise led by the Saskatchewan Party leader, Mr. 
Speaker, that will in fact undo the good work that many people 
there are doing today, because that’s what’s happened, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I have a . . . I say to the member opposite, I say to the 
member opposite from Outlook, do not work hard today at 
destroying the seed potato industry, Mr. Speaker. I know that 
you have a good friend in Mr. Harry Meyers, Mr. Speaker; I 
know that he’s there. He did a wonderful job, Mr. Speaker, in 
making sure that you protected that industry in the last little 
while — or that investment, Mr. Speaker — because he was 
closely tied to the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why you were there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
my first question I talked about the Minister of Agriculture still 
turning the knife into people’s backs who were hurt by the NDP 
government. He continues to do it today — people who lost 
thousands of dollars; people whose livelihoods were destroyed; 
people who lost their personal savings because of the decisions 
made by him and his NDP government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister should be apologizing to those 

people to their face instead of hiding from them. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister claims to have letters of support, but 
he can’t produce them. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Crown 
Investments Corporation won’t discuss the NDP’s potato 
investment strategy with a newspaper reporter. He runs and 
hides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP continue and the minister continues to 
claim that all is well despite the deep, deep level of betrayal felt 
by people in the potato industry, and particularly the people of 
the Lucky Lake region who have been most affected by the 
failure of SPUDCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP continue to ignore and 
misrepresent the level of hurt caused by SPUDCO and his 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I quoted from a letter a minute ago from 
the irrigation corporation diversification corporation which I got 
in November, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to quote now from a letter that I got and I can 
continue to provide these if the member wants them. I can 
continue . . . I’m quoting now from an individual who comes 
here from Holland, Mr. Speaker, and he says this: 
 

I am an immigrant from Holland. 
 

We have great opportunities in Dutch land that we bring here 
to Saskatchewan, he says. 

 
I (have) farmed in Saskatchewan for one year and the result 
. . . (has been) very positive. (And I ask you this, Mr. 
Minister.) I would . . . like to stay in this province and grow 
(an additional) 400 acres of seed potatoes in 2003 but I 
need a commitment for storage facilities . . . 
 

Two or three more bins, Mr. Speaker, is what he says here. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, you need to stop, Mr. 
Speaker, you need to stop putting down the potato industry in 
the Lucky Lake area, Mr. Speaker, because you have a group of 
producers out there today who are growing the industry. And if 
there’s anybody who is misleading this House, the people of 
Saskatchewan, that’s the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, that’s doing 
that and destroying an industry there that we have millions of 
dollars of investment in today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In spite of the 
mess that the NDP created with SPUDCO, despite the loss of 
28 million taxpayers’ dollars, there are people in Saskatchewan 
struggling to rebuild the potato industry that the NDP almost 
totally destroyed. 
 
The credit doesn’t go to the government. It doesn’t go to the 
NDP but it goes to producers, to people of the industry and 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

 

local communities who have banded together to keep it alive, in 
spite of the NDP government, and, Mr. Speaker, in order to 
fight the NDP government. In fact there are more than 200 
farmers and investors taking the NDP government to court over 
this failed SPUDCO venture which could drive the total cost of 
this misguided venture to $70 million or more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the minister continue to insist that all is 
well in the potato industry in Lucky Lake when he knows full 
well that it isn’t? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I know this much, Mr. Speaker. When I 
visited the . . . when I visited Outlook and visited the potato 
sheds, Mr. Speaker, I know this, that there are seven potato 
sheds, Mr. Speaker, in that area of the province of which we 
were responsible for building for producers in that area, Mr. 
Speaker. And six of them, Mr. Speaker, are plumb full — 
plumb full of potatoes, Mr. Speaker. And farmers in that area of 
the province say, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And farmers in that area of the province, 
Mr. Speaker, say, we like these potato sheds because today 
they’re full and they’re adding to the industry and helping us 
with the irrigation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, we need to start talking 
about what the potato industry is doing in the Lucky Lake area 
today rather than putting it down on a regular basis which 
you’re doing here today. There are $28 million of potato sheds 
there, Mr. Speaker. Nobody’s ran off with the money. The 
money’s invested, Mr. Speaker, for those producers today. 
They’re full of potatoes and they’re building the industry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just like to take a moment to remind the 
minister to always make all of his comments to the Chair. 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday the minister of Liquor 
and Gaming was forced to admit that the NDP government has 
lost more than $6.2 million on mega bingo. The Saskatchewan 
Party has learned that the amount was close to $2 million more 
than the $6.2 million originally stated by the NDP. 
 
Will the minister answer this question today? How many 
taxpayers’ dollars has this NDP government really lost on mega 
bingo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to respond 
to that question. I want to pre-empt my answer by saying that 
both . . . And my officials have responded to requests for 
information about linked bingo. My officials provided the 
development and implementation costs that were requested at 
Crown Corporations Committee in March. 

Since linked bingo became the subject of discussions in early 
April, my officials have been pulling together more 
information, Mr. Speaker. Just before Easter, they informed me 
that they were identifying costs in addition to those already 
asked for, Mr. Speaker, and supplied, and also costs for related 
projects. 
 
I immediately asked my officials to confirm the complete cost 
of linked bingo and all related projects and provide a full 
accounting of these costs to me. They have now provided me 
with this information and I’m happy to provide it and table it 
here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister of Liquor and 
Gaming is now admitting that his NDP government lost nearly 
$8 million on mega bingo — 8 million taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s money that could have been used to hire more nurses, 
policemen, for addiction services, or possibly to build a new 
sewage plant in North Battleford. But instead, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP blew it on mega bingo without a business plan, without 
cabinet approval, with no ceiling on the expenses, and without 
any due diligence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who gave approval for this blatant abuse of 8 
million taxpayers’ dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, cabinet approved a linked 
bingo game as part of a larger gaming strategy. 
 
The various ministers responsible for SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority), Mr. Speaker, over the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Please. Please, members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the various ministers 
responsible for SLGA over the period of time during which 
linked bingo was approved, developed, implemented, and 
operated would have monitored SLGA’s work. 
 
This monitoring occurred through regular meetings and 
briefings, as well as updates provided to Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming board, the Chair of which is the minister 
responsible for Liquor and Gaming, and another member from 
cabinet. 
 
So the minister responsible for SLGA did not approve an 
upfront expenditure for this project because initially, Mr. 
Speaker, no — no — net budget impact was projected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is unbelievable that the 
minister of Liquor and Gaming today admits to the people of 
Saskatchewan that absolutely no ministerial approval was given 
to spend 8 million taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again the NDP is telling us they didn’t tell us 
about all the losses in mega bingo. Why? Because we didn’t ask 
the right questions. Just like SPUDCO. They didn’t tell us all 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

the facts about SPUDCO because we didn’t ask the right 
questions. And they didn’t tell us about all the money lost in 
Retx because we didn’t ask the right questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s a novel idea. The next time the NDP loses 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars in one of its hare-brained 
schemes, why don’t they just decide to tell the truth about it? 
Why don’t they come clean? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Why don’t they come clean with the people of 
Saskatchewan? Because it is their money. Mr. Speaker, why 
was the minister trying to cover up the true amount of the losses 
on mega bingo? Why did he not release this report until now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated and I’ll say it 
again, cabinet approved a linked bingo game as part of a larger 
gaming strategy. The SLGA board, Mr. Speaker, therefore the 
minister of the day, did approve a linked bingo budget 
expenditure for SLGA at the point when linked bingo game was 
not succeeding and the SLGA budget impact was identified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this occurred through the board’s approval of the 
budget, the overall approval of SLGA’s budget in 2001-2002 
budget submission for government’s overall budget process. 
 
The minister responsible for SLGA ultimately approved 
SLGA’s recommendation to cancel the game, and I believe that 
was prudent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, we have heard that the minister 
actually did want to release this report a while ago but he was 
overruled by the Premier’s office. I guess that’s the same people 
who figured covering up the truth about SPUDCO for six years 
was a good idea and they only told the truth after they got 
caught. Mr. Speaker, once again the NDP only tells the truth 
when they get caught. 
 
Will the minister confirm he wanted to release this report earlier 
but the Premier’s office shut him down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I regret that that hon. 
member would choose to attack me personally. I take my 
responsibilities very seriously, the oath that I’ve taken to be 
accountable for the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
done that. 
 
When I had determined, when I was notified that there were 
costs over and above what had been reported, I immediately 
asked my officials to ensure an accurate accounting. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to table the total, accurate accounting to 
this House, to the people of this province. And I’ve tabled that 
document, Mr. Speaker, and all the details are included in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
want to be very clear that we are not questioning the minister of 
Liquor and Gaming. We are questioning what happened at the 
Premier’s office level. 
 
It is our understanding that the minister of Liquor and Gaming 
wanted to do the right thing. He wanted to come clean on this 
whole issue and he was unduly influenced by others in the 
Premier’s office. 
 
The question is, to the minister of Liquor and Gaming: did you 
want to come clean with this and were you unduly influenced 
by others? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, my report is tabled when I 
was satisfied that I had received all the details that my officials 
could muster up after reviewing this entire project that had 
extended from 1996 to 2001-2002. 
 
I was given all the details. I wanted to make sure that it was 
absolutely accurate without coming in with any partial figures 
or partial truths to responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. When I was 
satisfied that document was ready for tabling, I tabled it, Mr. 
Speaker. What else can I say? It’s here today in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a pattern developing in the province of 
Saskatchewan that’s very alarming to Saskatchewan taxpayers 
and that is, this government only tells the truth when it gets 
caught. When it gets caught wasting millions of dollars, then 
the government admits to the matter at hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was the case with SPUDCO. We’re finding it 
to be the case with mega bingo, even in spite of the Premier’s 
assurance after the SPUDCO probe that the standard would be 
higher, that this government would be more accountable, that 
the taxpayers could expect some answers. 
 
Well last week we found out when the Crown corporation 
annual reports were tabled that taxpayers would not be getting 
information on investments this government had made on their 
behalf, and one of them involved the Georgia-based dot-com 
called Retx. Then at the end of the week, they had a change of 
heart and released some of the information. We need a little bit 
more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the question to the Minister of SaskTel is this. SaskTel is 
saying Retx will continue to lose money in 2003 and 2004. Will 
the minister tell the people of Saskatchewan how much more 
money this government will allow Retx to lose on their behalf 
in the next year and a half? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have said 
before and I’ll say again, Mr. Speaker, this is nothing more than 
an attack on our Crown corporations. 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

 

But let me answer the question specifically, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Retx, as the public was informed when we released the 
annual reports, Mr. Speaker, Retx saw an increase in revenues 
of 63 to 65 per cent — an increase in revenues. This is exactly 
what you want to see for a start-up company, Mr. Speaker. We 
disclose the value of our investment, Mr. Speaker. As it pertains 
to the exact amount of losses, we’re not able to do that because 
of confidentiality because we’re in a partnership. I was clear 
about that from the beginning; I’m clear about that today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister was anything but clear 
about these investments. His own officials at SaskTel said quite 
clearly last week that the taxpayers would never get any 
information on companies like Retx. They had to change their 
story after questioning in this forum and by the media, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But there are still several other investments that they have made 
on the part of taxpayers that they have not provided detailed 
answers for including, Mr. Speaker, another dot-com called 
agdealer.com, which the NDP invested still more money in last 
year. We’re now up to $8.1 million invested on the part of 
taxpayers. 
 
Will the minister tell us what is the current value of that 8.1 
million NDP investment and how much more will taxpayers 
expect to lose as a result of this investment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect 
to the question, Mr. Speaker, we indicated that Ag Dealer was 
in the year 2002 rolled into DirectWest, Mr. Speaker. 
DirectWest is owned 100 per cent by Crown Investments 
Corporation, and they have provided full disclosure on that. As 
I’ve said before, if we own 100 per cent of the company, Mr. 
Speaker, we disclose as much as we can. If we own only part of 
it, we still disclose as much as we can but there are issues of 
confidentiality. 
 
But let me say again, Mr. Speaker, about that Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker, that Sask Party is on a daily basis attacking our 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker, the investments that they make. And they 
have one single agenda — it’s to discredit them, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s to discredit them so that they can sell them off, so they can 
privatize them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this minister and this NDP 
government needs no help in discrediting our Crown 
corporations in the province of Saskatchewan. The truth of the 
matter is that last week the minister’s officials announced that 
due to out-of-province investments by the Crowns, the 
taxpayers took it on the chin for $85 million. And so in this 
forum, in question period in the Legislative Assembly, you’d 
think it would be the right place for the minister to be held to an 
account for the investments he’s authorized on behalf of 

taxpayers. And that’s what this is all about. 
 
Agdealer.com is one of them — 8 million taxpayers’ dollars 
invested in this over the last two years. His official was just 
outside the Legislative Assembly today providing some 
information on the nature of that investment including, I 
believe, the losses attributed to that agdealer.com a year ago. 
Will the minister just provide that information? How much 
money have taxpayers lost as a result of the investment and how 
much is it worth today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
will know, as I’ve said here, that Ag Dealer was rolled into 
DirectWest last year, Mr. Speaker. DirectWest, if he went 
through the annual reports, he will know that DirectWest has 
been profitable for some number of years, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve been profitable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say again that this is nothing more 
than a daily, daily attack. They can phrase it however they want, 
Mr. Speaker. This is nothing more than a daily attack on our 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker, so that they can discredit them, Mr. 
Speaker, so they can sell and privatize them. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, our Crowns provided dividends to the 
people of Saskatchewan some $300 million. Mr. Speaker, over 
the last 10 years what have they done? They have paid in 
dividends and benefits to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 1.6 
billion, Mr. Speaker. And on a daily basis, they continue to 
discredit them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you, shame on you, Sask Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have also made an 
investment in something called Business Watch International on 
behalf of the taxpayers of the province. They now own 93 per 
cent of Business Watch International. The amount invested, 
they say, was 2 million; the current value, less than 1 million. 
 
Is that the total extent of the losses to taxpayers — 1.1 million? 
And what about operating losses for Business Watch 
International, another NDP investment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you what their 
financial statements would be if they had the Crown 
corporations under their control, Mr. Speaker. Their statement 
would be simple and it would be full disclosure, Mr. Speaker. 
It’d be absolute full disclosure. They would sell everything, Mr. 
Speaker. They would sell everything. 
 
And you know what they’d do? They’d use the money to 
finance things so that they could buy their way back for years 
into the future, Mr. Speaker, as they did in the 1980s. Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan can see through that. They 
can see through it. They know that the Crowns return dividends 
to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — 1.6 billion in the 
last 10 years. 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would just like once again to 
bring it to the members’ attention that there were a couple of 
times during the question period that members just got a little 
carried away and started getting a little too personal, using 
direct phrases across to each other. And I want to bring that to 
members’ attention. And try to keep that in mind for tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave of the 
Assembly to make a statement of importance to all 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

National Day of Mourning 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and all hon. 
members. Today is the National Day of Mourning for workers 
killed or injured on the job. Across Canada, almost three 
workers a day die on the job and more than 1 million workers 
are injured every year. 
 
Today is a day to mourn, and a day to remember — a day to 
mourn all the people who have given their lives to the building 
of our communities, our province, and our nation. 
 
Twenty Saskatchewan workers died last year as a result of 
injuries or illnesses sustained in the workplace. Many thousands 
more have been injured. Mr. Speaker, even one death on the job 
is too many. 
 
Today our thoughts and prayers are with all family members 
who have suffered the death of a loved one at work. We can 
never turn back time and make it possible for those mothers and 
fathers, sisters and brothers to come home again. But we can 
work to prevent other families from having to endure such 
anguish by renewing our efforts to do everything humanly 
possible to reduce workplace injuries and deaths. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to rise as I read into the 
record the names of those 20 Saskatchewan workers who died 
on the job last year. And I also ask that all hon. members 
observe a moment of silence in their honour when we finish. 
 
Harvey Dyck, Adam Gress, Leslie Godfrey, James Jones, 
Reinhold Petrowitsch, Ryan Haggard, Morley Gloeden, 
Matthew Wiebe, Brent Nagy, Jason Stern, Tanya Loewen, 
Calvin Johner, John Prentice, Owen Jones, Richard Neiss, Kelly 
Argotow, Donald Mohagen, John Scott, Harold Aubin, and 
Robert Riddoch. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, members. Please be seated. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
respond to the minister’s statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in sending our deepest sympathies to the 
family of the 20 victims that died, just simply for going to 
work, in a workplace accident over the past year. 
 
It’s unacceptable and, Mr. Speaker, we must, in this legislature, 
do everything in our power to make the workplace as safe as 
possible, not only through workplace safety programs but 
through education, Mr. Speaker. One life is too many to lose in 
the workplace. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to join 
with the members opposite in sending our deepest sympathies 
to the families affected over the past year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Watrous on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
introduce, in the west gallery, three gentlemen who are key 
people in the Agrivision, a well-known organization that quite 
frankly is always positive about Saskatchewan, and thinking 
ahead and having a vision for our future. 
 
So I would like to introduce Dr. Red Williams, Mr. Lionel La 
Belle, and Mr. Al Scholz and have all the members welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Yorkton on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
with the member from Watrous in recognizing the three 
gentlemen in the west gallery: Mr. La Belle, certainly Mr. 
Scholz, and Dr. Red Williams. 
 
Not only have they been instrumental in working on the 
Agrivision file which has been busy promoting agriculture 
across Saskatchewan as Agrivision has been doing, Dr. Red 
Williams also serves on my ACRE (Action Committee on the 
Rural Economy) committee as one of the key players and 
members and was part of the work that was done across 
Saskatchewan in tabling the final report. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, three gentlemen who do a ton of work, 
much of it on a voluntary basis, in making Saskatchewan and 
rural Saskatchewan a better, stronger place to live. And I want 
to ask the entire Assembly to join with me in recognizing the 
good work that they do in helping agriculture and rural 
development in Saskatchewan. 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Southeast 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — I thank the Assembly for allowing me to 
introduce these — once again — these three very esteemed 
individuals. As the newly minted Legislative Secretary looking 
at in-migration and immigration in this province, I would like to 
welcome Al Scholz, Red Williams, and Lionel La Belle here. 
 
And I would like to inform all members that they are 
spearheading their second annual Innovation Conference in 
Saskatoon on June 5 and 6. And the conference is entitled, 
Double the Population. They intend to double the population of 
this great province by 50 per cent within 30 years. Now . . . by 
100, I’m sorry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a poet that said: 
 

. . . a man’s reach should exceed his grasp, 
Or what’s a heaven for? 

 
Some people may say their goal is very ambitious. But you 
know what? Saskatchewan is a big slice of heaven and we have 
big ideas and big dreams here. 
 
And I ask everyone to welcome Al Scholz, Red Williams, and 
Lionel La Belle. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table response 
to written question no. 149. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 149 has been tabled. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Beside me on my left is the deputy minister, Harvey Brooks. On 
my right is assistant deputy minister, Barry Martin, responsible 
for operations. Immediately behind me is assistant deputy 
minister for corporate services, Don Wincherauk. 
 
And to my right, two seats behind, is Fred Antunes who’s the 

director of operations, planning and business support. And then 
beside Don Wincherauk is Mike Makowsky. Mike is manager 
of transportation, trade and logistics. And Harold Hugg is next 
to Mike, sitting in the next aisle over there. Harold is manager 
of northern access, air and safety. And in the back row, directly 
behind me is Cathy Lynn Borbely, leader of the budget 
development group. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to 
welcome the minister’s officials and I’m sure they’ll be very 
helpful in helping the minister to answer the questions that we 
have for him today. 
 
Minister, I think what we will do today is I have a couple of 
questions and there is a number of my colleagues that have 
questions dealing with highways in their constituencies, so we 
will probably spend a good part of the day discussing specific 
questions as far as highways in these constituencies. 
 
However, before I turn it over to my colleague from 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood, I do have a question as far as this 
government’s policy as far as provincial highways within urban 
boundaries. A number of our major urban cities and also some 
of our smaller urban centres have provincial highways that go 
through parts of the city or through the town. 
 
And what is the policy and how is that section of highway 
handled? It is quite often the highways also doubles as a street 
and that sort of thing. And I guess I would like clarification as 
to whose responsibility for maintenance and upkeep of those 
highways and what kind of cost-sharing structure do we have 
and so on — if the minister could just generally outline how 
those sections of highways are handled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I appreciate the question. We 
found over the years that there have been a number of 
arrangements. But by law every community over 1,000 people, 
the highways in the municipal boundaries — those over 1,000 
— actually are to be owned by the community themselves. 
 
We have over the years, as some of these communities have 
expanded, we’ve made arrangements as they’ve moved out onto 
the provincial highways to turn some of those over. That’s 
usually done through negotiation. And where the rural 
cross-section is, very often we’ll cover cost of maintenance. 
 
And the thing is that in each of these cases, there is also some 
provincial highway that goes partway into the communities. It’s 
supported by the Department of Highways. And in I’d say 
virtually every case, negotiations are ongoing as to what will be 
maintained by the department and what the cities are looking 
after. 
 
And as they expand, we move back the areas that we’re 
responsible for. And I think case in point would be Victoria 
Avenue which has expanded significantly, and we’re in 
discussions and negotiations with the city of Regina around 
how that will be handled and who will be responsible. 
 
So it’s basically case by case, based on the law that 
communities over 1,000 are responsible for the highways within 
their jurisdiction, roadways in their jurisdiction. 
 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to you and your officials today. I have a few questions 
for the department in regards to highways in my constituency. 
 
The first question is regarding the Highway No. 3 from Glaslyn 
west to Fairholme. I understand that that portion of highway is 
going to be upgraded or there’s going to be some work done on 
it. Can you explain to me just what is going to take place on that 
portion of highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The No. 3 between Glaslyn and 
Turtleford is all approved under the Prairie Grain Roads 
Program. This year we’ll be doing to Fairholme. It’ll be 
strengthening and paving, and eventually that whole road will 
be upgraded to a granular sealed pavement. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
When you say it’s going to be upgraded and resurfaced, are you 
looking at widening the highway somewhat? Because that 
highway is fairly narrow as it sits right now and the shoulders 
are very, very soft. 
 
And the reason I’m going down that is because last year there 
was two culverts changed on Highway No. 3 just west of 
Spiritwood and at that point in time those culverts were 
upgraded. And I’m just wondering if the department is looking 
at upgrading that highway to accommodate primary weights? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well currently that No. 3 is a thin 
membrane surface highway, and so we are needing to upgrade it 
substantially to be able to handle the kind of weights that are 
being expected now, which primary weight is the case. So the 
road will be upgraded. 
 
In terms of widening, there will be sub-base and base added, 
and we expect — though I don’t have the design plans here — 
we do expect that it will be widened somewhat to meet today’s 
standards. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. To 
the minister, so by your answer that I just heard, you are 
looking at, at some period of time, upping that highway from 
the condition it is now to primary weights? Is that what your 
answer is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There’s a couple of elements involved 
in this, one in terms of the building and the structure of the road 
itself. It’s capable of handling the industrial primary weights 
but in doing that on the granular structure pavement, it will 
reduce your lifespan of that pavement. But there is also the 
possibility of putting thicker pavement on at some point. 
 
And so there really is an overall question about, can we 
accommodate a shortened lifespan in the overall picture of our 
pavements in the province? So when we make the decision 
about whether or not it goes to primary weight rather than 
secondary weight, we’ve got structural issues. Can it handle 
that? Yes, by design it can but it does reduce the lifespan. And 
second question is, is there substantial activity, industrial 
activity, to meet the criteria that would make, that would lead us 
to a political decision which would say yes, you will put that to 
a primary weight? 
 

So all of those factors would have to be put into the works in 
order to make the decision whether or not it will be classified as 
a primary weight highway. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
The reason for the question regarding primary weights, the 
North Central Transportation Committee under the leadership 
of Richard Porter, who has been working on this for some time, 
has been talking to a lot of people, truckers or whatever have 
you. 
 
And the problem that truckers are running into in the 
transportation of, especially grain from Shellbrook to 
Spiritwood which is primary weights, once you get to 
Spiritwood, from Spiritwood to Glaslyn there is no primary 
weights there. So therefore they would have to take a lighter 
load to Glaslyn. And up until last year they could fill up their 
trucks with grain from Glaslyn and move to either North 
Battleford or to Lloydminster. Those elevators now have been 
closed down in Glaslyn so therefore there’s no place to fill up 
their loads with grain. So it’s causing a real problem, especially 
for the grain transportation system in that area. And that 
highway, which is Highway No. 3, transports a great deal of 
grain plus other product out of that area. 
 
And basically what I’m wondering is, how long would it take to 
upgrade that highway to primary weights? If they upgraded the 
highway from Spiritwood to Glaslyn and if the changing of the 
culverts was something to do with changing that up to primary 
weights, it would definitely help that area. And what I’m saying 
is, this bit of highway that you’re looking at now from Glaslyn 
to Turtleford, or Glaslyn to Fairholme, pardon me, and on the 
way to Turtleford, if you’re looking at rebuilding that highway 
now, wouldn’t it make sense to try and upgrade that so that 
primary weights on that portion of the highway could be 
granted in maybe a year or two years down the road? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I thank you for your question, 
and just a note as I’m answering it, I really appreciate the work 
that Richard Porter and that ATPC (area transportation planning 
committee) is doing, and the other ATPCs in the province. 
They’ve been doing a tremendous job in terms of identifying 
the major areas within their particular area that need work, the 
roadways that need work. 
 
There are a number of pieces to the transportation picture in 
Saskatchewan as we’re trying to get the roads built to the right 
standards for the needs in every particular area. And when we 
look at that area we know that there is work going on in 
short-line rail development as well, a potential of more grain 
haul out of Spiritwood. And I know that there is conflict as well 
as the ATPCs struggle with the issue of how we best meet the 
grain haul needs. Do we need to go to primary weights? Is that 
where the solution is? Or are there other factors that need to be 
involved, that are involved in terms of how grain should best be 
hauled? 
 
So we’ve got, in that particular area, in terms of the decision 
about how we build the road, we’ve got sensitivity to the 
short-line rail developments that are there and the possibility of 
work around a terminal at Spiritwood. We must be involved in 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

 

terms of the whole picture. We can’t just say, well kick the road 
up to primary. It is quite significant additional cost and it may 
in fact not be what’s needed in that particular area. We may find 
that we’re meeting the needs there for grain haul from the . . . 
by building it up to a structural, granular structural pavement. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. I 
thank you for your answer. I guess what I’m looking at is 
because of the elevator’s gone in Glaslyn now, where they’re 
not going to be able to facilitate the truckers with grain, there’s 
a great distance there that they’ll only be able to haul just . . . or 
not primary weights. 
 
Would it be out of the order if your department would grant, 
during certain periods of time in the year, say two or three 
months in the wintertime when the ground is frozen and the 
highway is frozen, plus in the summertime when it is dry, to 
allow primary weights to be added to that highway to allow the 
truckers to facilitate the produce coming out of that area and 
going west to North Battleford or to Lloydminster? 
 
Also in that area there’s a great amount of travelling of . . . or 
hauling of logs, I should say. And there again, without having 
the primary weights on that specific highway, it reduces the fact 
of the amount of product hauled out of there at one time. Could 
this be utilized on that highway in certain periods of time in the 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well in terms of the log haul, most of 
the trucking companies that are hauling logs are operating 
within the trucking partnership in order to manage weights. And 
we’ve found that to be quite effective so far. 
 
The other thing is that during winter months, the trucking is 
already allowed at 10 per cent above . . . yes, 10 per cent above 
primary in the winter months. So it’s already accommodated for 
during those — is it three months? — yes, during the three 
months in the winter. And so the needs are being met during 
those periods. 
 
And we’re looking, as I said earlier, we’re looking at what 
alternatives may come up in terms of short-line rail for grain 
haul, and also for the ATPCs and some of the other groups that 
are involved to try and come to a resolution about whether or 
not primary weights are the answer in terms of grain haul. 
Because that’s not clear yet. You’ve got some that are saying 
yes and some are saying no. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess my final 
question on this portion of my constituency and that is: because 
there’s primary weights from Prince Albert through Shellbrook 
right to Spiritwood already, the portion of highway from 
Shellbrook west to Glaslyn and then on to Turtleford, there is 
no primary weights as yet, would the minister commit to the 
fact that they are looking at upping at least from Spiritwood to 
Glaslyn primary weights on that highway? And if they are, how 
soon can they be put into primary weights? And if not, why 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We are still engaged in consultations 
around, around weights and primary . . . or primary weight 
highway networks. Those consultations are ongoing. I’d like to 
be able to give you a timeline but we do not have a timeline, 

deadline at this point. And we’re really trying to pull together 
all of the significant factors. 
 
So at this point, the ways that we have of enabling our . . . the 
trucking partnership for non-grain commodities, and we do 
have a number of trucking firms that are engaged in that . . . 
With grain haul, we have had central tire inflation programs. 
Wheat Pool was a primary taker on that one, using central tire 
inflation which reduced road damage. 
 
And at this point, we’ll continue with our consultations and try 
and get a comprehensive view of the development of primary 
weight system within the province as quickly as we’re able to 
through this process of consultation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
the minister and his officials. I imagine there’s not much doubt 
when the member from Rosthern gets up that you wonder what 
particular highway we’re going to be discussing. 
 
We could discuss Highway 312 and some of the concerns there. 
We could discuss Highway 12, some of the concerns that are 
there. But I think today I’d like to spend most of the time 
dealing with Highway 11, and specifically with safety. 
 
I know members in other parts of the province have highways 
that are fairly, fairly tender as far as handling heavy loads are 
concerned. That isn’t a key issue in the situation on Highway 
11. So I want to go through quite a number of the situations that 
exist there to find out what information the department uses in 
order to make its decision on how they’re going to work and fix 
the highways. 
 
So my first question . . . And we’re going to start off with the 
community of Rosthern, and then we’ll probably move to the 
Hague and Osler areas because once we’re past Osler we 
basically have twinning taking place and that has been very 
good. 
 
And I do have to, at this particular point, thank the NDP 
government for the twinning that’s happened on both Highway 
11 and Highway 12. I’ve been thankful enough that in one case 
I actually voted for a budget on that case. It’s just to let you 
know how serious I take that particular stretch. It takes a lot to 
get me to support an NDP budget, but I have done it and that 
was the key issue that made that difference. 
 
The intersection of Highway 11 and 312: and probably looking 
back 10 to 15 years — and I’m not sure in what blocks you 
have your information — I would like to know how many 
accidents have been recorded in that intersection and how many 
deaths. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, I’m sorry we do not 
have that information here in our briefing notes but we will get 
that as quickly as possible and get it to you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank the minister for that commitment. And 
I was going to ask exactly the same question with reference to 
Highway 11 and the 6th Street access, Highway 11 and the 4th 
Street access, Highway 11 and the Hague entrance, and the two 
entrances into Osler. So if I’m going to be supplied that 
information, would like the same sort of thing. 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

The question I have coming out of that information would be: 
how big a part does that information play in the kind of solution 
that the department uses in deciding how they’re going to do 
their dividing, how they’re going to move past town? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I would say that that is the biggest 
single factor in determining what kind of work needs to be done 
at any given intersection, the analysis of risk for accident or 
death. And with that information then we look at the various 
designs that could be done in that particular area and try and get 
the design that would, according to the analysis, give us the 
safest intersections that we could possibly have in those areas. 
And that pertains to twinning or the way that the access is set to 
the highway. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And at this time I’d like to take 
some time to go through some of the situations that I’ve been 
aware of. I’ve lived in that particular community for 
approximately 30 years. I have unfortunately seen some 
half-dozen burnt corpses in vehicles from accidents that 
happened at various intersections or at different times. I know 
people in our community who have survived an accident and 
were wheelchair bound; people who’ve been badly facially 
scarred because of accidents that have been there. In almost 
every single accident at those intersections, I’ve known at least 
some of the people that were involved. The one key feature in 
all of those communities that needs to be taken care of are 
turning lanes. 
 
We had two semi-trailer trucks at the intersection of 11 and 6th 
Street this summer in which a life was lost. Had there been a 
turning lane into town, when people coming from the south, 
that accident wouldn’t have happened. Same intersection, 
couple of years ago, there were three people in a vehicle coming 
from Saskatoon waiting to make a left-hand turn into the town 
of Rosthern, were hit from the back by a semi. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Those intersections have a lot of those accidents. Almost all the 
deaths that were caused there would have been avoided had 
there been turning lanes. The twinning is fine and I’ll say a little 
bit about that, more about that later on. But the fact that turning 
lanes haven’t been put in there, that’s been the situations that 
has existed there for years. 
 
And I know there have been key hot spots in the province 
where accidents occur. We’ve had that one situation close to 
Gull Lake and thankfully the government has moved on that 
and I think most of those key critical areas have been removed. 
 
The 312 from where the twinning ends till Rosthern, that 
particular section, those turning lanes have been one of the key 
critical areas. There have been other accidents at some of those 
intersections. Most of those — and if we look at the ones at 
highway intersection of 11 and 312 and 11 and 4th — have 
usually been where someone’s gone through a stop sign. Now 
there’s a limit to what you have to do. Unfortunately some 
people will go through stop signs. Department of Highways has 
done quite a good job at the highway of intersection . . . and 11. 
They’ve put up larger signs. They’ve put up lights. They’ve put 
up rumble strips. There really is nothing else you can do. 
 

And if someone drives through one of those stop signs and is 
killed, you have to say, that’s unfortunate but there’s nothing 
about Highways where they can take responsibility. And as I’ve 
said, I’m very aware of those situations. And on those, like I 
said, I think Highways has done good job of trying to make 
people as aware as possible of those stop signs. 
 
Twinning would probably not have saved any of those lives 
about going through stop signs because you still have to drive 
across lanes of traffic. And if you’re going to drive across a lane 
of traffic on a single lane, you’ll do the same thing on a twin 
situation. But I think the turning lanes are the critical ones. 
 
Now I’m not sure what kind of a timeline Highways has for 
finishing that twinning. I know that’s going to be a fairly 
expensive proposition. But it’s also a very important 
proposition and I would hope that it’s there in the very near 
future after you’ve taken care of things such as Gull Lake and a 
few other also dangerous areas. 
 
And I’m not going to ask for us to be put ahead of other areas 
that cause a lot of deaths. I will however ask to be put ahead of 
other areas where we’re discussing things as potholes and 
weight limits and all that — the lives are more important. 
 
That takes me into the other part I want to discuss to some 
extent, and that is in the twinning situations. Each community 
has some very awkward situations for the twinning. You know, 
whether you’re talking farms and odd curves or whatever at 
Osler, whether you’re discussing some of the sloughs/lakes that 
are close to the Hague area, whether you’re discussing what’s 
called the Mennonite Youth Farm near Rosthern — a large 
seniors’ complex is out there — how do you twin with that? 
 
Now it’s easy to go and give it to the engineers and say, twin 
something, because they’ll be able to do it and it’ll be a 
grandiose plan. There’s no problem with that. 
 
Now the part that I’m concerned about and want the minister to 
respond on, is when you’re looking at a grandiose plan that the 
engineers may come up with — and it may be fine for people 
going, you know, between Saskatoon and Prince Albert in 
either direction — I think we need to look at the other situations 
and that is, what is this going to do for the life of the 
community? And I think we sometimes need to say, let’s make 
the plan a little less grandiose and see if we can accommodate 
life within the community. 
 
Now Osler is a fairly rapidly growing town, doesn’t have a 
major business component at this point, probably will at some 
time. Hague has a major business component — whether you 
talk the major Ford dealership they have there, the Zak’s 
building and lumber supply which has now gone interprovincial 
and has another office in Red Deer, we have some major things 
happening there. Rosthern, being quite a large community, and 
that community is sort of a hub section for whether you’re 
talking about Batoche, whether you’re talking about the Seager 
Wheeler Farm at Duck Lake, our own arts centres that we have 
in Rosthern. We need those accesses left there. 
 
Now I believe that in the plans that are there right now that the 
6th Street access to Rosthern is being closed. Now that’s a main 
access into the community and, as I said, the arts and the 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

 

tourism is a big part of Rosthern. I knew that was part of the 
plan or one of the things that was out there. And I was hoping 
when the deputy minister took over, with his knowledge of the 
community I thought we had an in to sort of not make this 
twinning such a situation that it isolates the towns. 
 
When I go from here to Saskatoon, all those communities along 
the way have a fairly easy access into town. And as a result, I 
have personally gone through every single town between here 
and Saskatoon a number of times, either just to see what the 
town was like if I had an extra 15, 20 minutes or to get into the 
town, drive down the back alleys, and look for old cars that I 
might want to restore. Now had that been a difficult transition 
to get into those towns, I probably wouldn’t have taken the 
time. 
 
And I’m worried about those three communities that are the 
next ones in line for the twinning. How much does Department 
of Highways take into consideration when they plan their 
twinning, is the life of those rural towns? And I’m thinking 
specifically of the 6th Street access into Rosthern; the Osler 
access, which is their main access right now which I believe is 
also destined for being closed. And I’ve been, you know, talked 
to by a number of the business people that do exist in Osler. 
They have some very definite concerns. I’d like to see what 
your answer is and would probably have some response to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I’d like to thank the member for what 
I think is a very, very balanced question and acknowledging a 
lot of the work that does go on. 
 
I would have to say from my time now as minister that one of 
the things that I see and hear from the department staff, from 
the engineers, certainly is that in all considerations, safety is 
number one. 
 
And you look at the kind of investments that we’re making 
around safety — snow and winter ice removal were $18.24 
million; 15.73 million for pavement marking, for sign and 
guardrail rehabilitation, for mowing, for illumination; 4.89 
million for transportation compliance; 2.74 million for six 
major safety projects; 36 safety improvement projects for 
875,000. But just to know that it really is key. 
 
And I know that sometimes when you get the first plan that’s 
put forward, it can appear pretty grandiose. And I expect it’s 
probably trying to take into account everybody’s hopes and 
expectations — what’s the best we could do here in this 
particular area? 
 
The second thing I’m very pleased about with the work of the 
department is that they have bent over backwards time and time 
again in their consultations with the communities to try and 
accommodate what the needs are. At the same time, they’re 
trying to project 30 to 50 years out to determine what kind of 
traffic flow we’re going to have in a particular area at that time 
and to try and make sure that any change in design, which costs 
from a minimum of hundreds of thousands of dollars up to 
millions of dollars, that it’s done right, it’s done with safety as 
key, and finally it’s done with the long-term expectations of 
need accommodated. 
 
So what we have seen in particular with Rosthern has been the 

initial design that was put out there with the intersection 
improvements, with twinning possibilities. Then there was 
consultation with the community and a mix of messages coming 
from the community about access from No. 6 and No. 12, how 
that could best be accommodated to serve the needs of the 
community, to help that community to continue to grow and be 
healthy and showcase its cultural and business assets. All of 
those things continue to go into the consultations. 
 
I think one of the things that we know as well, with 312 coming 
into the highway there — it comes in currently at an angle — 
we know that between the No. 6 and that access that there is 
only a short distance. And so to try and accommodate all the 
current access points, just within the design framework, can’t be 
accommodated if safety is still to be considered number one. 
 
So we know that there is need for good access. And it’s as you 
indicated, as the member indicated, just to draw people who are 
passing by for whatever their interests might be, we want to 
make sure that there is good access to the communities. We 
want to make sure it’s safe. One of the things that we know 
needs to happen at the very least is 312 access needs to be put at 
90 degrees. We know that that will make that particular access a 
lot safer. So in summary, safety truly is number one. 
 
My experience with the department has been that they truly do 
bend over backwards to consult with the communities to try and 
accommodate the needs of those communities. And the deputy 
minister really does love his community of Rosthern and wants 
to see the best for there, as well as I know the member does. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I’ve seen that design that’s 
there and have looked at it fairly closely. And when you talk 
about 312 needing to be at right angles to Highway 11, that’s 
correct. I believe though that the curvature that they use to 
accommodate that, basically . . . And the distance from the town 
limits to 312 is a matter of a couple of hundred yards. 
 
And yet in that plan you have the speed limit of 312 going 
through town, then it is increased, and they said, well we have 
to have this big, loopy curve to accommodate that. Well when 
you come out of town why should you have to speed up for 
about 3, 4, 500 feet and then build a curve for that? Just leave 
the speed limit low and you don’t have to have as big a loop to 
get that right angle in there. 
 
There’s a lot of fairly simple things that could be done to 
accommodate all of that, and that’s when I used the word 
grandiose. And I think this is one of those things. There is 
definitely room between . . . to have that divided road, the part 
that would be on the east side, that would be the north 
travelling, to have that close enough to town to accommodate 
that. 
 
And as I said earlier on, if you have to cross traffic flow, it 
doesn’t make any difference whether your other lanes that 
you’re going to access are 100 feet away or 100 yards away, 
you still have to stop at that stop sign and cross a flow of traffic. 
So to have it close to town I think would be good. 
 
And I would ask the Department of Highways to make sure that 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

they try and reassess that because I think all of those towns that 
are growing communities are going to be cut out as far as the 
life of the community is concerned. 
 
I will leave that particular topic at this particular point. I would 
quite willingly take about half an hour to an hour to do a 
substantial tirade on why this hasn’t happened sooner, because 
as I’ve said I’ve seen the people that have been hurt, injured, 
and killed, and could say why didn’t at least turning lanes be 
put in place years ago and those accidents wouldn’t have 
happened. It would have saved lives in the tens if that would 
have happened. And I’m not sure what the cost is to SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and all the other costs 
that are there, but strictly on a dollar figure I’m sure those 
turning lanes could have been put in place and it could have 
been saved in another way and another time through another 
arm of government. 
 
But we may get back to that tirade another time later on this 
spring, because it’s not like I don’t want to give it. 
 
But I do have two other areas that I want to get into fairly 
quickly this afternoon. And one is just asking the minister what 
the involvement is with the Department of Highways with 
implementing the toll snowmobile roads and enforcing those. 
And those are the trails beside the highways. 
 
And I want to know what involvement is of the Department of 
Highways with that because in my area, and I’m thinking of 
312 specifically, there are a lot of farmers living very close to 
that who have no interest in belonging to any organized clubs 
and there’s a groomed trail. Are they allowed to use it if they’re 
going to go visit the neighbour half a mile away or two miles 
away or four miles away? It seems that that’s a toll situation. 
 
And I’m going to let the minister explain Department of 
Highway’s involvement in that and then we may take that a 
little further. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well with regard to the snowmobiles, 
the question would be more clearly asked of the minister 
responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
 
However the snowmobile clubs in a particular area operate, 
groom those trails and they set their own fees for people who 
are travelling on them. And it really is under another . . . It’s 
under The Snowmobile Act and the minister for SGI would be 
able to fill you in further on that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And we will try and do that. I 
think the minister needs to realize that it would be . . . it’s about 
as ludicrous as if someone planted some daisies beside a 
sidewalk and said well, I’m helping to take care of this 
sidewalk, therefore now you’ll have to pay to walk on it even if 
you’re just walking to see the next door neighbour. We would 
say that’s bizarre. The people living in this area who have this 
situation there, it’s just as bizarre. 
 
I have one other area I want to get into quickly this afternoon 
and that is, it relates to some extent to the member’s statement I 
made. And I know last Friday, I believe it was, the minister got 
into a little bit of an enthusiastic discussion with a skateboarder 
outside. And I’m wondering with regards to this junkyard that’s 

showing up outside, what the minister’s involvement is with 
that, if there is any? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well in some jurisdictions around 
North America skateboarding actually is now being considered 
a means of transportation. But it doesn’t really come under the 
Department of Highways and Transportation. 
 
And I think, as the member opposite would indicate and 
probably most of us in this House would indicate, we don’t 
want to see any junkyards anywhere. We don’t want to see a 
building that is damaged. We do want our young people to be 
able to enjoy the beauty of this for many generations to come. 
 
And I think in the desire to try and accommodate some of the 
needs to move the young people away from heritage parts of 
our building, we may have had a little bit too much activity in 
terms of putting things out there that might be structures for 
them. But that’s going to be dealt with. And we do want to 
make sure that the building continues to be beautiful and is 
enhanced by anything that is done. 
 
So though it is a means of transportation, it doesn’t rightly 
come under our estimates but I would accommodate by giving 
you that answer anyway. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the 
minister’s officials, welcome. I appreciate the opportunity to 
ask you a couple of questions today and they’re mostly going to 
deal with the area around Kelvington. 
 
The first question is Highway No. 38. It actually goes through 
the town of Kelvington up to Greenwater Park. And it had some 
work done on it last year. But it was in deplorable state a couple 
of years ago because when the tourism guide came out, instead 
of telling people to go to Greenwater Park down this highway, 
they actually told them to go to Melfort and come around and 
back from the North, which is not saying a lot about the 
highways in that area. It had a huge economic impact on the 
Kelvington area and it is still quite a concern. 
 
The other thing that is quite a problem is Highway No. 38. 
Because it goes through the town of Kelvington, it means that 
the town itself is expected to pick up the costs of maintaining it. 
I’m wondering if this issue is being looked at at all by your 
department, because of course there’s quite a burden to the 
people of Kelvington when they are actually carrying the 
responsibility of putting a highway right through the middle of 
their town. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Highway 38 north of Kelvington is a 
TMS (thin membrane surface) highway and it has not qualified 
under the Prairie Grain Roads Program for upgrade and so it 
will basically just, in terms of any scheduling for this year, it 
will just get routine maintenance for safety and that’ll be about 
it for 38. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure you recognize that 
because the town itself has to bear the cost of the maintenance 
through the town even though there’s a considerable amount of 
traffic on it, it does put an unfair burden on to the town. Is that 
an issue that’s being looked at by the department? 
 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well as I’d mentioned earlier, and I 
don’t have the exact population, but it’s my understanding that 
Kelvington would fit into, at least according to the map, it 
would fit into the category where it’s over 1,000 and would be 
responsible for their own maintenance. 
 
That said, we do have, of course, highway interface with the 
communities all over the province and there are ongoing 
discussions with communities about maintenance, what the 
community is responsible for, what we will do as a department 
as well. 
 
So basically under law, if a community is over 1,000 they are 
responsible for the roadways, associated roadways within the 
community boundaries. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But you did open a 
small window of hope there for me, saying that there was 
ongoing discussions and negotiations with communities. Does 
that mean that the town can contact your department and 
request some aid in helping to maintain this highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well one of the things that, again, that 
I’ve found with the department is that we really try and 
accommodate where possible and to help out with communities. 
A lot of the people come from the communities around as well 
and want to do what they can. 
 
But in terms of discussions it’s kind of . . . Very often it’s, is 
there something that we can do in a partnership? There’s a bit 
of a trade-off that could happen. I mean there’s no legislation at 
all that allows us basically to do this. There’s no grant program. 
But just accommodations can be made just because we try and 
accommodate, and try and help where we can. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not really 
hearing any real promise but I’m not hearing you say no. So I’m 
sure that when I give a copy of Hansard to the council that 
means that they’ll be contacting your office, and appreciate it. 
 
The other highway going in to Kelvington that’s a major 
concern is Highway No. 49. They’ve asked for this to be 
considered a primary weight highway. It is the largest centre in 
a 35- or 40-mile radius and they’ve contacted your office a 
number of times, especially through the North East 
Transportation Planning Committee. I know that they’ve sent a 
number of letters in from various organizations and groups that 
are talking about the importance of the upgrade for this 
highway. Greenwater Park is one of the main areas that will be 
affected by Highway No. 49. 
 
We know that the elimination of highways means that there’s a 
lot of heavy-haul traffic that is going to be going on grid roads 
now. And the RMs (rural municipality) that are surrounding this 
area are feeling the effect of the heavy-haul traffic that’s taking 
the grid roads because of the primary weight restriction on the 
highway. 
 
The co-op itself has 25 to 40 trucks that are serviced at the 
cardlocks centre and there’s going to be more of them if they 
actually build the proposed co-op there. Kelvington Transport 
tells me that they have 870 loads out of Kelvington every year 
and 450 loads into the town of Kelvington. And they are also 

affected by the fact that there’s lower weight restrictions. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The Wheat Pool has written to you, giving you the information 
that 1,270 trucks a year go into the Kelvington area. Right now 
the weight restriction is 35 tonne per load and if there was 
change to a primary weight road it could go up to 42 tonnes. 
And this would mean the number of loads would decline to 
about 1,050. This would be a considerable economic saving and 
again work toward the revitalization of some of these smaller 
communities. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, is this highway one that is on the, at least in 
the planning stages to be changed to a primary weight load? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Highway 49 is currently a structural 
pavement and clearly has been identified by the area 
transportation planning committee as one of those that they 
would like to see a priority for primary weights as we’re 
reviewing the weight structure of pavements around the 
province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you give us a better idea of what you 
mean when you’re saying reviewing? What type of time frame 
are you looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well as I indicated to one of the 
members earlier, we do not have a deadline drafted for the 
review. The consultations are going on. We’re looking at a 
number of factors. We’re looking at what rail possibilities there 
are. 
 
You’ll know that we already moved a number of highways that 
were 10-month primary weight highways to 12-month and 
we’re still getting feedback on that. Generally people are 
pleased but there are those who are concerned about the lifespan 
of the roads when you do increase the weight. 
 
So all of those things are going on in terms of the consultations 
and the review. But there is no timeline on it. We don’t have a 
deadline on that at this point, so that’s the best I can give you at 
this time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. From what I 
understand is that there has been some progress made on 
moving some of these highways into primary weight areas. So I 
guess then I’m going to take that as a clue that I should start 
nagging more. You know, they say the squeaky wheel gets the 
grease so maybe I should be bringing it to the minister’s 
attention every opportunity I have. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s just two other issues that I want to discuss 
with you. One of them is the area of grass mowing along the 
ditches. I have a couple of constituents who sometimes do this 
contract work. Can you give me an idea, first of all, if the rates 
have changed this year for mowing, and when the tenders are 
going to go out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The tender schedule has been 
approved for the mowing contracts but we don’t have it 
available right now. But we’ll undertake to get that to you just 
as quickly as we can. 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I would 
imagine that means if there’s been a change in the rental rates 
for various forms of equipment, that’s been approved as well. If 
it has been, I would appreciate if I could get an update on the 
rental rates that are cost shared by your department as well. 
 
The last issue that I wanted to discuss with you is companies 
that are actually very frustrated with the timelines it takes to get 
payment. In lots of cases companies will tell me that it’s 
nothing to have to wait three or four months to receive a 
payment from your department. 
 
Of course with the cost of carrying on a business, this puts a lot 
of burden on companies. I am aware of . . . I think it was last 
year we discussed, through a written question, companies that 
were actually suing the department. 
 
I’m wondering right now if you can tell me how many . . . if the 
Department of Highways is involved in any lawsuits from 
different contractors across the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — A couple of things. First, I’ll respond 
again to the mowing contracts that you were asking about. We 
don’t set rates for equipment. The tenders are set out; the 
contractors bid on them; and by their bid, whatever they bid, 
that’s what they are paid. So they might set their own price for a 
use of a particular piece of equipment. But the nature of the 
tender is that the contractor puts in a bid and if it’s acceptable, 
then they would receive the contract. 
 
Secondly, in terms of payment, we’re very . . . try to be very 
diligent about paying at a minimum of every six weeks, based 
on work completed. Where completed, it is evaluated and then 
the payments go out. If there are disputes then, certainly if 
there’s a dispute about what or how something should be paid, 
if it’s before the courts, then there would be holdbacks until 
there is resolution of those disputes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many cases 
are involved in litigation at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — No, we can’t give you that information 
at this time but if you’d like, we could get that number for you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The minister 
probably won’t be overly surprised that the questions I have are 
on Highway 15 since that’s been brought up by myself with 
petitions and other areas from the constituency of Watrous. It is 
undoubtedly the absolutely worst highway that I have. 
 
My understanding is that the minister and/or his officials have 
met with the rural municipality of Mount Hope and there has 
been some type of agreement that’s been reached to address the 
stretch of Highway 15 from the town of Semans, I believe, to 
Highway No. 20. 
 
Can the minister give me an update on how that is going, what 
progress they hope to make, and, you know, when the project 
will be completed or even initiated? If he could give me some 
information on that, I would really appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well we do have a partnership 
agreement in place at this point. We negotiated over the past 

year on that. And it’s now on the scale of getting the funding in 
place to find out what we can do in terms of the stages of 
completing that road. But it will be upgraded. The agreement is 
in place and it’s just a matter of getting the funding in place. 
 
It’s our intent to do a portion of the road this year and then to 
stage it as we’re able to afford those upgrades. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. When 
he was saying that it will be done in stages, I’m assuming over 
a course of more than one year but he can correct me if I’m 
wrong on that. Are we referring to any farther than from the 
town of Semans to Highway 20 or is he also including Highway 
20 beyond the west? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The agreements that we have in place 
are with the local municipalities there. It is to run from Semans 
to No. 20, specifically. And when you go further north, we also 
have agreements in place over to No. 2, I believe. 
 
And from 2 beyond, those agreements are not in place but we 
would have to work with the municipalities there. And once 
those agreements are in place then we would see movement. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. When you mention 
from Highway 20 to Highway 2 agreements, are those 
agreements also with the rural municipalities that are along that 
route? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The piece from 20 to 2 has had a 
combination actually of . . . Early section close to 20 was with, 
in conjunction with the municipalities. And the second sections, 
they are Prairie Grain Roads Program up to No. 20. And so it’s 
through Prairie Grain Roads that we’ll be completing that piece. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. Going back to his 
initial answer when he said that, you know, they’re waiting for 
funding to be in place, what funding was he referring to? 
Funding within his department or are they looking for funding 
elsewhere? Or what exactly was he referring to when he 
mentions they’re waiting for the funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We have just over five and a half 
million for strategic rural partnerships and we have a number 
yet to come in, so it basically is within that internal budget 
within our department. It’s to find out what we can do within 
this year, within the monies allocated for rural partnerships. 
 
And so basically it’s an internal matter. It’s based on the 
number of agreements that are in and what can be handled at 
any given time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Could the minister give some indication 
then when he would be aware of the number of agreements that 
were in place and would be in the position then to allocate the 
money within those projects that he has so that we would know 
when this project would be initiated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, we should know within about a 
month and be able to give you an answer on that. Just there are 
a number of them yet to come in, and then we have to set the 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

 

priorities. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I’m looking at a 
order in council dated February 25 of this year, wherein the 
order in council states that the head office of the Saskatchewan 
Grain Car Corporation will be in Regina. I understand that prior 
to this the head office was in Melville. 
 
I wonder, could you elaborate as to why the change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The move of office was primarily an 
efficiency move. Functionally, the supports are here in Regina 
for the Grain Car Corporation and the move was an 
acknowledgement that the work was primarily being done here 
anyway. And with need for making our department and the 
Grain Car Corporation as effective and efficient as it could be, 
this seemed the right move. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, this move I would imagine would affect 
some employees in Melville. I guess the question is, how many 
employees were there in the head office in Melville? Has the 
move taken place and if so, when did that happen? And what 
has been done with those employees in Melville that were at the 
office in Melville; is there plans to look after those folks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The action took place shortly 
following the passing of the OC (order in council) and there 
was one employee involved, a person who was doing some 
secretarial duties, and there was an office rental as well. The 
office rental was no longer needed of course. And so the one 
employee was laid off and the office is closed. 
 
Mr. Hart: — The Grain Car Corporation, I believe they started 
with approximately . . . or with 1,000 grain hopper cars, if I 
recall correctly way back many years ago. How many cars does 
the Grain Car Corporation own today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, we don’t have the exact number 
at our fingertips. Some of them are taken out of service due to 
damage. But we can get you that number in short order. 
 
Mr. Hart: — In a question that would relate to the grain cars 
and the Grain Car Corporation, Minister, you are certainly 
aware that there is the Farmer Rail Car Coalition has an 
initiative to obtain ownership of the federal cars. If that group 
should be successful, what role do you see the Grain Car 
Corporation playing, if any? And further to that, would the 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation make its cars available to 
that group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We’re quite hopeful that the Farmer 
Rail Car Coalition will be successful in getting the federal cars. 
Any feedback we’ve got recently has seemed quite positive. 
And in terms of the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, 
certainly if the Farmer Rail Car Coalition is successful that 
would be a natural kind of negotiation to get into as to what we 
would do in terms of the cars that are still under our ownership. 
 
One of the roles that I think the Grain Car Corporation has 
played very successfully has been an advisory role, certainly 
helping in a number of grain logistics projects, including 
advisory capacity with the Farmer Rail Car Coalition and 
support for those bids. 

So at this point we have not defined a plan but certainly it 
would be looked at. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, do you foresee perhaps that the Grain 
Car Corporation would perhaps provide some services, whether 
they’d be more so over and above advisory, perhaps in the area 
of repairing grain cars and that sort of thing? Looking down the 
road, let’s just assume for the moment that the Rail Car 
Coalition people did attain ownership of the federal cars. Is it 
your plan to have the Grain Car Corporation or some other arm 
of government or agency of your government play an active 
role with the Farmer Rail Car Coalition in maintenance and 
administration and those sorts of things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — No, that’s not an area that we’re 
exploring. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So do I take it from your answer that the answer 
is no, the Grain Car Corporation will not be playing a role? And 
does that also include to any other agency of your government, 
whether it be a Crown or some other department agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s our understanding that in terms of 
their planning, in terms of their discussion — the Farmer Rail 
Car Coalition’s discussions — that that is an area that they are 
interested in and we think that that’s a healthy area for them to 
explore. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move that we 
report progress on Highways and Transportation as agreed and 
move to the Department of Learning. 
 
(16:00) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. On my right is the deputy minister of Learning, 
Dr. Craig Dotson. On my further right is Don Sangster, and 
Don is the executive director of school finance. Behind Don is 
Dr. Michael Littlewood, and Michael is the executive director 
of legislation and school administration. Next to Michael is Dr. 
Margaret Lipp, and Dr. Lipp is the executive director of 
Saskatchewan Learning. Behind us is Dr. Wayne McElree, and 
Dr. McElree is assistant deputy minister of Learning. Directly 
behind me is Gillian McCreary, and Gillian is the executive 
director of Saskatchewan Learning. And behind Wayne is 
Kevin Hoyt, and Kevin is the director of corporate services. 
 
Behind the bar we have Dr. John Biss, and Dr. Biss is the 
executive director of university services. We have Glenda Eden, 
she is the manager of financial planning; Norma Knuth, 
manager of financial operations, Teachers’ Superannuation 
Commission; Shirley Robertson, manager of pension benefits, 
Teachers’ Superannuation Commission; Brady Salloum, 
executive director of student financial assistance; and Nelson 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

Wagner, executive director of facilities planning. And I think 
I’ve got everybody. 
 
Before we start in to the questions I just have a few opening 
remarks to make about the department. Saskatchewan’s $1.2 
billion investment in Learning this year is a double investment 
in our future. It’s an investment in the future of individual 
learners and an investment in the future of our province. This 
kind of investment is one reason that in Saskatchewan our 
future is wide open. Building our future begins with kids, early 
childhood development is critical for future success. Our Kids 
First program expansion this year will enable it to serve 440 
more families. In total more 920 families will receive early 
intervention and support. 
 
This year’s budget increased the foundation operating grants to 
our K to 12 schools by 3 per cent to 510 million. This sustains 
our high quality education system, a system that is focused on 
the needs of students. Our SchoolPLUS initiative focuses the 
resources of seven government departments on meeting the 
needs of students in the school. SchoolPLUS is a critically 
important initiative of the Government of Saskatchewan and I 
welcome the recent appointment of David Forbes, MLA for 
Saskatoon Idylwyld, as Legislative Secretary to oversee the 
implementation of SchoolPLUS. 
 
A strong economy and a civil society are built on an educated 
and productive population. We believe that one of the major 
roles of government is to improve the educational success and 
the well-being of every child and youth in Saskatchewan. With 
this budget we are increasing our support for partnerships 
between school boards and Aboriginal organizations, like the 
innovative partnerships in Meadow Lake, North Battleford, and 
Regina. 
 
Saskatchewan people are innovators and they are comfortable 
using new technologies such as digital communication 
technologies. Our schools, our public libraries, and our 
post-secondary institutions have been leaders in providing 
digital resources, on-line access to information, and on-line 
courses. 
 
The budget supports the continued innovative use of technology 
to expand the quality of learning, the quality of learning 
resources and access to them. Investing in digital technologies 
and e-learning across the sector is an investment in our future. 
The future prosperity and well-being of Saskatchewan and of 
Saskatchewan people depends on our having a highly trained 
and highly skilled workforce. 
 
We are building on strengths such as our regional college 
system. Our regional colleges provide high quality university, 
technical, and other training opportunities in communities all 
across rural and northern Saskatchewan. SIAST continues to 
build on its solid track record in technical training. 
 
Saskatchewan’s innovative, industry-led apprenticeship system 
has more than 5,300 apprentices registered. This budget 
sustains our investment in skills training programs that are 
employment focused and responsive to the evolving needs of 
employers and workers. 
 
Saskatchewan has the highest proportion of young people in 

Western Canada enrolled full time in university. Our two 
universities continue to build on their successes as centres of 
excellence in research and innovation. The operating grant pool 
for the universities, federated colleges, and affiliated colleges is 
being increased by 3 per cent. Over and above that we are 
providing additional targeted funding for increased student 
intakes in medicine and the northern nursing education 
program. This will help us to ensure that we have the health 
professionals we need in communities around the province. 
 
We are working with the University of Saskatchewan to 
continue feasibility studies for the construction of an academic 
health sciences complex, and we are working with the 
University of Regina to continue feasibility studies regarding a 
new laboratory building. 
 
The budget also increases our financial support to students to 
enhance accessibility to high quality education and training 
programs. Saskatchewan was the first province to sign an 
agreement with the federal government to enhance benefits to 
students by simplifying the administrative process for student 
loans. This year the Canada-Saskatchewan Integrated Student 
Loans Program will provide more than $134 million to assist 
about 17,000 students. 
 
Learning is a Saskatchewan success story. Our focus on 
children and young people provides a strong foundation for 
learning, and our strong library system supports lifelong 
learning. Our post-secondary system helps people prepare for 
personal growth as well as for real jobs in the new economy. 
 
And we continue to build for the future. One of the most visible 
signs of that growth is the splendid new Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College to be officially opened in June — a source of 
pride for First Nations people, a source of pride for all of us, 
and a model of partnership. 
 
Another is the Canadian Light Source, the synchrotron, which 
will begin operation in less than a year, the largest scientific 
project undertaken in Canada in 30 years — a magnet for 
scholars from around the world; a powerful tool for pure and 
applied research. 
 
The structures and projects that display our growth are 
supported by Saskatchewan’s real strength — its people. 
 
Our investments in learning support a strong future, supported 
by strong communities, supported by well-educated and highly 
trained individuals. Our future is wide open. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And to the 
minister and to her officials, welcome. It’s a great opportunity 
we have here today to discuss the spending priority of the 
government in the area of Learning, the second largest spending 
area for this government. 
 
I’ve told a number of people over the last years that I’m the 
Saskatchewan Party critic for K to 12 Learning, not necessarily 
education but on the way we spend money. So I want to go on 
record as making sure people are aware that I’m not criticizing 
Learning ever because I do understand and realize, as much as 
everyone in this room, that education is the key to the future 
and we have to be working together to ensure that all our 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

 

students are ready to take over. 
 
I am of course concerned that, with the words of the minister, 
the fact that we are still planning on the decline of over 30,000 
students by the end of the decade. It’s not something that is 
addressed directly. And even though education itself is not 
going to be changing this issue, the fact that we won’t, we’re 
not talking about growing a population means that we don’t 
have a combination of departments working together where we 
can ensure that education is going to be a real priority to 
everyone. 
 
I have a number of questions to discuss, not the least of which 
will be the new appointment for one of the MLAs for 
SchoolPLUS on-line learning, the fact that we have 18 school 
divisions that don’t get any money from the government and yet 
the minister has talked about covering the costs of the teachers’ 
salaries, and how we can actually ensure that the people of the 
province know how this money is spent when we get that type 
of information going out across the province. 
 
But to start today, I would like to ask the minister if there’s any 
real changes in the foundation operating grant this year, in the 
way the formula was actually derived. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There were no major changes. This year 
there were some minor changes, but basically it was the same as 
always. And if there’s any of the small changes you want to 
discuss, we can go through those. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, probably the one area that I 
would like to know if there’s been any change is the isolated 
school factor, or the small schools grant. Can you give me an 
idea of what’s happening in that area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There was no change in the approach to 
the calculation. We did increase the per-student money. So we 
put in an extra $1 million into that process. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have been 
receiving information from various school boards around the 
province as they set their rates or continue, or are working on 
setting their rates this year. 
 
I am sure by the time we finish our Learning estimates in the 
next couple of months that we will know how many school 
boards will actually have to increase the mill rates and I am also 
somewhat concerned that changes in the assessment in the next 
couple of years are going to mean that there will be more school 
boards that will be in the zero grant category as well. 
 
Madam Minister, before I get into anything real . . . into any of 
the particulars, I just want to ask about the high-school dropout 
rate. I’ve been at a number of functions lately where the 
statement was made that we have the lowest high-school 
dropout rate in Canada and yet we don’t take into consideration 
the Native schools on reserves. Is there any work being done to 
look at the dropout rate in that area so that we can include those 
figures in the overall picture? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This was a Statistics Canada survey 
conducted in 2000 — that’s the one you’re speaking about? — 
and it did survey youth 18 to 20 in all Canadian provinces. So 

we believe it to be accurate but it did not include Aboriginal 
students, band school students. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess my 
question was, is there any work being done within the province 
to see if we can determine what the dropout rate is, using the 
numbers in our band schools as well? I’m concerned that this 
report talks about an analysis of what’s happening to the people 
that are ages, that are older than the 20- to 22-year-old and see 
what’s happening with them. The outcomes of the education 
system for both on-reserve and off is going to be of great 
importance to all of us as we try and grow this province. 
 
So I understand that this report didn’t talk about the on-reserve 
schools, but I’m wondering what the Department of Learning is 
doing to see what is happening there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We are committed to finding solutions 
with our partners to how to track our students. And we used to 
track them from 9 to 12 and . . . or 10 to 12, grade 12s. We now 
have 90 per cent of our K to 9 students also included in our 
tracking and we are working towards having a tracking system 
that tracks all students in the province. 
 
And we’re working with the First Nations as well to deal with 
that, with some MOUs (memorandum of understanding) that we 
have recently signed to track Aboriginal students as well on the 
band schools. 
 
So we’ve expanded our tracking system and we’re working on 
implementing it fully across the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, we had an opportunity to 
speak a month ago and we talked about tracking students so I’m 
going to go into this area even though it isn’t something I had 
planned on discussing at this time. 
 
In order to track the students, we’re going to have to have 
student identification numbers. And I believe you’d indicated, 
at that time, you had hoped the process would . . . or some type 
of system would be in place by September of this year. I didn’t 
know . . . I was led to believe it was going to be for all students 
because of course children are moving from ages of 
kindergarten right to grade 12. 
 
I’m wondering if you can give me the status of this tracking 
system and if all reserves are going to be involved in it, if it’s 
going to be on a voluntary basis or how we were going to 
determine that all children are actually identified in the 
province. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The student data system, the SDS is what 
we’re talking about now. It is a system, a tracking system, that 
has been . . . Its conceptual design is complete and we have 
now, as I just said before, have included all K to 9 students in it, 
all across the province. And we have already done the 10 to 
12s. They were already included. So we are moving to almost 
90 per cent of our students are in the system and being tracked, 
including on the band schools. 
 
This system is going to include things like the children that are 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

in the school, in all the schools that they’re in. But I think you 
asked about some sort of identification of each student. I don’t 
think we have that anticipated at the moment, like wristbands. 
But we do have enrolment information on all the children in K 
to 12 now, the 90 per cent of them across the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, thank you. I believe that the 
reason we were looking for student identification numbers is so 
we could track students that move from one school to another, 
specifically from the band to a city or a town and then back 
again. So that we are all aware that there are a couple of 
thousand of students — and I’m probably being conservative — 
within our school system that are considered hidden students, 
meaning they probably enrolled in school sometime in 
September and then moved and did not go back into the school 
system at some time. So without having this formal number and 
being able to say, where is this student at a certain time during 
the year, these students may be lost. 
 
So I was hoping that when you said you had this student 
identification number available, it meant that there was actually 
a number, whether it was connected to their health number or 
social services number . . . I mean SIN (social insurance 
number) number, some way of identifying students. 
 
And again, when I talked to a number of people over at DIAND 
(Department of Indian and Northern Development), they 
suggested that through the reserve they actually . . . there’s 
numbers already in place. Maybe there was a chance to use 
numbers that were already given to individuals. 
 
What process is your department on at this time when it comes 
to giving an actual student identification number to children in 
the school system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The system as it’s designed has assigned a 
Saskatchewan student number. We’re also working on 
agreements with Health and with advice from Justice because 
there’s privacy issues involved in linking with perhaps the SIN 
number or the health number. So we are working on those 
issues. 
 
But we do have an assigned student number for the students we 
already are tracking now. So we can follow, as you were 
saying, them if they move from school to school. But there are 
other issues and we want to look at maybe simplifying the 
system by looking at some of the links we can make with the 
other departments, in particular Health. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I imagine the new member 
that has been given a position of working with the SchoolPLUS 
area is going to find that this is an area that’s going to be of 
great importance to him because if we are actually going to 
integrate the different departments, we’re going to have to find 
a way to ensure that the same number is used, whether it’s in 
Health or Justice or Social Services. 
 
So to start another number is probably not going to be an 
efficient use of time or money. So I was really hoping that we 
had to come up with some innovative idea of ensuring that we 
would have a system that worked right from the very beginning. 
But we’ll discuss that when we get into the SchoolPLUS area. 
 

Madam Minister, I want to go into one specific area right now 
and I’m sure that you were thinking this is going to come up. 
But I’m talking about the Englefeld school issue and the fact 
that there is a number of, I believe, 122 appeals that are going to 
take place this year because of designation of school support. 
 
I know with changes in legislation — I believe it was three 
years ago — we have one form that’s used right across 
Saskatchewan when a property owner registers to pay their 
taxes, and I believe the copy of . . . There is one form that’s 
used right across the whole province. If I’m wrong, I’m sure 
you’ll correct me. But I believe this form says that someone has 
to indicate if they were a member of the religious faith that’s 
been established in an area. 
 
So I guess I’ll stop there and ask you if this form is being used 
consistently right across Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As far as we know, the form is being used 
consistently, and that form has been agreed to by both the 
Catholic and the separate . . . or Catholic and the public 
divisions of the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association). 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The notice of 
appeal to a board of revision gives a number of places where 
someone can designate how they’re going, why they’re 
appealing against a certain issue. And one of them says, the 
preparation or content of the assessment rule. But nowhere on 
there does it say designation of school support. 
 
Can you explain to me how they can determine that they are 
going to appeal this designation of school support when it’s not 
part of the court of revision paper? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The courts have ruled that the board of 
revision does have the right to hear an appeal based on 
inaccuracies. I think that’s what you were asking. So the court 
has ruled that the board of revision can hear this — can hear an 
appeal. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, can you tell me where the 
Department of Learning is on this issue? I know you understand 
that there is a court case . . . or this court of revision is going to 
take place and that the lawyers involved are being paid for by 
— the one side — by the SSTA. Is there any help from the 
Department of Learning? And where is the Department of 
Learning standing on this issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Department of Learning is providing 
no help with the legal bills of individual parties. And we are not 
a party to the dispute and we are not taking sides. We just 
understand the law is clear and we will observe the 
developments. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I know the autonomy of the 
school board is of utmost importance to your department as it is 
to our party and the way we are looking at education. Having 
parental choices and having the parents involved in making the 
decisions on what’s happening to the students is key in making 
sure that the parents get the type of education that the children 
need as well. 
 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

 

But this issue is something that is going to . . . or has the 
potential of reaching beyond just the bounds of the two school 
divisions that are involved. It has the potential of going all the 
way to the Supreme Court, which I believe is something that 
nobody wants to have happen. Because with the changes in the 
legislation a few years ago, I don’t believe this is going to 
happen any more where a school division is going to be able to 
start again. 
 
So I think it’s an issue that should be looked at in a way of 
saying how is this going to benefit the students? How’s this 
going to benefit children? How’s this going to benefit 
education? 
 
Has your department been asked to give any input into it at all? 
And are you willing or prepared to talk to either side about this 
issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We have not been asked, as far as we 
know, to participate in any type of advice or mediation or 
whatever between the parties. 
 
But I just want to mention, to point out something that you did 
mention in that about changing the law. We clarified the forms 
to conform with the Constitution of Canada and the law. We 
didn’t change the law. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
Going on to the area, I noticed in the estimates that this year 
there’s . . . the number of full-time equivalents is 528.2. And 
that is up somewhat, I’m not saying specifically, just up a little 
bit from last year. 
 
Can you give me an idea, over the past numbers of years — and 
I don’t know how far back you have information with you — 
what this number has doing? Has it been increasing? And I’m 
thinking specifically in the K to 12 area. And I know now that 
you keep . . . they’re all combined, so it’s difficult to break 
them down. But can you give me an idea of what the numbers 
of staff within the Department of Learning is doing? Is it going 
up or down? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The FTEs (full-time equivalents) have 
remained fairly steady over the last decade. But this year in fact 
we do appear, on vote 5, we have got 559 this year, down from 
564 last year. So we have decreased our FTEs. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Ms. Draude: — I guess that looks different from the actual 
budget number then where we had 528 under the department 
estimated and 523 last year. If I look under . . . on page 91, 
estimated 2002-2003 was 523.2; 2003-2004 is 528.2. So there is 
an increase in that area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Same page, but you didn’t finish the next 
line and add it in to get the totals that I just mentioned. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, over the last three years, 
we’ve had an average of between 4 and 5,000 students a year 
lost in this province. And that should . . . That means in every 
school division there has been a decrease in the amount of 
money that is given to them, if they are fortunate enough to 

receive funds from the government, because the formula is 
based on the number of students in an area. 
 
So school divisions have seen an actual decrease in the amount 
of money because of the enrolment figures declining. And yet, 
we do not see the same number decline, percentage of decline in 
the Department of Learning. Can you explain that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The amount of money put into the schools 
has increased over the last . . . since ’95 significantly every 
year, and each year there is a decreasing enrolment. But each 
year also, there is an increased cost to educate per student. And 
as well as the different programs that we’re adding into the 
system to assist students with different needs. 
 
So the system itself has increased its cost and we’re spending 
more per student per year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the increased cost . . . the 
increased money that has been going into the school division is 
going by way of increased wages which are of course 
negotiated. And I’m not saying it’s not necessary because we 
have to ensure we have high-quality teachers, and that they are 
. . . we have the professional people we need to educate our 
children, but that we still have less students in the province. 
 
And it means that when it comes to the administration of those 
students, the numbers of . . . the percentage of people that are 
working to administrate those, the work for those children, 
should be going down as well if we’re talking about numbers of 
people. 
 
And that’s basically what I was asking you about is, I don’t see 
a 7.5 per cent decline in the number of people that are working 
in the Department of Learning over the last four years like I see 
the number decline in the student enrolment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I just want to . . . I didn’t hear really a 
question but I do want to say that when we talk about the 
increase in money going into teachers’ salaries, the teachers are 
who deliver the programs. 
 
And much the same as in Health, which is always my point of 
reference, the front-line workers, the human resources in both 
departments, are 70 to 80 per cent of the cost. The teachers 
touch the students. They’re the ones who educate the students, 
who teach the students, who deliver the programs. So of course 
that’s where our money’s going to go. 
 
And the cost of educating a student has risen. And the 
department has kept up with the different programs and 
administered those programs, and delivered the programs to the 
students, through the teachers, in a certainly responsible way, 
and has indicated our support for K to 12 and post-secondary 
education by putting $1.2 billion into education. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I’m discussing the number of 
people that are directly involved in your department, the ones 
that are administrating and managing the Department of 
Learning. 
 
I’m not sure what . . . When I looked under FTE staff 
complement, I saw department had actually gone up, revolving 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2003 

 

funds has gone down. Maybe you could explain to me first of 
all what the revolving fund is and then we can decide whether 
the actual help that’s coming from the department for the 
children in this province is going up, or is it just . . . or is the 
administration part of keeping a government going, going up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’ll go to the question of the revolving 
funds FTE issue first. The wind-down of the learning resources 
distribution centre resulted in 7.5 FTEs being lost. The transfer 
of the . . . we had one transfer of the executive director to 
Corrections and Public Safety, and we transferred three 
employees from the Saskatchewan Communications Network, 
the SCN; so that resulted in a net loss of 5.5 FTEs. That’s the 
revolving fund question. 
 
Your question about corresponding student enrolments to staff 
numbers in the department, they cannot be explicitly linked. If 
we had a big increase in students, we would not see a 
corresponding increase in staff in the department. Staff in the 
department provide services, leadership, curriculum support — 
all the things that have to be done all the time anyways for the 
students that we do have in the system. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s exactly 
the kind of answer I needed to hear and it’s probably the same 
answer that school boards right across this province are hearing 
when they get their budget and they see that their enrolment has 
gone down. 
 
So they get less money from the department because you’re 
saying, okay there’s fewer students so you don’t need as much 
money. But, correspondingly, their work has not gone down; 
they still have to light the buildings; they still have to heat the 
buildings; they still need support staff. They still need 
everything that is not recognized by your department when it 
comes to the amount of money you’re getting. 
 
On one hand I can understand how it has to work in the 
department, but it has to work out in the field as well. We have 
to ensure that school boards have the capability, or have the 
money to fund the education system. 
 
So in our case when the 18 school divisions that get not one 
penny from this government, and the other school divisions — 
and so far I’ve seen at least nine that got a lot less money this 
year than last year, and a number of school divisions who have 
already reported that their mill rate is going up — means that 
the responsibility that they’re trying to have for the children of 
this province is going further onto the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
It isn’t affecting the Department of Learning because you’re 
still continuing to give the high quality of service that the 
students expect across this province, that teachers expect, and 
parents expect. But I don’t see that it’s happening when it 
comes to going down the scale to the amount of money that’s 
given to the people. 
 
On budget day, when I heard the minister talk about the amount 
of money that was going to be given to K to 12 education and 
how the operating grant had gone up and everybody was 
supposed to be happy, at the end of the day people knew that it 
was in some cases covering the teachers’ salaries, in most cases 

not. 
 
It did not at all cover support staff. It did not cover the increase 
in utilities. It did not cover the increase in insurance. It did not 
cover the increase in fuel. And it did not cover so many of the 
other things that is necessary to keep the school system going. 
 
So I’m sure that we’re going to have this discussion on other 
days as well. But I would like now to refer, before I let my 
colleague ask you a few questions about . . . I would ask him to 
help me out in asking these Learning questions, I want to talk to 
you for a moment about capital — the money that was given for 
capital this year. 
 
I have a letter recently, in fact I just received it today, from you 
on capital funding and basically it shows that we have less than 
half of the money this year for capital funding than we had last 
year. And at the same time I’m in receipt of a letter from a 
number of school boards who asked for money to update their 
facilities, in some cases build new facilities to ensure again that 
they had the wherewithal to give the type of education that 
children are asking for in this province. And yet there is less 
than half of the money in the budget for K to 12. Can you tell 
me how this was arrived at in your budget process? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We had choices to make when we put the 
budget together, and we chose to fully support and protect the 
foundation operating grant and add a huge increase into that. So 
the choices to be made, then we had to offset that with a 
balance, and where do we get the money from? And the capital 
was where we took it from, or where it suffered, and the 
foundation operating grant got the huge increase. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Not too long ago I asked you, Madam 
Minister, if there was decisions made on how the money that is 
allocated into capital funding this year has been spent. And I 
was told that there was a number of projects that had been 
approved and that there would be a list of the rest of them 
coming forthwith. 
 
Is the determination made for the public yet to tell us where the 
money for capital expenditures will be going this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We’ve not finalized our list since the 
boards have not given us their priorities. All of them have not 
submitted their priorities so we haven’t been able to finalize our 
process and give that list out. We anticipate that’s about June 
we would be doing that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I would like to congratulate you, for the record today, 
on your recent appointment as Minister of Learning. I know that 
it’s a big challenge. It’s a large department, a lot of 
responsibility, a lot of money flowing through the department. 
And many demands on the department I’m sure have crossed 
your desk already. 
 
But, Madam Minister, your appointment is only more recent 
than my own as critic and there’s a lot of areas about 
post-secondary in particular that I need to learn about and be 
familiarized today, if it’s possible. 
 
Now we only have a few minutes remaining and I don’t think 



April 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

 

we’re going to be able to broach anywhere near the number of 
questions I have. I notice the number of officials you have with 
you today. It’s unfortunate that we only have an hour and I hope 
that you will be able to assure me that we’ll have many more 
hours together in this House on the issue of post-secondary 
alone, let alone what my colleague would like to cover in terms 
of K to 12 education as well. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Madam Minister, I wanted to just sort of start with the 
post-secondary budgetary areas that we saw outlined in this 
year’s document. But I am going to defer that for just a few 
moments and go back to the questions relating to SCN. 
 
The Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation was asked some 
questions in connection with the role of SCN in distance 
learning and educational opportunities. And I think that we 
need to get our understanding of what has happened in that area 
as clear as we possibly can this afternoon. 
 
So I guess what’s brought me to this point is your response to 
my colleague just a few minutes ago as it relates to the number 
of full-time equivalent positions and the revolving fund. And 
you made a comment about three people being transferred. 
 
Now if I understood you correct, you were saying that there 
were three people transferred from SCN to the Department of 
Learning. But it seems to me that the number of FTEs went 
down, not up. So can you explain the incongruity of that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The total of 5.5, you heard correct. It was 
minus 5.5. There was a plus three from the SCN but we wound 
down the learning resource distribution centre which had minus 
7.5 FTEs, plus one for corrections and public safety. 
 
So the total net result was minus 5.5 FTEs, but three do come 
from SCN on the plus side. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. To the minister 
through the Chair, I would like to pursue the SCN issue just a 
little. According to the budgetary documents, the transfer of 
distance education from the purview of SCN to the Department 
of Learning was going to reduce SCN’s budget by 
approximately $1.7 million. 
 
Would the minister be able to delineate for me exactly where 
that transfer of monies which went into the Department of 
Education — or the Department of Learning, rather — where 
they show up in the Learning estimates this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — To the critic, on page 94 of the Learning 
estimates under training programs, that’s where the line is — 
technology enhanced learning — that’s where the SCN fits in, 
in to that 4.837 number for 2003-04. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, we 
talked about the three employees that were directly affected by 
the transfer of the distance learning to the Department of 
Learning. Were there other employees affected? Were there 
some employees that were actually laid off, lost their jobs as a 
result of this transfer? And if so, could you give us an indication 
how many and if there is any other collateral damage associated 

with that transfer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — To our knowledge there were no other job 
losses associated with the transfer. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — To the minister, can I assume then from what 
information we have gleaned already that there are three people 
— only three people — associated with the delivery of distance 
education programs in the department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We used to have . . . We have four people 
in post-secondary, three SCN, and eight in K to 12, and they’re 
all now in one branch. So we have 15 people there, which we 
used to have . . . where we used to have 12. But they’re all in 
one branch in the department now. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. I 
was wondering if the minister would be prepared to explain the 
rationale for this decision. 
 
The purpose of SCN, it seems to me over the longer period of 
its existence, has been to provide delivery of distance education 
to the province. And this particular move, although not 
completely unexpected I suppose in view of the expanding 
demands of distance education and the responsibility of the 
Department of Learning for that — I can understand why you 
might want to do that — but what was the rationale for doing 
this right now? And I guess the further question to that is this: 
was this move precipitated by a conscious decision in the 
Department of Learning, or was it something that was 
precipitated by a deliberate effort by SCN to remove itself from 
responsibility for distance education? Whose idea was it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The move was a joint agreement between 
SCN and the Department of Learning to move some of the 
program responsibilities and resources for e-learning to the 
department. So it was a jointly discussed and arrived upon 
agreement. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:56. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................733 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................733 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................733 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................733 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................733 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................733 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................733 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................734 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................734 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................734 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................734 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................734 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................734 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................734 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................734 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................735 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................735 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................742 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................742 
  Lorjé...........................................................................................................................................................................................743 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Day of Mourning 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................735 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................735 
 In Motion Program 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................735 
 100th Birthday Celebration 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................736 
 National Volunteer Week 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................736 
 Legislative Building 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................736 
 Bursaries for Students in the Health Care Professions 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................737 
 Development of Feedlot Industry in Redvers Area 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................737 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Government Participation in Potato Industry 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................737 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................737 
 Mega Bingo 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................739 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................739 
 SaskTel Investments 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................740 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................740 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 National Day of Mourning 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................742 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................742 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................743 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................743 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................743 
  Hart ....................................................................................................................................................................................743, 751 



 

 

  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................744 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................745 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................748 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................750 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................751 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................752 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................756 
 


