















































Hansard: March 21, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 77 
 March 21, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
pertaining to opposition crop insurance 2002 grasshopper spray 
policy. And the prayer goes like this: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reassess the grasshopper spray penalty assessed to farmers 
in 2002; and further, the government review the definition 
of viable farming practices as outlined in present 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance policy. 

 
This petition is signed by the people of Paynton and Maidstone 
from my area. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 58 between Chaplin and 
Shamrock. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Shamrock and Coderre. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to rise 
again on behalf of constituents who are very concerned about 
the state of the hospital in Swift Current, Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition opposed to 
possible reductions of services to the Davidson and Craik health 
centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 

health centres be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctor 
services available, as well as lab services, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Saskatoon, Lumsden, Davidson, 
Regina, Kenaston, and North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 4, 6, and 8. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I give notice I shall on day no. 9 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Highways minister: what is the total amount of 
money spent towards the maintenance of Highway 42 in 
2002; further to that, did the department accept any 
liability for vehicle damage as a result of the condition of 
Highway 42, 2002; if so, how much money was paid out? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly I would like to introduce Vern Hoyt and his son 
Tyler from the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains, and 
they are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Tyler is a grade 9 student at Luther College. And, Mr. Speaker, 
two weeks ago in Estevan he won the junior championship for 
10-pin bowling and he will be representing Saskatchewan at the 
national championships in Kelowna, BC (British Columbia) on 
April 12 and 13. 
 
Vern is the campaign manager for Dan Thibault, the Sask Party 
candidate in Regina Wascana Plains who will also be the next 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from that 
constituency. 
 
So please join me in welcoming Vern and Tyler and also 
extending our best wishes to Tyler as he competes in the 
championships in Kelowna. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 
the opportunity to introduce to all of my colleagues in the 
legislature and to yourself as well, Mr. Speaker, a group of 
young people seated in your gallery. 
 
Yesterday evening I had the privilege as minister responsible 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) to attend the 
annual CYAID conference, which is the Canadian Youth 
Against Impaired Driving conference, held in the Delta Hotel. 
There were over 600 young people there from across Canada 
and actually several from outside of Canada in attendance. The 
energy level was incredible. It paralleled, I think, sometimes 
what goes on in the House during question period on Fridays, 
Mr. Speaker. But it was a wonderful event and I’d like to take 
the opportunity to introduce a small group of those individuals 
who are in your gallery today. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker . . . and as I introduce them 
I’d just ask them to rise and ask colleagues to welcome them 
warmly as soon as I’m finished introducing them. Seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Karen Wedel from Yellowknife in 
the Northwest Territories; Lindsay Rouleau from Invermere, 
BC; Alisha Anderson from Olds, Alberta; Vanessa Huber — 
Huber, I should say — from Unity, Saskatchewan; Jenna 
Wanner from Swift Current — she’s on Team SGI; Laura 
Webb from Winnipeg, Manitoba; Leslie Brooks from Red 
Lake, Ontario; Cristale Marier from Red Lake, Ontario; Alex 
Creamer from Amherst, Nova Scotia; Alena Lawless from 
Amherst, Nova Scotia; Andrew Ramsay from Charlottetown, 
Prince Edward Island; Mandy Vogan from Bonshaw, Prince 
Edward Island; Sarah McDonald from . . . she is the Swift 
Current . . . from Swift Current and an adviser to SADD 
(Students Against Drinking and Driving) Board of Directors; 
and lastly, and I’d like to specially acknowledge all the good 
work that she has done, Crystal Fetter who is our SADD 
president here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Please join me in welcoming all these wonderful young people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition we want to join with the minister and members of 
the House in welcoming this group of young people here to the 
legislature today, and more importantly to thank them for the 
work that they’re doing. Swift Current has been long a proud 
home to a great chapter of SADD and, you know, the work they 
do in our community and across Canada is so very important 
both in terms of awareness and the general issue of driving 
without impairment. 
 
So on behalf of the opposition, I would like to join with all the 
members of the Assembly, welcome you here, and thank you 
for your work. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
really like to introduce Grant Schmidt today but unfortunately 
he’s not here so I can’t. So in his stead I would like to introduce 
Mr. Bill Cooper who’s with the Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program. And he’s been working with me the last 
couple of months, and it’s been actually quite a boring time to 
be involved in politics in the last couple of months. 
 
There’s been a resignation of a cabinet minister. There’s been 
nominations. There’s been founding conventions. There’s been 
by-elections. There’s been cabinet shuffles. There’s been 
swearing-in ceremonies. We’ve even elected a new federal 

leader in the time that he’s been an intern. 
 
He’s able to attend some citizenship courts in a school that was 
named for the presiding officer. And he’s also been doing a lot 
of work in research and in writing, and attended numerous 
community events with myself. And I also hear that he’s not a 
very bad lacrosse player, but there will be more of that next 
week. 
 
But he’s here alone today and I didn’t know the names of other 
interns so I’ve been holding off on introducing him. But would 
all members please welcome Bill Cooper to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s rare that 
I’m able to get on to my feet and introduce guests, period, but 
it’s even more rare when I get to introduce two sets of guests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to introduce to my colleagues in the legislature and 
to yourself, a constituent of mine from Meadow Lake who’s 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker — Jacquie McFarlane, who 
has recently moved to our constituency from the Fort 
McMurray area, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve warned Jacquie that 
there’s a very, very small chance that if she sticks here through 
question period that I may be on my feet again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Please join me in welcoming Jacquie to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Day for the Elimination of  
Racial Discrimination 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 1966 
the United Nations declared March 21 to be the International 
Day for the Elimination of Racism and called upon all nations 
to join together to achieve that goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, March 21 specifically commemorates the 1960 
massacre in Sharpeville, South Africa of peaceful 
demonstrators by the force of an oppressive regime. These 
people had gathered outside a police station to protest carrying 
passbooks in order to move around their own country. The 
police were sent out to stop that protest and the massacre 
resulted. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, though these peaceful demonstrators were 
shot to death, I believe what they actually died of was fear. Not 
their own fear. Had they been afraid, they would not have been 
out protesting in the first place. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, it was the people of the regime who were 
afraid — afraid for their wealth, afraid for their position, afraid 
for their power. They were afraid of having to share their place 
by the fire of opportunity and advantage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have made some progress in the fight against 
racism in the 43 years since Sharpeville, but I call upon all 
members here today in this Assembly to renew our commitment 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

 

to do what we can to eliminate all forms of racism here in our 
communities, our province, in Canada, and the world today. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for more 
than 10 years now the citizens of this province and indeed this 
nation have rallied together every March 21 to tell the world 
that there is no room for racism in their schools, their 
neighbourhoods, and their communities or their workplaces. 
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
is an opportunity for us to foster respect, equality, and to 
celebrate diversity, and to lead by example through our words 
and deeds. 
 
Today we must engage all of our citizenry to transcend the 
boundaries of race, ethnicity, and religion, and in turn to 
embrace diversity. As elected officials we have the 
responsibility to encourage and inspire all Saskatchewan 
residents to celebrate differences, not to stand apart because of 
them. We are all too intimately acquainted with the harmful and 
negative effects that racism has had on our schools, workplaces, 
and communities and we all understand that at the root of this 
systemic problem is a lack of understanding. 
 
It is time that we begin to communicate and learn about and 
appreciate one another. It is time to recognize and honour each 
other’s strengths. We must learn each other’s histories and be 
proud to tell our own in a better effort to understand each other. 
There is much at stake for all of us, for our children and our 
grandchildren, and those who come after them. We cannot 
expect our children to work together tomorrow, however, unless 
we start to work together today. 
 
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
expresses our commitment to build from the very backgrounds 
of our citizens, and accepting and appreciating all of society in 
which all can live with dignity and respect, and have every 
opportunity to accomplish their dreams and goals. We must 
stand united today in declaring racial intolerance in any form as 
incompatible with the kind of society we are and aspire to be. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College 
Teepee Entrance 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to make a point 
of clarification. In comments reported in the media on Tuesday 
the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy criticized the investment 
made in the entryway to the new Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College. 
 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) Vice-Chief 
and Chair of the SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College) Board of Governors, Lindsay Cyr, has expressed his 
regret over the negative statements made by the member 
towards the SIFC building and the teepee entrance. 
 

He says, and I quote: “I am concerned because the facts were 
not checked.” Vice-Chief Cyr makes it clear that the teepee is a 
First Nations investment made with First Nations resources, not 
Government of Saskatchewan dollars. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy does not seem to understand the true significance of the 
teepee. The teepee was made possible because of the 
Saskatchewan First Nations Veterans’ Association. They have 
led a very thoroughgoing and well-received campaign to build 
the commemorative veterans’ peace teepee. The teepee will 
recognize and pay tribute to the veterans who fought in World 
Wars I and II and in Korea for a better society in Saskatchewan 
and Canada and indeed in the whole world. 
 
What better place than the leading First Nations-controlled 
university to commemorate our veterans and their fight for 
peace and tolerance? 
 
And what better day than today — on the International Day for 
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination — to take a good, hard 
look at our own motivations when it comes to making such 
statements. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Outstanding Kindersley Constituents 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
commend the achievements of the members of the men’s 
curling team that brought home gold for Saskatchewan at the 
Canada Winter Games in Bathurst-Campbellton, New 
Brunswick. 
 
The team consisted of Mitch and Drew Heidt and Ross 
Neumeier of Kerrobert and Michael Mamchur of Meadow 
Lake, along with Ellice Mamchur as the coach. 
 
Team Saskatchewan finished three and one in the round robin, 
going on to defeat Ontario 7-3 to advance to the gold medal 
game. Mitch drew to the button to score two in the 10th end to 
defeat the home province of New Brunswick 9-8. 
 
Further to this, we are very happy about these accomplishments. 
These are fine young curlers and hopefully perhaps we’ll have 
some Olympians there down the road. 
 
As well today, I’d like to very much recognize the cultural 
contribution of a neighbour of mine, Mr. Jack Humeny. Mr. 
Humeny has been pursuing a music career for a number of 
years, and he’s well known in our corner of the province for 
some time. He’s now started to be noticed in wider circles. 
 
Jack had the opportunity recently to perform in Calgary and has 
been overwhelmingly pleased with the requests for solo 
engagements that arose from that opportunity and the recent 
release of his second CD (compact disc) entitled Smell the 
Flowers. 
 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

Jack is a cowboy. He helps out at the Glidden community 
pasture. He derives a lot of his inspiration directly from 
working with cattle. 
 
And I encourage all members to join me in congratulating Jack 
on his well-deserved success, and the men’s curling team. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
members opposite have a well-known policy to sell the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company at their very first 
opportunity. Here are some facts that make such a policy so 
wrong-headed and foolish — another reason why they have no 
chance in winning the next election. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Yates: — The Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
serves 275 Saskatchewan communities and through interline 
partnerships with other carriers reaches almost 400 
communities in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) has four buses 
equipped to load wheelchairs, which are available on any route 
with 24-hour notice to help those who are disabled in those 
communities. 
 
In July, 2002 STC moved 60,000 agricultural machinery parts 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. 
 
STC sells almost 600 medical passes a year. Medical passes 
allow people unlimited travel throughout the month for medical 
reasons. 
 
STC spends 150,000 each year renting hotel rooms in rural 
Saskatchewan for drivers’ rest periods. 
 
Of a total of $15.6 million spent by STC in 2000, 14.9 million 
was spent on goods and services right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite have nothing but slogans that 
are designed to hide their true agenda, their hidden agenda to 
sell all the Crowns. We have a plan that’s working day in and 
day out for the people of Saskatchewan to build and improve 
our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Candidate for 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand today to acknowledge Darlene Hincks. Darlene was 
acclaimed last night at a nomination meeting held here in 
Regina. Darlene will be the next candidate for the 
Saskatchewan Party in the Regina Qu’Appelle constituency. 

Not only will she be the next candidate, but after the next 
provincial election, she’ll be the next MLA for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, do you know why she’ll be 
the next MLA for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley — Mr. Speaker, 
do you know why she’ll be the next member? Because it’s the 
right thing to do. 
 
Darlene has been a city councillor and a prominent citizen of 
Regina. She’s been a city councillor for 18 years. Mr. Speaker, 
it seems like the last time that we had a member of local 
government run for election, he garnered 62 per cent or 63 per 
cent of the vote. I’m sure Darlene will do the same. Darlene has 
served on many boards and many commissions throughout the 
city and the province. 
 
Darlene, as well as 46 other nominated candidates for the 
Saskatchewan Party are looking forward to when the member 
from Riversdale turns up the courage to call an election so he 
can run provincially for the seat that he is sitting in right now, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear over and over again people wanting an 
election — election so that the member from Rosetown-Elrose 
will be able to sit in that seat opposite as premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Throne Speech 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know most 
people notice that the Leader of the Opposition and the Premier 
don’t often agree. But today is one of those rare times when we 
do agree. Mr. Speaker, I thought the Throne Speech was a 
disaster, and it turns out the Premier thought it was a disaster 
too. 
 
According to a column in today’s paper, the Premier walked 
into Wednesday’s cabinet meeting and had a fit of temper. He 
started screaming at everyone in sight. I guess, Mr. Speaker, it 
wasn’t very pretty. Now that would have been a whole lot more 
interesting to see and hear, Mr. Speaker, than the Speech from 
the Throne that we heard on Tuesday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that we know that even the Premier thinks the 
Speech from the Throne was a disaster, I would ask the 
Premier, will he join with us in voting against it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It looks to me like the Leader of the 
Opposition has had his ear to the door of the Premier’s office to 
try and find out what’s inside the Premier’s office, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s the closest that the member from Rosetown will ever 
get . . . (inaudible) . . . The closest he’ll ever get, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we’re extremely . . . Mr. 
Speaker, this Throne Speech is about painting the difference 
between what this administration and this government is about 
and what that party is about, Mr. Speaker. Because this Throne 
Speech talks about making an investment in health care into the 
future; this Throne Speech talks about investing in education in 
the future, Mr. Speaker. This Throne Speech talks about how 
we’re investing in infrastructure in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
and across the way. And this Throne Speech talks about the 
kinds of direction that we’re going to be going in agriculture, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, on that side of the House we have yet to 
hear, Mr. Speaker, on one occasion from that party, not a word 
about the direction about where that party will go, because, Mr. 
Speaker, they have a slogan only, Mr. Speaker, and no plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I guess the 
Deputy Premier still stands by the Speech from the Throne, but 
apparently he doesn’t agree with his Premier any more because 
at his cabinet meeting he made it known that he wasn’t happy 
with the advice he was receiving. He was concerned about 
complacency — complacency in both his cabinet and his 
caucus. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Speaker, maybe the Premier at least is finally 
getting in touch with Saskatchewan. He is realizing that his 
NDP (New Democratic Party) is doing a terrible job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know now that the Premier is upset with the 
Speech from the Throne, but doesn’t the Premier and the 
Premier’s office write the Speech from the Throne? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s office is supposed to set the 
direction for this government. The Speech from the Throne was 
a disaster and actually the Premier has no one to blame but 
himself. Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier blaming his cabinet 
and his caucus when in fact he should be looking at the mirror 
for the problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, 
and the leadership on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
doesn’t go about blaming anybody, Mr. Speaker. Doesn’t go 
about blaming anybody. On this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, our Premier takes responsibility for building a strong 
Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker, investing in a strong 
Saskatchewan economy. And that’s what we’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the member opposite from the . . . the Leader of the 
Opposition shouldn’t worry about what’s happening in our 
caucus, Mr. Speaker. He should worry about what’s happening 
in his caucus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, he shouldn’t be worrying 
about what’s happening in our caucus where we have a united 
group of men and women who are busy building a 
Saskatchewan economy as opposed to over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Because over there, Mr. Speaker, what the Leader of the 
Opposition is faced with is the issue of democracy, Mr. 
Speaker. Because he has a smorgasbord of members who have 
been elected from a variety of different parties, Mr. Speaker, 
who are now saying to him privately in his caucus, if they don’t 
respect, if they don’t respect the decision of the party 
organization, Mr. Speaker, many of those people won’t be 
sitting in those benches come the next election because they 
don’t like the decision of Mr. Grant Schmidt coming. And 
that’s where he should be spending his attention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would just ask 
members to, when questions and responses are being made, that 
the members provide an opportunity for both the responses to 
be heard as well as the questions to be put. 
 
There were times when I was . . . found it difficult to hear and 
to be able to follow the statements and I would just ask 
members to tone it down a little bit in order that all members be 
clearly heard and have the opportunity to be heard. That is the 
purpose of this place. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in that 
happy camp over there, on Wednesday the Premier walked into 
cabinet meeting and slammed his books on the table. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I see that the words that I’ve just spoken have 
really had an effect here. Let’s try again. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier had a temper 
tantrum, threw his books on the table, he was upset at his 
ministers. 
 
Well he should be. One of his ministers squandered $28 million 
and covered it up for six years but still, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier did not boot him out of cabinet. His Health minister has 
done nothing about waiting lists for years — the Premier should 
be upset, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s Agriculture minister does 
nothing to deal with the agriculture crisis in this province — the 
Premier should be upset. Mr. Speaker, his CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) minister keeps 
losing millions of dollars on project after project — the Premier 
should have been mad the other day. Mr. Speaker, it’s so bad 
over there the Premier couldn’t even find an NDP member to be 
his Finance minister — that’s how bad it is over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier admitted that the Speech from the 
Throne was a disaster. Isn’t that a direct result of his 
leadership? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to the 
member opposite and I want to read a quote that he had a 
couple of days ago, when he was on the CTV (Canadian 
Television Network Limited) station. And he says this, Mr. 
Speaker, he says: 
 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

In regards to democracy, the decisions are made here 
regarding the grassroots. Decisions are of the grassroots. 
 

Elected members, Mr. Speaker, he’s saying, make the decision. 
 

Each constituency makes its own decision through a 
democratic process (Mr. Speaker). 

 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is an extremely interesting point that the 
member makes, Mr. Speaker, because in the Melville 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, the new Melville-Saltcoats 
constituency, 1,200 people vote, Mr. Speaker, in making a 
decision about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Twelve hundred people, Mr. Speaker, 
show up and make a decision about what should happen in their 
constituency through a democratic process of which, Mr. 
Speaker, this member from Rosetown says he supports, Mr. 
Speaker. And then he finds himself in the middle of a debate 
with 58 constituencies in the province, of which he shares a part 
of, Mr. Speaker. And what happens, Mr. Speaker, is he then 
says well, we’re not going to have . . . we’re going to overthrow 
that because, Mr. Speaker, of the investment piece in our party, 
Mr. Speaker, and that we don’t believe in public investment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(10:30) 
 
Well public investment, Mr. Speaker, is about the member from 
Wilkie, Mr. Speaker, who is sitting in the House today who 
says, Mr. Speaker, that he wants public investment today to 
build a spa in his constituency, Mr. Speaker. And what does the 
opposition leader say? We’re not overthrowing that election, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re not overthrowing that election, but we are 
going to overthrow the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to remind the member, he’s not to 
refer to the presence or absence of members in their seats. 
 

Regina Correctional Centre 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s interesting to hear the Deputy Premier talk about democracy 
when we have a Premier that hasn’t even been elected as 
Premier by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety. Last weekend five 
inmates broke out of the Regina Correctional Centre. Thanks to 
some excellent work by police, four of the five men that 
escaped have already been captured. But the jailbreak leaves 
serious questions about the NDP government’s management of 
the jail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these five men were able to climb to the roof of an 

auditorium, break through a false ceiling, change into some new 
clothes they had previously stashed in the attic, smash through 
two more locked trap doors, and then shinnied down the outer 
prison walls using sheets that had been braided together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister owes this House an explanation. How 
could this happen? Why was there so little supervision of these 
five dangerous criminals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite gives me a lot to work with, but let me answer the 
question up front here. 
 
From time to time, there are escapes from the jails. We 
investigate the escapes. We take corrective action and we move 
on. This is the first set of escapes out of the Regina jail this 
year. This is . . . Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t this 
interesting? I think that the member outlines on the opposite 
side this detailed process of how these five guys managed to 
escape, probably taking copious notes so that he can pass it on 
to some of their former caucus colleagues that were also over in 
that jail. 
 
Isn’t it interesting that that party, Mr. Speaker, the first thing 
that they want to do when there’s . . . (inaudible) . . . is not raise 
it in the legislature; they want to go stage a photo op over there. 
 
What’s the first thing they do? They blame the facility. The 
second thing they do — they blame the unionized officials. Isn’t 
that typical of what that right-wing group of . . . (inaudible) . . . 
members on the opposite side stand for? That’s who they are, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s 
interesting to hear the minister that says that he had a lot to 
work with. I must say that that’s a lot more than the Premier of 
the province has, is lots of people to work with on that side of 
the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the prisoners who escaped was not an 
inmate of the Regina Correctional Centre. He was a federal 
prisoner who was actually incarcerated at the penitentiary in 
Prince Albert. The police describe Curtis Hartford as a 
dangerous criminal. On Wednesday Hartford shared his opinion 
on the NDP’s management of the Regina prison with the judge 
that sentenced him to an additional two years for the jailbreak. 
Hartford said, and I quote: 
 

The guards were slipping . . . They weren't doing their 
job(s). 

 
Mr. Speaker, even the prisoners at the Regina Correctional 
Institute think the NDP isn’t doing its job. What steps is the 
minister taking to ensure that prisoners at the jail will be 
adequately supervised from now on? 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
find it very interesting that the member opposite says that the 
reason that this has happened is because the officials at the jail 
were not doing their job. 
 
Isn’t it interesting that the first thing that that member then 
suggests is that they should go over, stage a little photo op, do a 
little tour. It’s the first time I have ever heard a bunch of old 
Tories try to get into the jail. 
 
This government, it takes public safety and public security very 
seriously. The number of escapes in this province are down 
over the past year — down. And I think that that’s important 
that the members of the opposition recognize that. 
 
It’s also would be helpful if the members of the opposition 
would state what their policy is. Are they supporting the 
changes in the jail? Are they going to privatize that jail? Are 
they going to privatize the workers in that jail? Where are they 
at and when are they going to put forward a coherent policy . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
the member . . . the minister would like to know our policy, it’s 
very simple. Call an election and you’ll find out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, there was an appalling lack 
of supervision of prisoners at the Regina jail last weekend. It’s 
fairly obvious. Even the prisoners are criticizing the NDP 
management of the prison system. The result was that the police 
had to go out and clean up the mess by recapturing these 
escaped criminals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister advise the people of 
Saskatchewan what is the policy at the Regina Correctional 
Centre with regard to the use of televisions and video games by 
guards and supervisory staff while they are working? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we have the member 
opposite stand up and at the height of arrogance say that the 
first thing that they . . . they will not come clean in terms of 
telling people what their policy is on corrections. They have not 
gone to meet with the Métis and First Nations Justice Reform 
Commission. They do not have a policy on corrections that goes 
beyond a simplistic idea of boot camps. 
 
I suspect that the members opposite don’t share the opinion of 
the First Nations Justice Reform Commission or the 
Ombudsman in terms of facility replacement. Nor do they share 
the view of this department and this government that in due 
course we are going to have to replace that facility. 
 
I’m sure that their policy is that a boot camp is too good, that 
the dungeon is too good, that what they want to have is a 
punitive system of punishment just as was outlined by the 
member for Rosthern when he was the critic in this portfolio. 

It is arrogant to say in this legislature to the voters and the 
people we’re accountable to, we’re not telling you; we’re not 
telling you what our policies are until the election, and we 
aren’t going to listen to them and you aren’t . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Public Safety is 
reminded to keep all of his remarks to the Chair. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well what a 
rant. Now I’d like an answer to the question, Mr. Speaker. What 
is the policy at the Regina Correctional Centre with regard to 
the use of televisions and video games by guards and 
supervisory staff while they are working? Please answer the 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, what exactly is the 
member alleging? What exactly is the member alleging? I think 
it is . . . This is a very interesting question period because the 
Leader of the Opposition stands up and says, oh it’s all about 
what’s in the Throne Speech; it’s all about the communication 
around it. 
 
Let’s understand what the hidden agenda of that party is. Let’s 
understand what that member is saying today. He is not 
prepared to follow through with us allowing the investigators to 
come in and take a look at what happened in terms of this. That 
member is accusing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is a pretty shocking set of 
allegations that are being made by the member opposite, that he 
is alleging — and he’s not saying this but he is alleging — that 
the correctional centre guards are more interested in watching 
TV and playing video games. 
 
That is exactly what that member is saying. That is an affront to 
what is happening in the facilities. That is absolutely wrong, 
and I am sorry that I am constrained by parliamentary language 
in this institution. But that member should stop attacking the 
unions, stop attacking the employees, and try and come up with 
some constructive proposals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question to the minister again is: was he aware that this 
practice was taking place by the guards and supervisory staff of 
the jail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the member keeps asking 
this question because he is clearly alleging, clearly alleging that 
the guards were watching television or playing video games. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question has been asked. I wait 
and I want to be able to hear an answer, a response. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The allegations that are being made by 
the member opposite I hope have some fact behind them. And if 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

he does have some kind of an allegation that he wants to make, 
he should bring them forward today. 
 
Because what he is saying is that he is making a major slur 
against a group of professionals that work in our correctional 
system, saying they are more interested in watching afternoon 
television, more interested in playing video games, than they 
are in maintaining the public safety. That is not correct. That is 
another attack by that right-wing group on a group of unionized 
workers who do good public service in this province. It’s 
shocking, it’s wrong, and it is an affront. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is very serious. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan Party has obtained a memo dated Monday, 
March 17 and distributed to employees at the Regina 
Correctional Centre. This memo advises staff to remove all 
televisions and video game players from the jail. Will the 
minister advise the House if he is aware of this memo, and is 
the minister also aware that on Monday employees of the 
Regina Correctional Centre were removing televisions and 
video games and other entertainment devices from the jail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I’m very pleased that the member 
has said that, because this now does show exactly how out of 
touch they are. On Monday we put the jail on a lockdown. Yes, 
televisions were being removed. Yes, video games were being 
removed — from the cells, from the inmates. The first thing that 
the members opposite do is not accuse us of dealing with public 
safety, they don’t accuse us of getting to the root of this with 
the prisoners, they accuse the unionized workers of watching 
TV and playing video games. 
 
Isn’t that typical? Half-baked, half-proved, wholly wrong in 
terms of the approach. Shocking, Mr. Speaker, and I think that 
the member does a discredit not only to the public servants of 
the province, he should rise today and he should apologize to 
those workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
will enlighten the minister somewhat if he’s not aware of this 
memorandum. I will give him some excerpts from it: 
 

With a few exceptions, staff are not to watch television, 
except night shift. This also applies to what are commonly 
referred to as Game Boys or PlayStations as well as 
personal laptop computers, DVD players, and VCRs. The 
word television below includes all of these types of 
devices. Any supervisor who knowingly allows employees 
to watch television or similar devices when that employee 
should be watching the inmates will be subject to the 
disciplinary process. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this leads me to the conclusion that this is actually 
being done in the prison. Will the minister explain if that is the 

procedure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let me explain to this. And I think that 
we are going to have to, once the lockdown is done, make sure 
that that member gets a chance to go through the facility to 
understand first-hand what goes on. This deals with common 
areas. There are common areas within the jails where there are 
televisions, where there are laptop computers. The staff are 
going to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well does the member 
really believe that we don’t have staff in the common areas? 
Does he think that these are inmate-only areas? 
 
This is absolute nonsense. It is a shameful attack; it is a 
shameful attempt to denigrate the public service of this province 
and it shows a complete lack of understanding. It’s half based 
on half-truths. It’s based on half the information and it is wholly 
wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I continue with 
the memorandum: 
 

Any staff who brings a television or similar devise into the 
centre without approval is to be ordered to remove the 
device from the centre before being allowed to work. 
 
That is, control room staff are not to knowingly allow any 
person to enter a cellblock carrying a television or similar 
device, assuming it is visible, unless that person is 
authorized to do so.  
 
In all cases the ADD must be notified.  

 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister aware of this memo? Is the minister 
aware that this practice is going on in the facility? Is the 
minister at least suggesting or considering that this could be a 
cause for the inmate prison break? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, when we put a facility on 
lockdown, the rules change. When we put a facility on 
lockdown because of an escape, the rules get a lot tougher. 
That’s simply the way it works. That means . . . Well the 
members . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The members are alleging that the 
employees . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The members are alleging that the 
inmates were watching TV and playing on Game Boys. This 
isn’t the case. We’re going to let the investigator go through; 
we’re going to find out what happened in the terms of this 
particular escape. But these kind of blanket allegations are just 
completely inappropriate. 
 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

 

When we put a facility on lockdown, when we put a facility on 
lockdown we end up tightening up a number of different rules, 
operational, in terms of our overall procedure, in terms of how 
we deal with the conduct. It is a heightened state of vigilance. 
That’s the way it works. And this means that that is going to 
provide us with a better public safety within those facilities. 
 
The member is making an unfounded allegation. He is jumping 
to a conclusion. He is accusing employees of having made bad 
decisions, having neglected their duties, and having, as a result, 
endangered public safety. If the investigators bear that out, there 
will be appropriate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Would the members come to order please. 
Order. Order. Order, please. Order. Orders of the day. Order, 
please. Order, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Goulet, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
colleagues, for that welcome. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
stand up and enter the Throne Speech debate. 
 
My first pleasure is to acknowledge and recognize the terrific 
job that the member for Cumberland did in his response to the 
Speech from the Throne. I’ve shared time with the hon. member 
for Cumberland for some years in this Assembly and he always 
amazes in this gentle manner of teaching and helping us to have 
a better understanding of our great Saskatchewan and what it’s 
all about. 
 
The other person of course is the seconder, the hon. member for 
Regina Wascana Plains, who did her usual great job in sharing 
our vision about what Saskatchewan can be and about the 
future, the wide open future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my first words outside of that are words of 
gratitude to the constituents of Regina Coronation Park. My 
constituents . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My constituents are of 
course very generous in their view of the north end of Regina. 
They’re very generous in their view of our great city, the capital 
city of Regina, and they’re very generous and giving with 
respect to the province of Saskatchewan. We form a integral 
part of Saskatchewan. 

It’s a constituency of hard-working, dedicated people, lots of 
families — I don’t mean to exclude individuals who by their 
circumstances might be single or not in a family situation, but 
it’s predominantly a family situation — with a good mixture of 
seniors that bring their wisdom and their grace and their 
understanding of where we’ve come from, and I’m always 
impressed by seniors with their dedication to the future. They 
always looking to the future. In fact probably the group that 
looks forward the most is that of seniors. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to again thank my constituents, Regina 
Coronation Park, for their generosity right around the province, 
but particularly as it relates to me. They’re very generous with 
me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the focus of today’s debate is the Throne Speech. 
And the Throne Speech to me is about good governance, it’s 
about the future, it’s about our wide open future of 
Saskatchewan. But there are a few issues that are very special 
that I wish to particularly address. It’s no surprise this is 
probably — possibly might be a better way of putting it — 
possibly the last Throne Speech we’ll have before the voters of 
Saskatchewan have an opportunity to have their say in a general 
election. I can’t call it. The Premier calls the election, but no 
great surprise that what I’m saying might very well be so. 
 
For me there’s some areas that make this speech very important. 
And I want to talk about areas where there’s clear distinctions, 
clear choices, because that’s what a democracy is all about, is 
choosing us or the opposition — government or opposition. 
And voters will choose. It’s not necessarily about right or 
wrong. For me it’s about them having clear choices and they 
will make the right choice. I have always had good faith in that; 
the voters can and will choose. 
 
For me, Mr. Speaker, the issues that the Throne Speech deal 
with that I wish to, are Crown corporations where there’s a 
very, very, very clear difference. We understand the importance 
of Saskatchewan’s Crown Corporations in Saskatchewan’s 
history and we understand, more fundamentally we understand 
the importance and the terrific job and the future of Crown 
corporations in Saskatchewan and beyond. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
submit that that’s an area where there’s a huge difference, us 
versus the opposition — the opposition that seem to have a 
policy that says Crown Corporations, we’ll privatize them all. 
It’s just a question of when for them. It’s not a question of if 
they’ll privatize them; it’s a question of when. 
 
One of the other areas I wish to address today is that of fairness 
for working people, Mr. Speaker, and there’s a good smattering 
of that in the Throne Speech. And I’m very pleased to be 
supportive particularly of the changes to the workers’ 
compensation legislation that my seatmate’s going to be 
introducing this session — the Hon. Minister of Labour will be 
— and I am most delighted to see that piece of legislation 
coming forward this year. 
 
The other area, Mr. Speaker, that I want to talk about is simply 
democracy, and it’s an important area. We’ve got a situation 
where right now there’s some uncertainty in the province if I 
can describe it that way. We had a former member for Melville 
visiting us yesterday and there seems to be some doubt about 
whether or not he will have a nomination for the opposition, 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

whether he’ll be running against us. And it’s interesting that a 
party that claims — that’s less than a half a dozen years old — 
claims to be from the grassroots, clearly is not. So I’ll have 
some more words on that later on. 
 
Those are the three major areas that I wish to address in the 
Throne Speech debate, Mr. Speaker. And the first one I 
highlighted was that of Crown corporations. And I want to just 
talk a little bit about some of the individual Crown corporations. 
 
We’ve got, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower that was probably Tommy 
Douglas’s — by his own words — his crowning achievement. 
The glitter of lights like diamonds in the night was the way 
Tommy described it — the rural electrification that was brought 
about hugely because of SaskPower, the same rural 
electrification, Mr. Speaker, that I submit continues to this day. 
We’re very, very proud of being able to provide electrical 
services to rural and northern Saskatchewan in places that 
frankly a private corporation would not do. 
 
And I want to point out that SaskPower has residential rates of 
less than 8 cents a kilowatt hour. Compare this with a March 18 
Leader-Post article, ATCO customers in Alberta, that ATCO 
electricity customers, this is a quote: 
 

. . . in northern Alberta are about to be hit with a power 
price hike of more than 70 per cent, say provincial 
opposition parties (in Alberta). 

 
Mr. Speaker, a 70 per cent hike in power. Our SaskPower rates 
are in the middle of a five-year freeze, Mr. Speaker, on rates. 
They’re in a five-year freeze. We pay less than 8 cents a 
kilowatt hour. A 70 per cent increase in ATCO rates is going to 
put them well above what we’re paying. 
 
And this is in a privatized power industry in Alberta — Alberta, 
that great, great province to the west of us. And I say great 
province. It is a great province, but it’s Alberta. And we’re 
Saskatchewan, and we can do things here. We do have to have 
some confidence in our own ability. And, Mr. Speaker, I submit 
that members on this side of the legislature — that is 
government members — have confidence that we in fact can 
deliver electricity, that we can in fact deliver power throughout 
the province. 
 
And we’re very proud, Mr. Speaker, of the SaskPower men and 
women that generate the electricity, that maintain the lines and 
that maintain that service right into our homes. 
 
(11:00) 
 
And from a Regina perspective particularly, I want to say how 
pleased I am that SaskPower has its head office in our great city 
and those head office jobs are very, very welcome. They’re 
needed. 
 
And my question would be what happens in a privatized 
SaskPower to particularly the head office jobs, but what 
happens to the jobs in SaskPower in terms of both generation 
and the delivery system, that is the people that maintain and 
build the lines? What happens there? And historically, you look 
at other jurisdictions where you have a private power utility, it’s 
not a happy situation. 

We’re proud of the jobs, proud of the reliability of power and 
we want to see power continue to be reliable well into the 
future. 
 
The Throne Speech, incidentally, also talks a bit about wind 
power. I’m very pleased with the steps that we have taken in 
wind power in the past. And I’m very much, very much looking 
forward to some exciting news on the wind power front into the 
future and it’s just nothing but good things can come from that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy, that delivers our natural gas to our 
residences and our businesses, far and wide throughout 
Saskatchewan, a Crown corporation — a Crown corporation 
that has had historically the lowest or the second lowest energy 
rates in all of North America — does a terrific job. 
 
They have fewer employees per line of service. They have a . . . 
than any other gas utility in North America. The people that 
work for SaskEnergy, day after day, are just amazingly well 
trained. They’re well equipped, by and large, and just doing a 
fabulous job of delivering us as safe a form of energy as they 
can in the best possible manner and reliability that frankly has 
been second to none. And I expect that to continue also as 
SaskEnergy continues as a Crown corporation into the future. 
 
Our version, a Crown corporation into the future. Their version, 
sell it off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SGI is a Crown corporation that has a long and 
proud history in Saskatchewan, started in no small measure 
because the private insurance companies wouldn’t insure 
farmers. Wouldn’t insure them, thought it was too great a risk 
because of the lack of fire halls nearby or lack of response . . . 
ability to respond. SGI developed Farm Pack and Tenant Pack, 
and many other, in their day, leading insurance policies. SGI 
has done a phenomenal job on the general side to the point that 
. . . I don’t have the exact numbers but my understanding is they 
have about half of the general insurance business in 
Saskatchewan. It’s just phenomenal what they’ve been able to 
do. 
 
That’s of course begging the question of what SGI does on the 
auto side, where Saskatchewan has enjoyed just consistently 
overall the lowest automobile insurance premium rates in all of 
North America — I suspect in all of the world, but I will stick 
with North America because I absolutely know that. 
 
We also, Mr. Speaker, have been able to pioneer coverage that 
is second to none. We’ve offered choices for individuals. They 
can have guaranteed coverage or they can have tort. We’re able 
to do all of this in the confines of the lowest automobile 
insurance premium rates for individuals, for people, in all of 
North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And, Mr. Speaker, the head office jobs are 
welcome also in our great city of Regina. The key here is 
they’re welcome in Saskatchewan, but as a Regina member I 
say they’re particularly welcome here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is often described as the jewel of our 
Crown corporations. SaskTel, the great little telco that doesn’t 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

 

know that it shouldn’t be able to or that it can’t, so it just 
continues to go on and it does. It has innovative products, 
innovative services. It has . . . it’s listed as one of the top 50 
companies in Canada to work for, Mr. Speaker. That’s our very 
SaskTel: SaskTel that has provided individual line service 
throughout Saskatchewan, digital service throughout 
Saskatchewan, the first province to be totally digital — the first 
province — and that over a province that has vast geography. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to share that two nights ago I was 
talking with a gentleman who retired from SaskTel. And he 
retired at a time when they were going from what they in the 
industry call 4LS, four-line service in rural Saskatchewan. 
They’ve got it down to only four. And they were going to 2LS 
and they had plans to go to 1LS, individual line service; which 
is essentially where they’re at now. 
 
This gentleman was talking to his counterpart from Ontario, 
from the private telephone company, Bell. And they got talking 
about the move that SaskTel was doing to move towards 2LS 
and then individual line service, and then digital service in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the counterpart in Ontario 
said, why would you even do that? We wouldn’t dream of 
doing that at Bell; we wouldn’t dream of doing that. Why not? 
No return. No cash return, that’s why not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we couldn’t be prouder 
of our telephone company, of SaskTel. We couldn’t be prouder 
of the service that we’re able to provide throughout 
Saskatchewan and now in northern Saskatchewan as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — We know that SaskTel is the telco that can and 
will. We know that SaskTel is going to continue as a Crown 
corporation, is going to continue to do well through this year 
and well into the future because we’re determined that this great 
jewel, this Crown corporation, can and will. Members opposite 
say, privatize SaskTel and do it quickly. That’s what they say. 
We say SaskTel can grow and expand as a Crown corporation. 
They say privatize. Mr. Speaker, these are some of the very 
clear differences between us and them. 
 
There are many other Crowns that I could talk about, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to restrict myself to those major ones, although 
frankly I readily admit that one that we’re very proud of also on 
this side . . . In fact earlier today we had a private member’s 
statement on Sask Transportation Company, a great little 
transportation company that provides freight and individual 
personal service throughout Saskatchewan, many parts of rural 
Saskatchewan, that frankly would not enjoy bus service if it 
weren’t for Saskatchewan Transportation Company. There’s 
over 300 dedicated employees that work there and they’re some 
of the finest people in all of the land, Mr. Speaker. STC is just a 
great little telco and it’s one that clearly, members opposite 
have said, we’ll privatize it just as quickly as they can. 
 
We have staked out our ground with respect to Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. Our ground is we are prepared to 
subsidize it to the tune of, the last I saw, about $4 million a 
year. I’m seeing some nods so I’m going to say about $4 
million a year. And that is our subsidy to guarantee that we 

have service throughout rural Saskatchewan, both mail and 
parts for machinery, that sort of thing — freight is what I was 
really scratching to find the right word for — freight service, 
and people. And we’re very proud of STC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to fairness for working people — 
that’s the other part I had — I wanted to say how pleased I am 
that the Minister of Labour is going to be introducing 
legislation acknowledging for firefighters that there are some 
hazards that lead to occupational diseases and there’s going to 
be recognition of those occupational diseases in The Workers’ 
Compensation Act this year. I feel like at one point in . . . 
earlier in my career I started that process so I’m very, very 
pleased that the current Minister of Labour is able to see it 
come to its logical fruition and conclusion. And I’m very 
pleased with the job that she is doing there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the democracy, I want to say that 
it’s interesting to hear from members opposite about 
democracy. This from a party that its first resolution was to do 
away with the Human Rights Commission — this on 
International Human Rights Day. It’s nice to look back to who 
they are and where they’re from. The first, first party resolution, 
do away with the Human Rights Commission. 
 
Then their latest effort into . . . or not latest but their latest effort 
into democracy was at their last annual convention where they 
had a five-minute, one-person debate on policy. Five minutes, 
one person, and it was all over. And that debate was about 
what? Kyoto. 
 
And on the international scene, Kyoto, it’s an important thing 
and it’s something that we have to deal with locally. That’s why 
we’re doing wind power. That’s why we’re doing energy 
conservation. That’s why the member for Saskatoon University 
. . . is it University Sutherland? Pardon me? . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Saskatoon Greystone has been leading the 
charge on alternate energy and on energy conservation and, Mr. 
Speaker, we look forward to doing that well into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s clearly much more I’d like to say but in the 
interest of allowing all members an opportunity to enter this 
very important debate — this debate that shows the differences 
for me, us versus the opposition; this debate that clearly, clearly 
will outline what choices voters can and will make — Mr. 
Speaker, in the interest of having as many members as possible 
join the debate I will thank you for your attention and I’ll take 
my place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would be . . . 
I’m pleased to be able to enter into the debate from the Throne 
Speech for this particular year. 
 
Throne speeches are traditionally an opportunity and an 
occasion to present visions and statements and people around 
the province look forward to these particular days. There’s two 
in particular that people look forward to. 
 
One of course is the Throne Speech where the government has 
an opportunity to lay out their plan, to show the vision, the 
direction, and to give people the hope and direction that they’ll 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

be following in the next year and hopefully following that. 
 
The other of course is the budget speech that comes down, will 
be coming down, later this week. That too is an occasion when 
it gives people of the province an opportunity to see where the 
government wants to go in a financial direction and of course it 
has the economic overtones of budgets presented at any time. 
 
Those two functions are very important I think in the 
presentation to the people of the province. 
 
I guess what we saw here in this Throne Speech was I think an 
opportunity that was lost. Here was an opportunity that the 
government had to show the vision statement that they want to 
put forward in this coming year, in this coming session, and the 
vision that should lead on into the future. And it’s that direction 
that the people of this province need more than anything at this 
stage because of several circumstances: the economy is lagging; 
we have out-migration; all those things that we’ve talked about. 
 
And it would appear that this opportunity to present the Throne 
Speech to address those issues, it just didn’t materialize. And 
unfortunately, that outline leading to a plan is, was not there. 
And like I said, it’s an opportunity lost. 
 
(11:15) 
 
People have to believe, people have to believe in where they 
want the government to go. And the people want to be able to 
contribute to believing . . . contributing to that plan, but they 
also want to hear it enunciated so they can make their own 
plans accordingly. 
 
And when I listened to the Throne Speech and have read 
through it subsequent, what I heard were the slogans that this 
government has been using all the time about the future is wide 
open. But at the same time we see that there is red tape blocking 
investment opportunities in this province. And we see that 
confidence is being lost in outside investors looking back at 
Saskatchewan who see the opportunities that we see here too, 
but they’re not prepared to take on the risk involved. 
 
So we hear the slogans but they’re pretty empty. But I also 
heard, and what I read in the Throne Speech was a summary, 
basically a summary of existing programs that this government 
has in place and intends to continue in place. That’s not exactly 
stimulating direction that encourages people to move in a 
direction that needs to be addressed in the opportunity of the 
centennial year that’s coming up. 
 
This opportunity is here right now. We have an opportunity to 
start looking at something exceptional, something besides the 
ordinary, in the centennial years of the cities of Regina, Moose 
Jaw, my city of Lloydminster — also recognizing the 
contributions in Prince Albert. This is an opportunity to start 
that direction, and it’s an opportunity to be able to continue it to 
the year 2005 when it’s the provincial, the provincial 
centennial. 
 
But I didn’t hear that in this Throne Speech, and I was 
disappointed that . . . I’m not sure where this government wants 
to go in this coming year and in the years following. 
 

They talk about expanding the economy of Saskatchewan — 
should be and the claim is expanding. And when I look through 
the Throne Speech, what they talked about in fact was growing 
the government. There’s the . . . the government growth is in a 
direction with government investment, and also continuing to 
put government dollars in competition to the private industry 
that we desperately need here and the investment that we so 
desperately need in this province. Nothing to do with trying to 
build confidence in investors; nothing that I could see in terms 
of expanding the economy. 
 
When we talk about agriculture, we believe on this side of the 
House that agriculture in fact does have a future. It has a very 
significant future in this province and it’s not something that we 
put band-aids on to try to get by until the next rain comes or 
until the federal government contributes another significant 
amount of money, even though that we refuse to get involved in 
the plans in developing those particular federal programs in 
conjunction with the provinces. 
 
But I do believe that agriculture does have a future. It won’t be 
the same as the future of agriculture as we know it now or have 
seen it in the past, but it certainly does . . . But what is that 
future? This was an opportunity to give us a bit of a view of the 
direction that agriculture should be going and what the 
programs that were needed to start this new direction in 
agriculture. 
 
They talked in the Throne Speech about, of course, the ACRE 
(Action Committee on the Rural Economy) and the ACRE 
committee and how they’re going to follow it. That’s an 
existing program. So where is the direction from here? They 
talked about value-added. They talked about the processing of 
agriculture commodities and intensive livestock operations, but 
they talked about the existing programs that’s already in place. 
Is that in fact the future? 
 
What about the crop insurance, 52 per cent increase in the rates 
that the producers are going to have to pay? Is that the direction 
that this government wants agriculture to go? It works out to 
probably three times the rate over the last three years. It’s 
increased that much. Is that the direction? The vision, is that the 
vision? Just more of the same? We’re going to continue on with 
more of the same? It’s not very inspiring. 
 
It’s like that when a person goes to a doctor and says to the 
doctor that he’s not feeling right; there’s something wrong — 
what can be done, can you help me? And the doctor says, well 
I’m not sure what’s wrong with you but, whatever it is, you’re 
going to continue to do it. I can’t correct you, but you’re going 
to continue to feel the same. It’s not a very reassuring statement 
given through this Throne Speech. 
 
So I guess what I saw also in that Throne Speech were not the 
statements that we needed to . . . that I thought we should be 
hearing, but the statements like well, we’re poised to do 
something; we’ll continue to do something; we support this; we 
support that. 
 
When we talked about energy in the Throne Speech, what I read 
was that the government has spearheaded, and that — with the 
change of royalty rates — and that spearheaded the increase in 
exploration. And I have to admit that that in fact was a 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

 

significant assist to the industry. Particularly in my area, that is 
certainly welcome. But I’m not sure you can take full credit for 
that. I suspect that $37 a barrel has something to do with 
spurring the exploration and development in all areas. 
 
The thing that has to be looked at is the competitiveness of our 
economy, competitiveness of our regulations. We have to be 
competitive with other jurisdictions. We’re not in an isolated 
island here. We have to make sure that we can do the things and 
present the programs in such a way that people will have 
interest in coming, see an opportunity and have the confidence 
to come here. That is something that I didn’t see there. 
 
And again, in forestry — they talked about forestry. And again, 
what’s the plan there? What’s new? What was presented? 
Where are we going to go? Is there going to be an opportunity, 
again, to present a vision and a direction to build the confidence 
of investors? Or are we going to have to again use public funds 
to try to stimulate an economy where the fundamentals, I 
believe, should be changed? 
 
The vision and the direction and the signals from this are so 
critical not only for private investment, but why would other 
people come? Why would they come and invest? Why would 
they come and stay? Why would local businesses try to expand 
if in fact they’re not aware of where the . . . what the plan is or 
where we may want to go with it? 
 
In health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very little was addressed in 
the Throne Speech that give you an indication of where the 
future vision might be. I’ve referred to a situation earlier — 
referring to health care now — when Premier Doer of Manitoba 
was presenting to the Romanow Commission on health. Premier 
Doer structured his remarks in the direction of, the health care 
provision in Manitoba is an economic advantage for Manitoba. 
I haven’t seen that direction here or those kinds of incentives 
here or the kind of . . . that statement leading to confidence 
from this particular government, and certainly not in this 
Throne Speech. 
 
There are adequate examples of how lagging economies can be 
turned around and incentives put in place so that — and the 
fundamentals change — so that lagging economies can turn that 
corner and start moving ahead. It’s not . . . We’re not breaking 
new ground here. It’s things that have been done in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
And I’m referring to things like out-migration of population 
which we’ve been experiencing for literally decades. We have 
just not grown. And the most serious part of that out-migration 
of course is the younger, trained people that Saskatchewan is 
famous for and in fact should take full credit for the training 
and education. But they’re not staying here. That out-migration 
is a big problem. 
 
The non-competitive taxation policies are another indicator of 
other jurisdictions that have lagging economies. And that aspect 
has been turned around so that the taxation policies become 
competitive, which then again starts attracting the interest of 
people and companies and starts building that confidence to 
come here to Saskatchewan or remain in Saskatchewan. 
 
These other lagging economies have similar characteristics as 

we have here — restrictive and red-tape controls that actually 
block investment or, at the very least, discourage it. I can give 
you several examples because I get a lot of calls from people 
that do want to come to Saskatchewan and have actually run 
into administrative red tape to the point where they have thrown 
up their hands. 
 
An example — probably the most recent example — would be 
two people from my constituency that actually wanted to invest 
in the tourism area of our economy. They were more than 
happy to invest upwards of 2 and $3 million of their own 
money plus leverage money from their financiers to buy into a 
site in northern Saskatchewan that has the potential equal to 
nowhere else in Canada. 
 
They were absolutely blocked from getting the final approvals 
and they, instead of pursuing it doggedly, they chose to buy into 
an outfitting and a northern tourist area in northern Manitoba. 
And actually who can . . . (inaudible) . . . them, but what a pity 
that is. 
 
We have another case recently where somebody wants to 
purchase a lodge in northern Saskatchewan and in this 
particular case, they were willing to pay all the necessary fees. 
But after two or three months of bureaucratic delays, they were 
finally assessed another 10 per cent penalty for part of the sales 
on some of the back taxes. And they’re struggling now with 
whether they want to continue to pursue this endeavour, where 
they would be employing anywhere from 50 to 75 people 
immediately, just because of a red tape or a regulation that 
actually discouraged, if not blocked. 
 
So these economies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all have something in 
common and they start out by determining where they want to 
go, and they enunciate it clearly and it’s a defined plan or a 
defined statement. So we start with a plan and the plan is 
developed by the people that are involved in the economy. It’s 
not imposed on the people of the economy but it’s developed by 
the people themselves, developed by the sectors, and people 
buy into that plan. 
 
It’s kind of like what would they like to see the province look 
like. What would they like to see that jurisdiction look like if, in 
fact, things could be corrected and changed around? That’s the 
plan. Where do we want to be when we grow up, so to speak? 
And if you have that plan, then you know exactly where you’re 
going. 
 
If you’re going to drive a bus, you’ve got to know where the 
bus is going. You’ve got to be able to make sure that the people 
agree that you want to go in that same place. And so the plan in 
this case becomes paramount and then you can start looking at 
the future and how you achieve that particular plan. So the first 
item is the plan. 
 
The second item that you need is a partnership. You need 
partnerships within that economy and those partnerships 
become very critical in trying to achieve it because the people 
have a belief in that plan. And now they will try to partner up 
with different parts of the economy to create the synergies 
needed to achieve it. 
 
And the whole idea is to try to work together instead of making 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

roadblocks and trying . . . working apart. It’s to the plan, the 
plan is the important part. The partnerships is important to 
achieve that plan. It’s not a . . . The partnerships are not, they’re 
not trying to make sure that one sector is dominant over 
another. They’re not trying to say that the government is the 
more important controlling factor here. The partnerships are . . . 
they have to get their heads together to, like I said, develop the 
synergy that . . . so they can start achieving that plan. 
 
(11:30) 
 
So the first was the plan, the second is the partnership, and the 
third step is then you proceed. You proceed by putting these 
fundamentals in place, you put the vision in place, and things 
start coming together. And you start developing a belief that we 
can do it, not a belief that, gee, we can’t and . . . or we need 
help. The belief that we can do it. And a growth vision of the 
Canadian average of 1 per cent a year surely isn’t much, that’s 
not too much to expect of a particular plan and I’m just so sure 
that we will be able to do much more than that. 
 
So we have the plan, the partnership, and then we proceed to 
make sure what we want to achieve can be achieved and start to 
change the attitude of people that I could see from my 
hometown. On one side of the border there is a can-do attitude. 
The other side of the border seems to wait for something to 
happen because they just seem to be not as self-assured. And I 
think we need to change that attitude because that is critical in 
developing the confidence needed to both stay, expand, or 
attract people. 
 
The plan, the partnership, then you proceed, and finally you 
prosper. This is the result that we all want for this province and 
we’re all prepared to work at it. But I think if it’s done right we 
certainly will be able to prosper in this province. The models 
are everywhere. Lagging economies, similar to the ones that 
I’ve already described, are in fact changing their direction and 
following the plan, the partnership; they’re proceeding now 
directly to prospering. 
 
And I’m thinking of examples right here in Canada — Nova 
Scotia has made the turnaround and are starting to make it a 
desirable place to live. People have a changed attitude in that 
particular province as an example. 
 
In the European Union we see of course the Irish model is used 
extensively with similar, exactly similar circumstance to what I 
described earlier — the out-migration, the investment, the high 
government involvement in the economy, trained people 
leaving, and so on. 
 
Holland is another example of an economy that has cycled 
through prosperous times and less prosperous, but they’ve 
begun to put the fundamentals in place because of the plan that 
they have put in place and the partnerships to achieve that plan. 
 
You know you can look in the United States. From the research 
that I’ve done, Massachusetts is an example, and Michigan and 
Georgia are examples of states that were almost written off for 
such things as the — by names — as the rust belt and 
economies that are no longer effective. 
 
That has turned around because there was a plan established by 

the people and that people are the ones that will make it work. 
So we’ve got to have . . . you’ve got to put trust and faith in the 
people and not pretend the government is going to be able to do 
that for you. We’ve got to develop the self-worth. 
 
A hundred years ago, that’s how this province was built. People 
that had faith and trust and energy and the commitment to do it 
and not wait for it to get done, and I think that’s what we’re 
doing here now. We’ve got to try to put pride in 
accomplishment, get pride in accomplishment, and not envy. 
It’s the accomplishment that we should be celebrating. 
 
So this Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was in fact an 
opportunity, but as it turned out it was an opportunity lost. And 
this is at a time when this opportunity and the vision and 
direction is so badly needed in this province. And it’s just not 
there and I say it’s a shame and it’s a disappointment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot support the motion. I will be 
supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It is a pleasure to enter into this debate today about the 
Throne Speech. If I might start my remarks by saying that I 
think as all of us in this Assembly witness the events that are 
unfolding in the world, that certainly my thoughts are with 
those people who are praying for peace, who are praying for a 
quick end to the bombing in Iraq and who are obviously praying 
for a better future for the Iraqi people. 
 
We have the luxury, the privilege in this country of living free 
and democratic lives and it is, I think, as we enter into this 
discussion on our Throne Speech and indeed as we enter this 
legislative session, it’s important that we all remember our 
responsibilities as members, as citizens, to help make sure that 
the democratic institutions remain strong. 
 
I am pleased, as we take a look at the Throne Speech, to speak 
in favour of the issues contained within it. I couldn’t agree more 
with the title of it, “A Vision. A Plan. A Future Wide Open,” 
because I think that that encapsulates not only the overall view 
for Saskatchewan but certainly what this government is 
promoting. 
 
Today I want to talk a little bit about some of those issues 
contained in that, and I want to contrast that with what members 
opposite are talking about, and their leader are talking about, 
because I think there is a growing divide and a very real choice 
that will be put to Saskatchewan people in the very near future. 
 
We as New Democrats, social democrats, have a vision of a 
Saskatchewan that is inclusive. We have a vision of a 
Saskatchewan in which everyone is able to rise and take 
advantage of opportunity regardless of economic circumstance, 
regardless of race, regardless of cultural background. That is a 
core part of who we are and what we believe. It’s part of what 
makes Saskatchewan such a great place to live, such a great 
province. And it’s that kind of leadership that this party and its 
predecessors have provided for 50 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This morning the Leader of the 
Opposition was critical of the Throne Speech in terms of the 
words that were contained in it. I thought it was interesting that 
he was critical simply of it being a . . . in terms of its 
communications initiative. I think it’s important that we look 
beyond what the words say, that we take a look at what the 
initiatives are, that we understand what the basis of those 
initiatives are, and that we are clear in understanding what the 
agenda is on this side of the House and on the opposition side. 
 
I want to speak first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the 
expanding economy. Saskatchewan’s economy is strong. It is 
growing, it is vibrant, it is diversified. And in the last year the 
initiatives taken by this government, by its former minister of 
Industry and Resources, by the Minister of Crown Investments, 
by the members of the investment council, have helped move 
this province’s economy forward. That’s why today we have 
seen 10 consecutive months of job growth. That is why we have 
seen a 68 per cent growth in terms of the oil and gas drilling in 
this province. That is why we continue to see Saskatchewan 
have the single largest per capita number of small businesses. 
That’s why we see retail sales up 7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the plan the Government of Saskatchewan 
has, the plan the NDP has, is working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Our plan is not focused on simply one 
geographic area of the province. It’s not about growing the 
cities at the expense of rural Saskatchewan. It’s not about 
growing the west side versus the east. It’s not about growing the 
South versus the North, as the member for Saskatchewan Rivers 
talked about yesterday. 
 
This is about growing the province in sector after sector after 
sector of the six key areas we identified. Despite the problems 
that we have had with the trade subsidy, despite the problems 
that we have had on agriculture, we are continuing to see 
growth. I am proud, Mr. Deputy . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I am very proud of the fact that we see 
today more than 475,000 people working in this province — 10 
consecutive months of growth, 6 months of record growth. That 
is something we should all celebrate, that we should all be 
proud about. It is time for the naysayers on the opposition in the 
Saskatchewan Party to stop putting down the businesses that are 
growing our economy in our cities, in our towns, and in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The Saskatchewan Party says that they 
have a plan. Well we know that they’ve got a slogan. As we 
take a look at what they say their plan is, as I was listening to 
the Leader of the Opposition yesterday, he talked about his 
economic development vision in two areas. One was in terms of 
tax, the second was in terms of Crown investments. I want to 
talk about that today because this is a very important wedge 
issue. This is an important difference between where the 
opposition Saskatchewan Party is and where our NDP 

government is. 
 
We have today . . . We are in the fourth year of a significant set 
of income tax reductions in this province — $400 million worth 
of income tax reductions. Today personal income tax rates in 
this province are at their lowest rate since 1976. They are at 
their lowest rate since 1976. And that is as a result of the work 
of the current Minister of Industry and Resources, the former 
minister of Finance, who led and spearheaded that tax reform 
package. That was a balanced approach. Today it means the 
majority of Saskatchewan people pay less, pay 11 per cent tax. 
Eleven per cent, the lowest rate since 1976. 
 
The changes that came into effect on January 1 of this year will 
mean that Saskatchewan people earning less than $100,000 will 
pay no more than 13 per cent income tax on that. That is a 
tremendous change from the complicated, punitive tax 
measures that were in place under the Sask Party’s predecessor 
government, the Tory government that was in place — that the 
member from Swift Current was pleased to work for, that the 
member for Estevan was pleased to work for, that the member 
for Moosomin was pleased to serve in — a government that 
introduced a high-income surtax to be punitive to high-income 
earners; a flat tax that was punitive to all Saskatchewan people. 
 
These were measures that were simply not in keeping with what 
Saskatchewan people wanted. The members opposite are now 
hopping on the tax reduction bandwagon. We’ve reduced 
income taxes to the lowest rates since 1976 and I think that that 
is a very important piece that we should recognize and the 
members opposite should speak about. 
 
The members opposite say, oh well. The Leader of the 
Opposition says he’s going to create and make Saskatchewan a 
small-business, tax-free zone. Well this is a very interesting, 
interesting issue that the member raises. He says of course he’ll 
do it over four years; well maybe he’ll get it done; they’ll try 
and do it early in their term, but they’ll see. 
 
Since 1992 we have been reducing business taxes in this 
province. Since we’ve balanced the budget, we have been 
reducing the small-business taxes in this province. We have 
been reducing the corporate capital tax. That’s been a 
commitment that we’ve made and that is why we are seeing 
growth. That’s why we’re seeing growth, you know, in the gas 
sector; that’s why we’re seeing growth in Saskatchewan small 
business. And there is more that we can do. I don’t doubt that 
there is more that we can do and there is more that this NDP 
government is going to do when we’re re-elected. 
 
But people of Saskatchewan I think are deeply suspicious of an 
opposition party who says, trust us. Well as they take a look 
back at the former assistant to John Gerich, at the former 
assistant to Grant Devine, and a former bench mate of Grant 
Devine, at all the old Tories across the way, I think they 
ultimately start to say, well wait a second, we’ve kind of heard 
this before. We have heard this before. Well even the Leader of 
the Opposition said yesterday — he says they’re going to say, 
I’ve heard it before, that this is going to be one of those 
measures where they’re going to reduce taxes but increase 
services. 
 
Well yes we heard that before. You know what? You’re going 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

to hear it again next Friday when the Minister of Finance stands 
and says, we’re still paying — still paying — for that set of 
policy decisions that were made in the 1980s. We are still 
seeing the interest on our debt being the fourth largest 
expenditure that we have to pay. Imagine what we could do for 
the business sector, imagine what we could do for taxpayers, 
imagine what we could do in our communities to build safer 
communities, to build stronger communities — if only we 
didn’t have to pay for the mistakes of that government that was 
supported by current members of that opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, they say it’s not just the 
taxes. Having the lowest income tax rate since ’76 isn’t good 
enough. It’s not just the fact we’ve reduced business taxes since 
1992. That’s not good enough. They say that the real problem 
here, the real problem is . . . who? Saskatchewan people. They 
say the problem here is the labour. They say it’s the workers. 
That’s what they’re saying. 
 
And one of the first things that they’re going to do is that they 
are going to rip apart the labour legislation in this province, that 
they are going to peel back the protection that workers have 
fought for. Why? Because it fits with their ideological vision. 
Why? Because they won’t blame their past mistakes for 
difficulties that we have in terms of growing more, doing more. 
Instead they’re going to pass it off on the working people. 
Shameful. Ridiculous. But that’s what they say — they are 
going to tear apart the labour legislation. 
 
And you know what? They’re not just going to do it sometime. 
They’re going to do it right away. The first thing they’re going 
to do is dismantle the successes of the working people. 
 
We talked about the Crown corporations. The Leader of the 
Opposition went on to talk about the Crown investments. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we have, we are strong supporters of a mixed 
economy. We believe in private sector investment. We believe 
in private sector business growth. We believe in the 
co-operative sector. And we believe that where the 
Saskatchewan people can come together through their 
government to pool their resources and invest it, that we should 
do that — that the Crowns have an opportunity to do more than 
just provide electricity and telephone; that we have an 
opportunity to make some real investments in the economy. 
 
Now I know the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t agree with 
that. I know that he doesn’t agree with that, and that’s why he 
fired Grant Schmidt as a candidate. But what I find very 
peculiar is why . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members will all get their 
opportunities for this . . . to make their remarks. At this 
moment, at this moment I ask the minister responsible for 
Corrections and Public Safety to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much. I want to pick 
up on this question of Crowns and the economy because the 
Leader of the Opposition says he doesn’t believe in it. There 
should be no role for those Crown corporations in terms of 

investing in the economy. That’s why he fired Grant Schmidt as 
a candidate in Melville. 
 
Now unfortunately it’s not a very consistent approach because 
there’s, sitting right across from me, the brand new member for 
Battleford-Cut Knife. But what does the member for 
Battleford-Cut Knife believe? He believes that not only should 
the Crowns be investing in the economy and in business, they 
should be investing in his business. 
 
Now I think that’s a refreshingly honest approach that he’s 
taken. At least he’s come up front in saying, put that money into 
the economy. And in fact, I’ve got a great idea that you could 
put it into — he says — put it into his business up in his home 
community to help them grow. Put it into Wilkie, he says. Well 
that’s a very refreshing approach. It’s probably good he didn’t 
tell the Leader of the Opposition those were his views after the 
nomination or they’d have to have fired him and found another 
candidate. 
 
What are some of the other folks around there saying? Well 
they’ve got a lot of different views. I listened to the member for 
Cypress Hills talk about the investments in ethanol. And he 
said, as did the member for Assiniboia . . . sorry, for Wood 
River. The members were saying, well we aren’t opposed to 
investment in the economy and we aren’t opposed to investment 
in industry. We just think the government should be the 
absolute last group to invest. 
 
So it’s not a case of picking good investments. It’s a question of 
once all the other opportunities are exhausted, once everybody 
else is exhausted, if you’ve got a dog of an idea, bring it to the 
Saskatchewan Party. That’s what they’re saying. Don’t bother 
us with the winners; just show them the losers, is what they’re 
saying. Well that’s their approach. 
 
Invest in a business for the member for Battleford-Cut Knife, 
invest in the ethanol plants if they’re in the riding of Wood 
River or Cypress Hills — as long as it’s the absolute last place 
and we can’t find answers anywhere else. Don’t worry about 
the benefits back to Saskatchewan people. Don’t worry about 
the sound business plans, they say. Just make that investment 
directly. That’s what they believe in. 
 
And that is a very inconsistent approach that’s being taken by 
the Leader of the Opposition to say on the one hand in the 
House yesterday that the Crowns shouldn’t be involved in 
economic development, but to have surrounding him in his 
caucus a bunch of people that say, well you can do it in my 
riding. Yes make that public investment in my district. Pretty 
interesting approach as they get ready to head into an election, 
in terms of the Crowns. 
 
I think that we are going to see as we head into this a good solid 
debate about the Crown corporations. It goes beyond, though, 
the question of just investment in the economy. I think there’s a 
real question here about government participation in other 
sectors. 
 
I listened to the member for Thunder Creek. I read an article 
from him some time ago, just after his nomination, talking 
about what they were going to do with the Crown corporations 
if they’re elected. Well I tell you, a lot of people are pretty 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

 

concerned about it. It was somewhat reassuring, I guess, that he 
said that they would continue to support SaskTel and 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy after doing a core services review, 
whatever that is. After they shed off all the profitable pieces and 
left it with whatever it needed for a direct subsidy, that they 
would move forward with that. 
 
But then the member for . . . then the member for Thunder 
Creek went one step further and the member for Thunder Creek 
said that every other one of those Crown corporations would be 
privatized. Every one of the other Crown corporations would be 
privatized. Now that’s a very interesting message. 
 
The member for Swift Current used to work for the minister 
responsible for the Liquor Board. I’d be very interested to hear 
what that Sask Party plan is for privatizing the Liquor Board. Is 
the plan to immediately — early in the term, late in the term, on 
day one — fire the 1,600 people that are working in 
well-paying, unionized jobs in the liquor stores, to fire them, 
give the market over to their business friends, and then allow 
them to get hired back at minimum wage? Is that what the plan 
is? 
 
What’s the plan in terms of some of the other corporations, in 
areas where we have Crown investments that protect public 
interests? What about STC? How quickly is STC going to get 
sold off? Do you really think Greyhound’s going to continue 
the same kind of network that STC has? And how do they 
justify that in some parts of rural Saskatchewan? I’d be very 
interested to hear what members actually have to say about that. 
 
What are they going to do about the Gaming Corporation that is 
there to provide us with a security of government control over a 
sensitive area? Are they going to shut it down, as some of the 
members advocate? Are they going to give it away, as I’ve been 
hearing up in the . . . coming out of the by-elections? What 
exactly is the position? And I think that this is something where 
the Saskatchewan Party is going to have to say more than, just 
trust us, because they seem to have somewhere between no plan 
and a whole bunch of small plans, they seem to have a bunch of 
secret plans. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition yesterday, when we were asking 
him about his position on treaty land entitlement, said oh, I said 
what I had to say to SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities). I told SARM, is what he was telling the 
Premier and I. Well that’s fine, but is that the same thing that 
he’s telling the FSIN? And if he’s got . . . if he’s told SARM 
something about his policy on the treaty land entitlement, why 
won’t he share it with all of us here in the legislature? Why not 
tell the people of Saskatchewan what the plan is? 
 
I worry that in fact what the opposition leader is developing is a 
number of different plans — one that you tell the Indian people 
and one that you tell the farmers; that you’ve got one that you 
tell the city folk and one that you tell people in the country. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what I worry that the opposition is 
developing, is a number of different secret plans. 
 
What is their plan in terms of privatization? Our plan for Crown 
ownership and involvement is pretty clear. We believe that 
where we can assist, where we can provide control, where it’s 
important either for the economy or social development, that we 

are going to be involved. And that is a key part of what we 
believe in. It’s not dogmatic. It’s not ideologically hidebound. It 
is one that is pragmatic. Where we can divest, where we can 
take advantage of market opportunity, where the private sector 
can do it better, we allow that to happen. And that’s what we’ve 
done. 
 
But the members opposite, let’s understand, as we take a look at 
what our vision is of an inclusive Saskatchewan versus theirs, 
which segments off, that hives off, that divides Saskatchewan 
between rich and poor, Métis and First Nations people and 
others, between the farmers and the city folk, that is a policy of 
division. That is a divide and conquer policy that the members 
opposite pursued all the way through the ’80s. 
 
I thought it was refreshing yesterday for the member for Sask 
Rivers to stand up and talk about how his view of investments 
were that SaskTel should make good international investments 
like the one in the Chunnel and not make bad international 
investments. I thought that was ingenious. Inconsistent with the 
approach taken by his leader — I’m sure his leader will deal 
with him in the nomination process. But nevertheless it was 
refreshing to at least hear that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our approach is clear, our vision is clear, our plan 
is clear, and it is the same plan that we’ll tell SARM, that we’re 
going to tell the FSIN, that we tell people in the cities, that we 
tell people in the country, that we tell people in Wood River, 
that we tell people in northern Saskatchewan. That is our plan. 
It is out front. It is open. It is honest. It is accountable — unlike 
the hidden, secret, duplicitous agenda being advanced by the 
members opposite. 
 
This Throne Speech should be supported. We should support 
the ideas in it. Stop haggling about the words and get on with 
allowing us to continue to see this province’s economy and 
society grow. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today on behalf of the constituents of 
Humboldt to reply to the Throne Speech. But before I do that, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome to the Assembly the two 
new members, the member from Battleford-Cut Knife as well 
as the member from Saskatoon Fairview, and wish them well in 
their efforts to represent their people well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech that came down this year from 
the government was best, I guess, described by the Premier 
himself. The Premier was very, very upset with his own Throne 
Speech. Now just exactly how that could come to pass I’m not 
sure, but we see a Premier who goes on a rant with his own 
cabinet about how pathetic the Throne Speech was. You know, 
you have to really wonder how in control the Premier is of his 
own government and of what happens within this government, 
including the Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is known is that the Premier entered his 
cabinet room, slammed his paperwork down on the massive oak 
cabinet table — and this is a quote from the paper — and used 
both language and volume that caught everyone’s attention. 
Earlier on today members opposite were kind of wondering, in 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

some of the conversation that was going across the floor, how 
in fact the opposition came to know about that incident. Well I 
think that the members opposite are going to have to be 
questioning themselves. I think there happens to be a . . . 
somebody over there that’s obviously so unhappy that they 
leaked that information to the media themselves. It’s really 
quite interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today a good example of the incompetence of the government 
was clearly demonstrated when the minister for Corrections was 
answering in question period — or trying to answer somewhat 
— questions put by the opposition regarding the safety at our 
correctional institutes in this province. 
 
It was very clear to members on this side of the House that that 
minister was totally irresponsible in his duties as a minister 
because he did not even know and could not equate to us the 
policy that was put forward by his government, if in fact there 
was any policy. 
 
It’s clear also, Mr. Speaker, that there are people in the 
correctional institutes that are responsible for what happens 
there, the staff asking for assistance and help. If this isn’t a clear 
cry from staff members for assistance and help and direction, I 
don’t know what is. In the meantime we have the safety of the 
citizens of our province certainly in jeopardy with this kind of 
activity going on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I do want to mention, when we look at 
whether or not there was vision in this Throne Speech, I want to 
certainly say that the Throne Speech as it was put forward 
indicated that there was vision. The government is telling us 
they have a plan, they have a vision, and they have a future 
wide opened. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, their vision is certainly not clear. There’s 
nothing tangible in the Throne Speech that would indicate to us 
what kind of forward-looking initiatives they have. We hear the 
Throne Speech. Eighty per cent of the Throne Speech was about 
the past; maybe 20 per cent talked about a few little initiatives 
that they were going to move towards in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite any member of the cabinet, any 
member of the NDP, to take a look over at the Humboldt 
constituency if they want to know what it is to be forward 
looking, to have vision, to be innovative, to understand the 
work ethic, to understand what it is for people to work together 
and move together — and to understand what private enterprise 
business can do in fact to grow a province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have always been — in the Humboldt 
constituency, that area of the province — one of the most 
aggressive areas of the province as far as private enterprise 
moving on ahead. We have the . . . I would say we are the hub 
of the largest farm manufacturing, machinery manufacturing 
rather, in the province. 
 
These kind of industries started from private enterprise. These 
industries started without government assistance. In fact they 
abhorred government assistance and they grew in a very 
commonsensical fashion because of family involvement and 
certainly good planning and good business sense. 
 

(12:00) 
 
This is what the province needs more of now, Mr. Speaker. We 
have had enough government interference in business. We have 
had enough of this NDP government taking hard-earned 
taxpayers’ dollars and blowing it, basically, on ventures outside 
of Saskatchewan — risky ventures. No sense, no sense at all in 
what they have done. Risky ventures outside of Saskatchewan 
that have lost us millions and millions of taxpayers’ dollars. 
Bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is government has no business in 
business. 
 
And just in reply to the member from Regina South and his 
comments here just a few minutes ago. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister from Regina South is constantly talking about what 
they are about as opposed to what we are about. 
 
Well what we are about is believing in the people of this 
province to have the best business sense; to know what to do to 
grow this province. And we believe in giving them the freedom 
to go ahead and do that without undue government interference. 
That’s what we believe in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak a little bit today about the 
necessity, as the Saskatchewan Party sees it, of recognizing that 
First Nations and Métis people in this province must be and are 
necessarily going to be a part of the growing economy. Because 
Saskatchewan’s success over the next decade, it does hinge on 
the success of our rapidly growing First Nations and Métis 
population. 
 
First Nations people and businesses must be full partners in the 
growth and governance of Saskatchewan with equal 
opportunities, equal rights, and responsibilities. A 
Saskatchewan Party government will build a partnership with 
First Nations based on recognition that treaty rights must be 
respected and honoured by the federal government within the 
context of the economic, social, and political climate of the 21st 
century. 
 
A Saskatchewan Party government will build a partnership with 
First Nation and Métis people with support for the principle of 
responsible Aboriginal self-government, where self-government 
is defined as community or local government that is democratic 
and fully accountable. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party government — that will be soon — 
will build a partnership with First Nations based on First 
Nations as full partners, investors, and owners in the economic 
development of Saskatchewan, and support for First Nations 
private sector partnerships in major projects, including 
value-added expansion of our rich uranium resources; 
participation in infrastructure development including the 
financing and construction of local infrastructure — highways, 
pipelines, and electrical transmission assets — and, Mr. 
Speaker, new opportunities for value-added growth of our 
forestry, agriculture, and tourism industries. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Métis population — particularly the 
Métis population in northern Saskatchewan — have spoken 
with us about their hopes and desires for so many years that 
they might be able to own their own housing units in the 
northern administration district of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

 

Speaker, we are meeting with them on an ongoing basis to 
change what they desire to happen. And that change would be 
rather than forever and a day having to look at simply renting 
their housing units, they will be able to purchase them. 
 
Many of the Métis in the North have jobs at the mines in 
forestry and so on. And they certainly feel that they have the 
capability of contributing fully to owning their own homes. And 
so that’s one of the things that they feel will give them a sense 
of pride, a sense of ownership, a sense of self-direction. And, 
Mr. Speaker, those are some of the fundamental beliefs of the 
Saskatchewan Party also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have pretty well constantly looked at the editions 
of the Seeds of Success — if you don’t mind me using this in 
the Assembly. And within this magazine is such a statement of 
celebration of what First Nations and Métis people are doing 
throughout Saskatchewan. This magazine informs all of us — if 
we’re not already informed — of the many, many, many 
achievements of entrepreneurs in the Aboriginal world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just take a moment to point out some of 
the successes because I really feel that it’s important that we 
acknowledge, we look at these successes, and that the world 
around us knows just the kind of great opportunities that are out 
there for Aboriginal people, that they are seriously taking on. 
 
One of the people in this magazine that has a career in 4 
Directions is Michelle Fraser and there’s a great article on her 
achievements. Another one of the entrepreneurs in this 
magazine, Mr. Speaker, is Eva Lizotte. Eva is a designer living 
in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan — a clothing designer. And she 
has sold her clothing designs and clothing all over the world. 
 
These kind of people are very, very inspirational to their own 
people as well as everyone in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just mention while I’m on my feet, the 
great desire of First Nations people to go to their own people, 
and their intent to be mentors to those people. There’s a great 
deal of that happening right now and I just take my hat off to 
the many First Nations people, some of them living off-reserve, 
that periodically go back on-reserve to encourage the young 
people in the schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our goal, the Saskatchewan Party goal is to grow 
Saskatchewan by 100,000 people. We know that the expanding 
numbers of Aboriginal people will, in fact, be a part of that 
growth. We want to see a vibrant province. We have a plan, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that all people in this province, Aboriginal 
people, non-Aboriginal people alike, have opportunities for 
success, that can move forward, and that can certainly make 
Saskatchewan a place of equitable prosperity when looked 
anywhere in this country. We will under a Saskatchewan Party 
government be, in fact, the greatest in the country. 
 
So I thank you, Mr. Speaker. And what I would like to say is 
that I cannot support the Speech from the Throne basically 
because the Premier does not support the Speech from the 
Throne himself. And further to that, Mr. Speaker, we 
recognized during the time that the Speech from the Throne 
came down that there was certainly no vision for this province 
in the contents of that speech. 

The people of this province are looking for leadership. They’re 
looking for direction to grow the province; for prosperity, to 
ensure that our children that are here can stay here and those 
that have left the province can come back here and enjoy 
opportunities to build their family here and certainly to build 
their communities. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I will not support the Speech from the 
Throne, but I will support the amendment put forward by the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, the member . . . the member 
. . . As always, once again, the NDP members across are 
intending to have just a little bit of fun with this. But they do 
that constantly. They do that constantly and that’s all right. 
There’s a little bit of . . . there’s a little bit of, I guess joking, 
that is quite fine in the Assembly and this is certainly done with 
goodwill so I take no offence to that. 
 
So I would support the amendment put forth by the member 
from Rosetown-Biggar. So I will take my seat with that, Mr. 
Speaker, and invite the next reply from the Throne Speech. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
stand today in proud and in loud support of the Speech from the 
Throne. I think the Speech from the Throne talks about a plan, 
it talks about a vision, and it talks about our future wide open. 
And that future wide open, Mr. Speaker, involves all of 
Saskatchewan and that includes northern Saskatchewan, and 
First Nations people of Saskatchewan, and the Métis people of 
Saskatchewan as a whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand in proud support of the Speech from the 
Throne primarily for one reason, Mr. Speaker. It certainly 
involves the Athabasca constituency. It involves the 
Cumberland constituency of the North and makes it a very 
strong part of our economy. We include people of the North. 
And yesterday as I listened to the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers, who’s going to be an ex-member very quickly, Mr. 
Speaker, as I listened to some of the comments that he made, 
Mr. Speaker, I stood in this Assembly and I was very, very 
concerned of some of the comments he was making. 
 
So today I say to the people of northern Saskatchewan — yes, 
we are a proud people; yes, we’re a very determined people; 
and yes, we have to take our rightful place in Saskatchewan’s 
economy, but we’re not going to be able to do that with that 
Sask Party Tory government in charge, Mr. Speaker. People of 
northern Saskatchewan know this, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll give 
you evidence, Mr. Speaker, of what this government has done 
and what this Throne Speech talks about when we talk about 
expansion of our economy, we talk about protecting medicare, 
we talk about opening doors, we talk about environmental 
protection, we talk about secure families and vibrant 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask my colleagues to join 
me in a chorus here as we go down the list here for some of the 
things that we have done. And I want to coach them a bit, Mr. 
Speaker, primarily because some of the work that the member 
from Cumberland has done in his early years as a first minister 
of Aboriginal ancestry in this Assembly, and I want to thank 
that member from the bottom of my heart for doing all the work 
that he’s done from the North. 
 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let me start. Where there was a need for a 
new school in Pinehouse, Mr. Speaker, there is a new school in 
Pinehouse. Where the people of Turnor Lake needed a brand 
new road, Mr. Speaker. Where the people of La Loche needed a 
new hospital, Mr. Speaker. Where the people of Green Lake 
needed financial support for their sawmill. Where the people of 
La Loche needed housing for their families. Where the people 
of the small communities like Bear Creek and Stony Rapids 
needed water and sewer. Where the people of Black Lake 
needed a hospital, Mr. Speaker. Where the people throughout 
the North wanted control of some of their land and the 
resources and decision making to land use planning. To have 
control, Mr. Speaker. Where they wanted support for 
commercial fishing. Where they wanted support for trapping, 
for wild rice, for outfitting and for ecotourism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list is very long. And as you go down the 
specifics of some of the list, Mr. Speaker, there is no question 
there has been good progress made by this government, and this 
Throne Speech talks about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to point out, yesterday the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers, he was talking about friends he has up there, and I quote 
from Hansard. It says, quote: 
 

I got to make a lot of friends up there. A lot of friends in 
northwestern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are 
very influential, community leaders in northern 
Saskatchewan. Community leaders, business leaders, who 
are very concerned. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t find Saskatchewan Party friends in 
northern Saskatchewan. And the reason why we can’t find 
them, Mr. Speaker, is that PC Party, that Conservative Party 
never had the North’s heart and mind and soul ever, ever part of 
their vision or their plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that everything that we’ve 
talked about in Northern Affairs hinges on what they would do, 
what they would do if they were in power, Mr. Speaker. I say 
today to the people of northern Saskatchewan, you can say 
goodbye to the remote housing program. They will not support 
housing in northern Saskatchewan. This party built 50 new 
houses in La Loche alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They will be selling off the Highways equipment. You can kiss 
Highways workers’ jobs goodbye, Mr. Speaker, if that party 
comes in. 
 
The massive water and sewer projects in northern 
Saskatchewan to bring water and sewer to Bear Creek and to 
Stony Rapids and 40 other communities, you can kiss that 
goodbye if that party’s in power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Five to six million acres of forest, Mr. Speaker, have been 
withdrawn or in the process of being withdrawn from the large 
forestry companies to give to the communities. And right across 
the forest fringe of northern Saskatchewan, Aboriginal people 
are in charge of forestry, Mr. Speaker. You can kiss that 
goodbye if those guys are in power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What have we done? Cumberland House needed a new bridge. 
Cumberland House has a new bridge, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had 

many roads fixed in the North that needed fixing. They got 
fixed, Mr. Speaker. La Ronge needed a hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
La Ronge got a hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of the North have been asking for support for their 
social programs, Mr. Speaker. This is what the party has done 
that’s in power today, Mr. Speaker. This government has 
provided to the North for support when you talk about secure 
families and healthy communities. We have put together Kids 
First. We have put together SchoolPLUS. We have put together 
“building independence.” We talk about Sask Income Plan, 
community-based organizations getting support, child-care 
programs, respite programs, special funding for schools with 
disabled children; and the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And what do they say? What do they 
say, Mr. Speaker? If we get in power, if we get in power we’re 
going to take $50 million out of the social assistance budget. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, shame on them. Shame on them because 
that’s a program that they’re going to hurt the most, the 
disabled and the disadvantaged throughout Saskatchewan. And 
northern Saskatchewan is saying no, to the Sask Party or the 
Sask-a-Tory party or the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party 
or the Reform Party or the Alliance Party, whatever they’re 
called. We are saying in northern Saskatchewan, no way José. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat in 
this Assembly for now going on to seven or eight years and of 
those seven or eight years I’ve been Minister of Northern 
Affairs for a couple of years now, and the previous minister had 
been there for a couple of years. And I say to the minister that 
served before me, how many questions have we got in his last 
two years of service? Big fat zero — zero questions from 
members opposite. And how many questions did I get, Mr. 
Speaker, in the last two years I served? One question, Mr. 
Speaker. One question of Northern Affairs. That is a thousand 
day question, Mr. Speaker — four years or 48 months. 
 
And I say to the people of the North, do not listen to that 
opposition because the only question they asked here, Mr. 
Speaker, was why are we sending people to Fort McMurray to 
work? That was the only question they asked, Mr. Speaker. 
That was the only question. Are they going to pay income tax 
over there? Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer is you pay income 
tax where you live and if the people of La Loche want to work, 
let them go to work. That was the only question they had, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, some of the friends that 
they talk about they have I would say today are self-serving 
friends that don’t like the vision that we have and the plan that 
we have for northern Saskatchewan. We are funding New North 
to make sure New North is able to be strong and to be 
strengthened to be able to present a solid lobby on behalf of 
people of the North. We are working with the northwest 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

 

communities to expand forestry, to make sure they’re part of 
forestry, Mr. Speaker. We are funding CREDOs (community 
regional economic development organization) to make sure that 
CREDOs are very active, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskTel has high-speed Internet, CommunityNet, all these 
opportunities, Mr. Speaker, are being afforded right throughout 
the North because of this government’s policy and this 
government’s belief that the North is part of our province, 
unlike those guys across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the trying 
things that we have to do in the North is to try and create jobs. 
We know, across the way, that this is about the economy, this is 
about jobs, trying to get young people trained to get them into 
forestry, to get them into tourism, to get them into outfitting, to 
get them into commercial fishing — the list goes on and on. 
 
And we believe, Mr. Speaker, we believe that CIC and some of 
the investment opportunities that we have taken in the North, 
whether it’s the Green Lake mill or whether it’s the joint 
partnership in the OSB (oriented strand board) plywood or 
whether it’s working with Weyerhaeuser or whether it’s 
working with Kitsaki and the Zelinsky Brothers on forestry, we 
believe we’ve got to be there to be able to support them and to 
be able to invest in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And what does that party believe, Mr. Speaker? What does that 
party believe? Well I take a quote yesterday, a quote from the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers who acts all concerned 
about the North and who cries crocodile tears when it comes to 
the North, Mr. Speaker. He has never cared about the North and 
he never will. And the few friends that he’s . . . have up there, I 
believe and I say today that they have a private interest. They 
have a private agenda, and that private agenda is to be 
self-serving and to look after themselves and not the rest of the 
community. And the North does not want that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And what does that member say, Mr. 
Speaker, about the potential benefits of forestry expansion and 
the fact that on this side of the House we believe we should 
support them by doing inventory work, by investing, by 
training, by working with the communities? Well this is what he 
says, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Tory Party, they say, 
quote: 
 

If they want to build a sawmill they’ll take that risk. If it 
fails, then at least they’ve tried. (Then) That’s what they’ve 
been promised. If they build an outfitting camp and if it 
doesn’t work, if it fails, at least they tried. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that’s the attitude that we 
should take when it comes to northern Saskatchewan people — 
if they fail, at least they tried. 
 
If that member would have taken two minutes to know — he 
talks about outfitting here and forestry — on outfitting, when 
his cousin Grant Devine was in power, he gave away all the 
outfitting opportunities to people that did not include northern 

Saskatchewan. So how could he get into outfitting with all these 
fine operating areas gone? His Open For Business slogan that 
they had in the early . . . in the mid-’80s has cost northern 
Saskatchewan great opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And secondly, on forestry they have always promoted big 
companies coming here. On this side of the House we believe, 
we believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have to work with the 
communities. And in northern Saskatchewan, in northern 
Saskatchewan, the communities have to be positioned, the 
Aboriginal groups have to be positioned to become part owners 
in the decision making and the management of forestry, and to 
get the benefits of forestry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Private contractors can indeed harvest, they can log, they can 
even do some planting. But they can’t own forestry rights if the 
people of the North want the communities and the people who 
are being charged of those rights to make sure that they’re being 
done in a sustainable fashion and that they have their input, and 
that they can benefit from forestry, and that they can also attract 
investment from the government to help them develop those 
forestry opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And I say to the people of the North, 
we’ve signed a $20 million agreement with the federal 
government, that’s one aspect of our Northern Development 
Accord, Mr. Speaker, and we are going to make sure that 
people throughout the North know exactly what we’re doing to 
make sure that the environment is taken care of, that the forestry 
training is there, that we build up our roads, that we have a 
quality of life due to some of the challenges that we have to 
meet — to the social services aspect, to housing, to health care, 
and the list goes on. We are working on the quality of life issues 
now as part of our first phase. 
 
And the second phase, Mr. Speaker, is to make sure that we 
have job training and opportunity, and that we provision the 
northerners to be part of the North and to be part of the northern 
economy. 
 
People of the North have always said we don’t mind sharing, 
but let us share. And they’re also saying we want to make sure 
the economy is great, but we don’t want to be just cheerleading 
that economy, Mr. Speaker, we want to be part of that economy. 
 
So I sit here today and I listen to some of the statements by the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers, and I say to him the 
election is coming, the election is coming and I doubt very 
much I’m going to see him here next term, Mr. Speaker, 
because what he has said last night is the furthest thing in the 
truth, and very clearly he has indicated that northern 
Saskatchewan has never been, and will never be, part of their 
thought, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — But, Mr. Speaker, we’re in this 
Assembly for a fight, Mr. Speaker. We are going to fight, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s bound and determined as we are on this side, 
we’re going to fight that attitude. And there’s no question about 
it, northern Saskatchewan’s going to say thank goodness that 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

we have a good government that involves us, that respects us, 
that talks about us, and not one that simply cries crocodile tears 
every now and then because it’s politically opportunistic to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Hermanson talks about, in this article, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll quote, and I’ll quote from an article, Mr. 
Speaker, of April 9, 2002. And the quote is from the northern 
. . . or northlands paper, it says, quote: 
 

The Sask Party reps were also questioned about whether 
the Department of Northern Affairs would still exist if they 
formed government, and about how their views on 
trimming the civil service are going (to go) over with 
government employees. 
 
The . . . (answer) likely not . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, likely not. 
 
So I tell the people of the North this, if you believe that that 
party across the way is going to help fix some of the roads to 
Patuanak or to Dillon, likely not. If you believe that party is 
going to help us continue building up water and sewer, likely 
not. If you believe that party across the way is going to start 
doing something about the training opportunities that many of 
our young people want, likely not. Mr. Speaker, if you believe 
that party across the way is going to do something to help with 
the remote housing program, likely not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Throne Speech talks about what we’re going 
to do. Our history talks about what we have done, and we are 
not done yet, Mr. Speaker. We have some great opportunities; 
we’re going to continue building on those opportunities. 
 
Now we stood, across the way, Mr. Speaker, we go to many 
communities and I’ll take forestry for example. I said to 
northern Saskatchewan people that we are having some 
challenges in forestry — it’s because we’re developing a 
capacity to look at forestry. And yes, there are some problems. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do inventories; we’re going to 
do investment; we’re going to do training; we’re going to do 
proper research and make sure we do this thing right. 
 
So we see great opportunity right across the North, Mr. 
Speaker, and that stuff takes time. And I tell the people of the 
North, we are going to be patient, you have to be patient. We’ll 
eventually get to the goal of having some great opportunity in 
forestry. And above all the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, is to have 
control of some of the resources. 
 
So whether it’s commercial fishing, whether it’s ecotourism, 
whether it’s outfitting, whether it’s trapping, whether it’s 
forestry, whether it’s tourism, northern Saskatchewan has said 
we want to be part of it. And on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, we are delivering, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — On that side of the House, will they 
deliver? Likely not. And that member stands up in this 
Assembly and cries about some of the jobs that we’re creating 
and some of the opportunities that are being met and he says 
well, you’re sending people to Fort McMurray to go work over 

there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are trying to get people work. The 
people of La Loche have been working on that road for a 
number of years. And the first thing that that member gets up 
and asks this Assembly — out of four years, one question for 
Northern Affairs — why are you sending people to work in Fort 
McMurray? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been saying all along it’s about jobs. 
On one hand we’re talking about trying to create jobs for 
Aboriginal people and they say, oh no, you shouldn’t have these 
special programs for Aboriginal people. Well then we say, 
okay. Oh no, no, we’re going to cut $50 million from social 
services. Okay you don’t want us to help them with social 
assistance; you don’t want us to help them train; you don’t want 
us to help them get jobs through special efforts. Well what do 
you want to do? Make up your mind. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not taking their advice. We’re not 
taking any of their direction because all they have is pure 10 
cent slogans, Mr. Speaker. No plan, no approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And I say shame on them. The people 
of Saskatchewan and especially the people of northern 
Saskatchewan know you can put as many names in front of 
these folks as you want. We know that they are the PCs and the 
Conservatives that gave away our forestry. We know that that 
they’re the PCs and the Conservatives that gave away our 
outfitting opportunity. They’re the PCs and Conservatives that 
tried to do away with our commercial fishing industry, with our 
trapping, with the ecotourism strategy we had. We know that 
they are the PCs and the Tories that tried to do away with 
northern Saskatchewan hiring policies at the mines that dropped 
from 50 per cent down to 15 per cent. And thank goodness for 
the former minister of Northern Affairs and this government, of 
bringing back those numbers up, Mr. Speaker, when this 
government took over power in 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
question there is great progress happening in northern 
Saskatchewan. Great progress. But there’s more that’s going to 
be done. 
 
As we’ve maintained, Mr. Speaker, it was hard to continue 
moving forward on many fronts when we started looking at 
some of the challenges we had, and that is to make sure that we 
had proper housing, safe roads, decent strategies, certainly 
looking at some of the water and sewer projects that were 
necessary, and training. We needed to go through the work of 
rebuilding the North to make sure our next target of job creation 
is not being hindered by other problems that we’ve had over the 
years in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s why I say to the people in the North today, that who 
are you going to trust? Who are you going to trust when in the 
mid-’80s, Mr. Speaker, when that party under the PC banner — 
and they know they’re PCs; they know they’re PCs — when 
they were in power, Mr. Speaker, they had no respect, no 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

 

vision, no plan for the North. And, Mr. Speaker, change your 
name all you want, change your name all you want, but the 
people of the North will not be fooled, and the people of 
Saskatchewan will not be fooled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say this, Mr. Speaker, we are looking forward to the next 
election because on this side of the House we know what we 
stand for. On that side of the House — a bunch of question 
marks, a bunch of confusion, a bunch of inexperienced people 
that just simply don’t have the vision that includes all of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say this in my final comment, Mr. Speaker, come next 
election, I’m looking forward to it, and we will rock you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, if I could just have that member’s 
attention, next time that there’s a Speech from the Throne, 
would you please deliver it? Because at least there was 
something entertaining when you were speaking, as opposed to 
everybody falling asleep when the Lieutenant Governor 
delivered that Speech from the Throne. 
 
She was forced to read the speech, and I think if you looked 
around the galleries you saw that there was about a quarter of 
the amount of people that used to come to the Speech from the 
Throne because that’s what they’ve expected from this 
government over the last four years, is absolutely nothing new 
in a Throne Speech. 
 
It’s quite interesting to see the floor, how it was . . . whether it 
was filled up in the galleries. And there was very few people 
here because people have lost faith in this government. They 
can’t get their own people out; it was really quite a disgrace. 
 
I remember the first Speech from the Throne I was at. There 
was people filling all the galleries, filling the floor, and there 
were people downstairs. And it was nowhere close to that this 
year, Mr. Speaker, because people know that there is no vision 
with this government. And I guess maybe perhaps they had seen 
a bit of the Speech from the Throne prior and that’s why they 
didn’t show up, because really there was nothing in the Speech 
from the Throne for people to be excited about, for people to be 
showing up for. 
 
(12:30) 
 
So that’s why I would say I’d ask the member from Athabasca, 
the next time there’s a Speech from the Throne, have some 
input — at least you’re a little bit colourful. Are you factual? 
No. But are you colourful? Yes, you are. And it kept everybody 
awake. 
 
And I think that’s one of the problems that we had with the 
Speech from the Throne, and I think you’ll see that there are 26 
members, including the Liberal on the far side, that will be 
voting against the Speech from the Throne and be voting for the 
amendment. But I think there should probably be one person on 
that side of the House that would be voting for this . . . voting 
against this very Speech from the Throne. He did it when he 

went in to cabinet on Wednesday, and he should stand in his 
place and vote against it because it was truly a disgrace. 
 
For a province with the potential that this province has, to 
deliver a vision speech like that vision was, is truly disgraceful. 
And I think you heard the Premier . . . a lack of vision that was 
shown in that Speech from the Throne and definitely the 
Premier expressed it. 
 
As our leader had mentioned a couple of days ago when he 
replied to the Speech from the Throne — and it’s really a fitting 
line for this NDP government — you never miss an opportunity 
to miss an opportunity. That was an opportunity. Going into the 
next election within a few months, I would hope, if they can 
screw up the courage, if they could screw up the courage, it 
would have been an excellent time to lay out a true vision for 
what they see this province being in the next four years, eight 
years, or ten years. 
 
But instead I would say three-quarters of this speech was 
looking back on past programs, some that were failed. It was 
really quite interesting that she didn’t mention the venture into 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company). They looked at so many other programs of the past, 
they sure could have mentioned that one. And I think that could 
have used up 30 minutes of the 55 minutes of the Speech from 
the Throne. 
 
But they failed to take the opportunity that the Speech from the 
Throne is truly set out to do. It’s to set a future for the province, 
to look into that crystal ball and see where your province is 
going to be in the next four years, eight years, or ten years, and 
it wasn’t done, Mr. Speaker. It was really quite a speech that 
looked at the past. And that’s about all it did look at, was the 
past, and very little into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The one piece that the Speech from the Throne talked about was 
our future is wide open. They talked about that a couple of 
times. And I want to talk a little bit about my impression on The 
Future is Wide Open campaign. I had the opportunity of 
attending the kickoff at the Regina Centre of the Arts in, I 
believe it was in August or some time in the summertime, 
where they kicked off this campaign and there was lots of glitz 
and lots of hype. And you know when I responded to that, I 
thought that is one thing that the province needs is better 
promotion outside of our borders to let people know what we 
have to offer in this province. 
 
But it was interesting as the whole campaign was rolled out and 
the majority, the first majority amount of money that was spent 
was spent right here in Saskatchewan. I believe the first 
three-quarters of the budget was spent right here in 
Saskatchewan, which really goes against the whole point of 
explaining to the rest of Canada what we have to offer in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But then it was interesting as the Premier went on his tour to 
different provinces . . . And I was quite interested in following 
the one tour to Calgary, I believe it was, or Edmonton — 
Edmonton Chamber of Commerce. And unfortunately for the 
government, they happened to have a camera there and they 
panned the audience and showed how many people out of a city 
of how many — a million people in Edmonton — how many 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

people from the chamber of commerce came out to see our 
Premier, the member from Riversdale I should say, the member 
from Riversdale speak to the chamber of commerce in 
Edmonton. It was a disgrace. I would say there was maybe 16 
to 20 people there and when I looked across the audience, I 
noticed a number of people that were the entourage with the 
Premier. 
 
So when you hear them talking about The Future is Wide Open 
in the Speech from the Throne, I would agree that the future’s 
wide open. And people in this province believe that the future’s 
wide open because they believe that there’s an election within 
the next six to eight months. And that’s what they believe why 
the future’s wide open in this province. They can definitely see 
a change in government and that is what they’re looking at this 
campaign as stating: our future’s wide open because we’re 
within a year of the next provincial election. 
 
It was interesting when the Premier . . . And I talked to a 
number of people in Calgary and Alberta after, a number of 
friends, as I think every one of us in this House on this side and 
especially on that side as well have family, friends, relatives 
that are living in Alberta. So if you want to talk to any of the 
people there about what they heard about the future’s wide open 
and what they thought of the campaign — they thought there’s 
nothing wrong with promoting the province and we’d love to 
come back to the province, but what has changed? Has anything 
changed in this province? 
 
These people have left Saskatchewan for a reason. They’ve left 
Saskatchewan because they weren’t happy with the job 
opportunities, the tax structure and, frankly in some cases, the 
government that’s in place. And they left the province and 
they’re living in Alberta. Then you’ve got the Premier going out 
there saying, come on back. And they’re saying, what have you 
changed? Has anything changed? Are there a whole lot more 
job opportunities in the province than when we left? And 
frankly the answer is no. 
 
You know the government stated in the 1999 election campaign 
— and it was a lofty goal — they’re going to create 33,000 new 
jobs. And you ask the government how they’re doing compared 
to the 1990 level of where they’re at now. People in other 
provinces have looked at that and said, is the opportunity in the 
province, is the future wide open in the province? And frankly 
many of them are saying no, it isn’t. Will it be? Well they sure 
hope it will be. 
 
There are people over and over again that I talk to that are 
looking forward to moving back to this province. They love the 
province but they just didn’t find the opportunity was here, the 
tax structure was here, so they’ve moved to what you’d call 
greener pastures. And hopefully if the government, if the NDP 
government decides to call an election within the next six 
months or eight months or even a month, which it could do, 
there will be a change in government. And so many of those 
people will be coming back into Saskatchewan because they’ll 
see some hope and some prosperity. They’ll see some optimism 
of what this province can be. They’ll see some change in 
regulation and labour legislation, see a lot of change that will 
attract people back into Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year in through the wintertime, and I speak 

of this every time I reply to the Speech from the Throne, but I 
have a number of communities in my constituency that of 
course I can’t have an office in each one so through the winter I 
rent space in pretty much every town throughout my 
constituency. I rent space in the senior centre, the community 
hall, and I do a mail-out in the area and have anybody to come 
in and have a coffee and talk about the issues that they’re facing 
within their rural communities, on the farm, wherever, come in 
and discuss, I guess the way things are in Saskatchewan, the 
way things are in politics. 
 
And it was really interesting over the last three years. Pretty 
much every time I went out, you’d come up with specific 
issues. You know, property tax was a big issue, the education 
portion on property tax was a big issue and they’d say, well it 
hasn’t been addressed. It was addressed for two years and then 
that funding was taken away. It was kind of a bandage on a bad 
cut and the bandage has been taken off and now the property 
tax, the education portion is still there. 
 
They talk about health care and they talk about their highways. 
That had been the conversation over the last three years. But it 
was really interesting this year, Mr. Speaker, that the 
conversation changed. When I went to the various communities 
and invited people in, the one question that was asked over and 
over and over again is, when is the next election? I don’t think 
. . . I’d be very interested to get an honest answer from people 
on that side if they don’t get that question continually when 
they’re out. I know members on our side continually are asked, 
when is the next election? 
 
And people don’t ask when the next election is if they’re 
satisfied with what’s going on. People don’t ask when the next 
election is if they’re happy with the performance of the 
government. Now the member from Regina South says he 
doesn’t get asked because I think they’re afraid to say, you 
know, when is the next election because you’re going to be 
gone. You know, so maybe that’s just the true politeness of 
Saskatchewan people, that they wouldn’t be asking the member 
from Regina South when the next election is because then they 
would know when his retirement date would be, retirement date 
from politics. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the overwhelming question that we see 
throughout the province is, when is the next election? And I 
think it was pretty typical in the Battleford-Cut Knife 
by-election that just happened a week ago when people in that 
constituency voted 65 to 66 per cent to re-elect the Sask Party 
candidate. But the percentage went way up. 
 
And look at the turnout in that area. It was a . . . You know, 
compared to the Saskatoon Fairview turnout which, you know, 
is really sad to see that low of a turnout in any electoral process. 
Thank heavens in Battleford-Cut Knife they felt that there has 
to be a change in government. They were glad to re-elect 
another Sask Party candidate. 
 
But it shows the sentiment throughout rural Saskatchewan, 
especially in many, many small towns, that they are looking for 
a change in government because they believe their future is 
wide open but not under an NDP government. They believe 
their future is wide open after the next election when the 
Saskatchewan Party forms the government. 



March 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve been talking for the last year and a half, two 
years, about the plan that we have put out. And it’s interesting 
when I hear members on that side speak about the Sask Party 
and the fact that we don’t have any plan. We’ve laid out a lot of 
our plan for the future. They just choose not to read it and that 
is too bad. They like to fearmonger. They like to continually 
talk about oh, the Sask Party’s going to do this and the Sask 
Party’s going to do that. They have no documentation. It’s pure 
fearmongering and that’s what they do very, very well. And it 
spreads throughout the province and, fortunately, most people 
realize it not to be factual. 
 
But you know, any time they get into a bind, any time they get 
into a bind, their defence is oh, but the Sask Party will do this 
and the Sask Party will do that. Well the Sask Party is not going 
to do 90 per cent of what the NDP says we’re going to do. They 
mislead the public over and over and over again. 
 
Now it’s not necessarily misleading the public like the 
SPUDCO issue which they misled the public for six years. This 
has only been going on for the last two or three years that 
they’re misleading. With SPUDCO, they misled for six years. 
 
So is it above this government to mislead the public on facts? 
Not a bit. And I think the public has to realize when you hear 
members like the last member that spoke from Athabasca 
talking about the Saskatchewan Party’s going to privatize this 
and they’re going to chop that, and we’re going to do this, is 
absolutely misleading. Identical to what happened with 
SPUDCO in this province over the last six years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We in the Saskatchewan Party have a, as they would say, the 
king of slogans over there and they’re blaming that on us. We 
are going to grow this province by 100,000 people in the next 
10 years, Mr. Speaker, and we have a plan set out to do that. 
Now they choose not to read past the slogan — they choose not 
to read past the slogan — but there is a plan to grow the 
population by 100,000 people. And it is very, very evident — 
very evident. 
 
And as we go through the debate on the Throne Speech and the 
budget, each critic area is going to be talking about what will be 
happening in their critic area. Our leader yesterday, or the day 
before, in his reply to the Speech from the Throne, laid out a 
number of initiatives that we have talked about for the last three 
years but this NDP government chose not to listen. He talked 
about lowering the small-business tax to zero in our mandate. 
He talked about personal exemptions. He talked about a number 
of things that are prohibitive to growth in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now unfortunately they choose not to follow that or listen to it 
or read it, so what we’ll do is we’ll enunciate it through our 
replies to the Speech from the Throne over the next week or 
two weeks on what needs to be done in this province for 
growth. Because I don’t think there could be anybody on either 
side of this House that should argue the key to the success of 
this province is growth. Without growth we are going to be left 
behind — further behind than we already have been in this 
province. 
 
It’s interesting — we talked about the 100,000 people in 10 
years, and they’ll say well, it’s a slogan and it can’t be done or 

whatever — it was interesting to get the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains on the record and saying, it’s just can’t be 
done; it’s statistically unachievable. Is that what government 
believes is the potential for this province, that we can’t be 
average with the rest of Canada? Is that what you believe? Is 
that what you believe? 
 
And the member from Saskatoon says well we’re . . . but 
opposition is holding them up. Well I guess if exposing 
SPUDCO is holding them up from growing the province, I 
guess if having them to reverse their decision on long-term 
health care fees last session is holding them up, I guess if giving 
them some good suggestions on labour legislation is holding 
them up, we’re guilty — guilty as charged. We’re holding up 
the growth of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think what we need is this government to turn up the courage, 
call an election so that a plan can be put forward for growth in 
this province. 
 
(12:45) 
 
A hundred thousand people over 10 years. And the members on 
the government side are saying, it can’t be done. It can’t be 
done and it’s just a slogan. Mr. Speaker, it has to be done. There 
is absolutely no option. With a Saskatchewan Party government 
it will be done because it has to be done. The success of this 
province is reliant on the growth of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve talked about a number of initiatives . . . and the member 
from Greystone is hollering, is asking across the way, what is 
our plan? Did you listen to our leader’s speech the other day 
when he talked about getting rid of some of the taxes on 
growth? Have you tried that? You know, you’ve tried it in one 
sector. You’ve tried it in one sector. Listen to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Just a little reminder to the 
exuberant member from Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to give one 
example, through you to the members opposite, why a tax on 
growth is prohibitive. Give the example of the film tax credit 
which we pass every year in this province. And how has it 
done? How has it done in the film industry? 
 
Well let’s extrapolate that over many industries in this province. 
Let’s extrapolate on the capital tax, the capital tax because it’s 
one of the most prohibitive taxes for growth in the province and 
we’re one of the highest ones in Canada. Try that one. And then 
you say, well, there’s no plan. Have you tried those two 
initiatives? Try them. 
 
They’ve finally worked on . . . Through the Chair to the 
members opposite, they’ve finally got the issue on the film tax 
credit, but there are so many more. I mean it’s like, yes, that 
works, but how come we don’t try it through the rest of the 
economy? There are so many others. And they talk about the oil 
and gas and different things. Let’s try it overall, universally. 
Let’s try, instead of cherry-picking and picking winners and 
losers — what this government is absolutely famous for — let’s 
try it over the whole economy and see growth in this province. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest deterrents to 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2003 

 

growth in this province has been the fact of the NDP 
government. People across the nation, through the Americas, 
through the States, across Europe, look at Saskatchewan as an 
unfriendly place to invest large capital. They truly do. Because 
what happens is so often they get into a business and what 
comes along is a Crown corporation will say, Jeez, that looks 
like something pretty good to get into, they seem to be doing 
okay, well let’s start competing or taking over. And that 
happens over and over again, Mr. Speaker. SecurTek and a 
number of different issues have said to this government that 
they cannot compete against their very tax dollar. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. All members 
will have an opportunity, I’m sure, to make their excellent 
speeches. Right now, I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
funny how you hit a nerve when you start talking about 
government competing against business throughout the 
province. And that is the very reason why business is not 
investing within this province, Mr. Speaker. And they all get 
revved up and they’re defending the whole fact that government 
is supposed to be in the business of doing business. 
 
We truly believe that if a government got out of the business of 
being in business and set up a structure and a climate for 
business to invest in this province, then you’ll see true growth. 
You’ll see true growth in this province because you’ll attract 
business that doesn’t have to compete against its own tax dollar. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has a plan for that. They keep saying, 
what’s your plan, what’s your plan? And then we tell the plan 
and, oh no, you can’t do it. We’ve been investing, they’re 
saying, we’ve been . . . the government has been investing in 
business and that is why we are doing so well in Saskatchewan, 
that’s why the growth has been so huge in the province over the 
last 10 years, 15 years, or 30 years. And it doesn’t matter which 
stripe of government it is — it has been the NDP, and it has 
been the Conservatives, and it’s been the NDP, and it’s been the 
Liberals. And how have we done so far, Mr. Speaker? How has 
the province grown so far? Well it hasn’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government cannot come to grips with the fact 
that their investment, government investment — taxpayers’ 
investment — drives private industry investment out of this 
province. It has for years; it will continue to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if government investment was such a great idea, 
why doesn’t the Alberta government own oil . . . all the oil 
industry? They don’t. They allow private business to come in. 
They set up the climate, the tax structure that asks private 
business to come in. 
 
It’s interesting, the member hollers across — from Moose Jaw 
North — and he’s saying, how does rural telephones work in 
Alberta? You mean they can’t communicate in rural Alberta? 
You mean there are no telephones in rural Alberta? You know, 
it’s a red herring for these people to keep saying that if it wasn’t 
for SaskTel or SaskPower, if we couldn’t have had a SaskTel in 
Alberta, then they would have had rural telephone service. It’s 
absolutely ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to think that there is no rural telephone service in 
Alberta is absolutely ludicrous, ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. And to 
think that you’d have to have a Crown corporation to provide 
that is even more ludicrous. Private industry can handle stuff 
like that. And they do handle that type of industry all over the 
world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know they are hollering the glories of 
SaskTel. I have a number of areas in my constituency when 
they put the phone up to their ear and try and get cell service, 
they’re not doing very well with that either. SaskTel Mobility 
with their digital, which is a great idea, has cut the range so 
greatly. 
 
I’ve got people . . . You know one of the best commercials that 
I’ve seen on TV is when the guy runs with his phone and puts it 
up to the barbwire fence. And I mean that’s what’s happening 
in rural Saskatchewan right now trying to get service — 
because there is no service. 
 
And you can have the member from Moose Jaw North espouse 
the virtues of how well phone service is in rural Saskatchewan, 
but I’d ask him to come out to, hey, let’s say Francis, 30 
minutes out of the capital city of Regina, and make a phone 
call. I’d ask you to come and do that and see what type of 
cellphone service you have. 
 
You don’t . . . I mean all of the members, through you, Mr. 
Speaker, to come out to rural Saskatchewan. Don’t just go up 
and down No. 11 Highway and don’t just go up and down No. 1 
Highway. Come out on 33 Highway and stop at the junction of 
33 and 35 and see what type of cell service those members 
would have, Mr. Speaker, because there is none. There is none, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the whole attitude towards business in this province has been 
lacking for decades. And when we talk about growing the 
population by 100,000 people over the next 10 years, we talk 
about attracting business which this government and 
governments prior to have never done because they’ve always 
put taxpayers’ dollars in to compete against the very dollar that 
those people are bringing in and will then have to pay tax to and 
give the, give the government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re getting close to the time of 
adjournment. I have many more things that I want to talk about 
when we come back on Monday. And I’ll get into our whole 
labour legislation and why business . . . and why small business 
and large business is not attracted to Saskatchewan because 
some of our labour legislation that we have in place. And I’ll be 
very glad to start Monday morning, Monday afternoon, with our 
whole labour platform of what we’re talking about as far as 
labour legislation which will help grow the province over the 
next 10 years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:55. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Wakefield.....................................................................................................................................................................................77 
  Stewart.........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................77 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...............................................................................................................................................................................77 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Eagles ...........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
  Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................78 
  Addley ..........................................................................................................................................................................................78 
  Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................78 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
  Forbes ..........................................................................................................................................................................................78 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................79 
 Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Teepee Entrance 
  McCall .........................................................................................................................................................................................79 
 Congratulations to Outstanding Kindersley Constituents 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................79 
 Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
  Yates.............................................................................................................................................................................................80 
 Saskatchewan Party Candidate for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................80 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Throne Speech 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................80 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................80 
 Regina Correctional Centre 
  Huyghebaert................................................................................................................................................................................82 
  Thomson ......................................................................................................................................................................................82 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................85 
  Wakefield.....................................................................................................................................................................................87 
  Thomson ......................................................................................................................................................................................90 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................93 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................95 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................99 
 


