















































Hansard: March 30, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 9A  TUESDAY, MARCH 30, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 237 
 March 30, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again to 
present a petition addressing the potential of a tax on food in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from the 
communities of Hantsborder, Nova Scotia; Moosomin; 
Rocanville; Fleming; Killarney, Manitoba; Saskatoon; Freelton, 
Ontario; Penticton, BC (British Columbia); Wawota; Kipling; 
and Langbank. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I rise on 
behalf of constituents from the Cypress Hills area and 
communities of a wide variety throughout the province, Mr. 
Speaker, concerning the possible tax on meals. 
 
The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I too rise to present a petition 
under the same theme, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

And these are signed by people from Saskatoon, from Warman, 
Langham, Martensville, Duck Lake, Hepburn, Melville — from 
all over the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the potential of the 
PST (provincial sales tax) expanding. The prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
PST to include restaurant meals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners that I rise on behalf of today are 
from the city of Swift Current, from the towns of Mankota, 
Lancer, Hazlet, Hallonquist, Waldeck, Maple Creek, and Cabri. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. They 
are saying that they are strongly opposed to the Commission on 
Financing Kindergarten to Grade 12 Education’s 
recommendation to implement a regressive, new, 7 per cent tax 
on restaurant meals. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Outlook, 
from Kenaston, Conquest, Macrorie, Lucky Lake, and Birsay. 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals and 
confectionery goods. Please do not tax our food. 

 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from Yorkton, Melville, 
Bredenbury, Wynyard, Langenburg. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon-Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, at the risk of being repetitive, I 
too rise with regard to citizens concerned about a tax on 
restaurant meals. And I’ll read the prayer for that. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by constituents from Smiley, Kindersley, 
Plenty, Kerrobert, and Flaxcombe. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With spring 
around the corner, the petitions are flowing, and this one’s 
regarding the Qu’Appelle Valley water level. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level in the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people along the 
B-Say-Tah lake road, also in Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of those citizens 
concerned about the possible expansion of the sales tax. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Lake Lenore, Kindersley, 

Blaine Lake, Eatonia, and Rosetown. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition with relation to the tax proposed for restaurant meals 
and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks from Hanley, 
Limerick, Glentworth, Flintoft, Gravelbourg, throughout my 
constituency, and as far away as Drumheller. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s proposal to tax restaurant meals. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Medstead, 
Glenbush, Rabbit Lake, Glaslyn, Spiritwood, Shell Lake, 
Leoville, and a host of more signatures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too wish to 
speak on the regressive, new, 7 per cent tax on restaurant meals. 
The prayer, Mr. Speaker, reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is from Saskatoon, Osler, Hague, North 
Battleford, Cudworth, and Carrot River. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of citizens from west central Saskatchewan concerned 
with senior citizens bridging the gap between independent 
living and long-term care. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed mostly by the 
folks from Unity, but also from Kindersley and Wilkie. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order a petition concerning the 
expansion of the provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals 
presented March 29, 2004, is found to be irregular and therefore 
cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and are hereby read and received as addendums to previously 
tabled petitions being sessional paper nos. 47 and 48. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 14 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many 
customers have subscribed to SaskTel’s Max TV service 
from January 1, 2003, to December 31, 2003? And as well 
what was the total number of Max TV subscribers on 
January 1, 2003, as well as December 31, 2003? Further to 
this, what was the total number of Max TV subscribers 
that have disconnected services between January 1, 2003, 
and December 31, 2003? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 13 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how much of the $79.3 million 
provided by the federal government in 2003 under the first 

ministers’ accord on health renewal was spent on 
diagnostic and medical equipment in the year 2003; and 
what were the specific purchases in each health authority? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 14 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs: how many lawsuits 
have been brought forward by First Nations against the 
provincial government to reclaim tax money used for 
gasoline and purchases on reserves after the provincial 
government altered its taxing scheme; how many of the 
lawsuits have been settled and for how much; how many 
lawsuits remain; and what is the total and the amount of 
money being sought by the First Nations people? 

 
I have a similar question for the Minister of Finance. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — I am extremely pleased today to introduce to 
you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, 
Katherine Bardutz and her son, Eric who are constituents of 
mine in the constituency of Regina Dewdney. 
 
Eric is a grade 4 student at St. Dominic Savio School, and he is 
doing a heritage project on the legislature. So he is here today 
as part of that project to see this wonderful building and observe 
some of the activities today. I hope that you are not 
disappointed by your visit here, Eric. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to my colleagues here in the Legislative Assembly, it is a 
pleasure to introduce, in your gallery, Mr. John McBain of 
Rapid View, just outside of Meadow Lake. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome John here to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, through you and to all members of the 
Assembly, two young, very ambitious and very energetic young 
men. We have Trevor Holloway and Nathan Markwart. They 
are both constituents of Regina Walsh Acres. They were both 
instrumental in my election campaign and both hard-working 
university students at the University of Regina. And I would 
like to welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
address a very serious issue, one that requires attention and 
intervention from every level of government as well as 
members of the public. For the safety of our society, we must 
do all we can to ensure a zero tolerance policy is not only 
mandated but enforced. 
 
I am talking about sexual assault and the sexual exploitation of 
children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this week, during Sexual Assault Awareness Week, I ask 
all members of the House to recognize those whose lives have 
been irrevocably changed due to unspeakable and totally 
unacceptable acts of violence and abuse. 
 
(13:45) 
 
According to a recent report from Statistics Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest rate of sexual assaults in 
Canada. Of the top three urban centres in Canada with the 
highest rates of sexual assault, Saskatoon is no. 1 and Regina is 
no. 3. 
 
Even more disturbing, Mr. Speaker, is that a victim survey 
suggested as many as 90 per cent of all sexual assaults are not 
reported to the police. And even if they are reported, sexual 
assaults are less likely than other violent offences to result in 
charges being laid. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, 6 out of 10 victims of 
sexual offences reported to police in 2002 were children and 
youth under the age of 18 years. Mr. Speaker, 85 per cent of 
these victims were young girls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who perpetuate these acts must be dealt with 
accordingly. It is ultimately the responsibility of an elected 
government to ensure the safety and security of its citizens. And 
any and all measures must be taken to see that this is enforced. 
When there’s a question of public safety, citizens must be given 
relevant information so that they can take appropriate action to 
protect themselves and their families. 
 
I ask all members of the House to recognize Sexual Assault 
Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Corner Gas 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure everyone in 
this Chamber knows by now that one of the most popular 
television shows on Canadian TV is filmed right here in 
Saskatchewan. Corner Gas has been described as way beyond 
normal. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, Canada loves Saskatchewan humour. Corner 
Gas is so popular that 1.2 million people from across the 
country tune in each week to watch it. Mr. Speaker, Corner Gas 
delivers a full tank of laughs. 
 
This 13-part comedy series stars Tisdale-born comedian Brent 
Butt, as well as fellow Saskatchewan natives and Gemini award 
winners Janet Wright and Eric Peterson. It centres on a service 
station in rural Saskatchewan and takes a peek into the lives of 
a group of locals. Whether the characters are up to nothing at 
the local coffee shop or learning about Pilates, Canadians are 
filling up on laughter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Corner Gas has announced that it will begin 
filming its second season both in Rouleau and at the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage. Brent Butt recently said in 
an interview that having a sound stage has made all the 
difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — He went on to say, and I quote, that “it’s a better 
facility than anything in Toronto.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Perhaps more importantly, Mr. Speaker, the 
sound stage allows aspiring young artists in the film and 
television industry the opportunity to pursue their dreams right 
here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate the actors, writers and crew of Corner Gas for its 
success, and I wish them luck in the opening season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Update on Fire at Advanced Ag and Industrial of Biggar 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On February 16 my 
home community of Biggar came close to losing one of its 
major employers, Advanced Ag and Industrial. 
 
The business builds environmental tanks for the oil and gas 
industry and employs some 25 . . . or sorry, 65 people. A 
number of these employees watched on that Monday morning 
as their jobs appeared to be going up in smoke as fire roared 
through the office portion and front production area of the 
business. 
 
I’d like to commend and thank the employees that went above 
and beyond their duties and went back into the office to pull 
computers and files from imminent destruction, saving 
Advanced Ag’s most current and important documents and 
blueprints, allowing them to continue operations missing only a 
few beats. 
 
I would also like to thank the firefighters from the Biggar and 
Rosetown fire departments who contained the fire from 
spreading to other structures on the property and making a 
dangerous situation even more worse, as well as the members of 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

the local Hutterite colony who assisted in moving hazardous 
materials away from the blaze, playing a big part in saving the 
rear portion of the building that housed some of the equipment. 
 
I’m happy to report that the business is in full production, 
running three shifts a day to meet production obligations. They 
are utilizing their remaining structures on the site and are 
looking forward to reconstruction of their main building. I’d 
also like to thank the owners for getting things up and running 
within days of the fire and committing to rebuild in Biggar. 
Your commitment is appreciated and important to the 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan citizens 
continue to build on the tradition of excellence that makes our 
province such a great place to live. 
 
Earlier this year the Lieutenant Governor presented six 
recipients with the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. Established in 
1985, the Saskatchewan Order of Merit is our province’s 
highest honour. It recognizes outstanding contributions in the 
arts, business, the professions, research, education, community 
leadership, and public service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these talented individuals have enhanced the 
social, cultural, and economic well-being of Saskatchewan. 
They have made a mark in our province and have vigorously 
pursued their dreams while demonstrating a selfless spirit. 
 
The latest recipients of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit are Dr. 
Lorne Babiuk, international authority in veterinary virology and 
immunology; Margaret Cugnet, advocate of the arts and 
Yorkton community leader; retired chief executive officer of 
Cameco Corporation, Bernard Michel, who was instrumental in 
bringing the synchrotron to Saskatchewan; Roy Romanow, 
former Saskatchewan premier and Chair of the Commission on 
the Future of Health Care in Canada; acclaimed ceramic artist, 
Jack Sures; and one of Saskatchewan’s most gifted writers, Guy 
Vanderhaeghe. 
 
I ask all members, Mr. Speaker, to join me in acknowledging 
these six individuals for their dedication to this province and in 
congratulating them for exceptional accomplishment. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Rose Valley’s Annual Dance Competition 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
always felt extremely privileged to represent the people from 
Kelvington-Wadena. People from this area are innovative, 
hospitable, and know how to put on events in a very big way. 
 

Rose Valley is one such town. Not only do they put on a 
top-notch indoor rodeo each fall, but they put on an exceedingly 
successful dance competition which is going to be a three-day 
event. 
 
The Rose Valley School of Dance has been in existence for 21 
years, starting with classes in Ukrainian, then adding ballet and 
then highland dancing. It currently offers 52 students, age 3 to 
18, ballet, jazz, and tap. For the past 11 years, Crystal Anderson 
has held the position of artistic director of Rose Valley School 
of Dance, and under her direction, students have excelled at 
dance exams and placed well at competition. 
 
The weekend of March 19-21 this little town’s population of 
400 expanded by 1,400 people as close to 500 dancers from 19 
schools of dance gathered at Rose Valley for their annual dance 
mania. They actually had to turn down club entries. At some of 
the events during the weekend, there was standing room only 
for crowds of over 400, as there were not enough chairs in the 
town to accommodate the numbers of attendees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without the countless hours of time donated by 
parents of the dancers, as well as support of this community, 
this event wouldn’t have occurred. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask this 
Assembly to join with me in congratulating Rose Valley Dance 
Club for putting on this highly successful, competitive event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Partners in Employment 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, our province is one step closer to 
building independence for all Saskatchewan people with the 
help of a new pilot project called Partners in Employment. 
 
This program celebrated its official launch in February and has 
so far helped more than 125 people living with disabilities to 
find work. It has enriched their quality of life and provided a 
real and greater independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Partners in Employment is a partnership between 
the Saskatchewan Abilities Council, job seekers, businesses, 
government, and other community organizations. This program 
offers individualized services to help people with disabilities in 
finding, securing, and maintaining employment. Services 
include job development, pre-employment training, job 
maintenance, and job coaching. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one person who has benefited from Partners in 
Employment is Stephanie King, the first client to successfully 
attain employment through this program. Ms. King is proud of 
the success she has achieved, and she says, quote, “the program 
is the best thing that has happened to me.” That quote says it all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Stephanie King and all of the program’s participants who have 
successfully found employment. Let us also acknowledge the 
Saskatchewan Abilities Council for its commitment to 
providing people the opportunity to achieve their full potential. 
 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Achievements of Young Musician from Eatonia 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it gives me great pleasure today to applaud the achievements of 
Juline Wilson from Eatonia. Seventeen-year-old Juline placed 
fifth in the International Clarinet Association’s high school 
competition in July 2003. She is one of a long line of students, 
highly accomplished by the band teacher in the local school, 
Mr. Steve Mealy, who sent a number of individuals to the 
Canadian honour band and now placing in international 
competitions. 
 
Wilson was shortlisted to the top six after submitting an audio 
recording of her playing. Last year’s top finalists from the 
competition were from Latvia, and this year she competed 
against five Americans as the only Canadian as well as the only 
female in the competition — an amazing accomplishment to be 
ranked fifth in the world. 
 
Please join me in congratulating this outstanding musician and 
in wishing her every success in her future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 
Waiting Times for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
today I introduced John McBain to members of the Assembly. 
Mr. McBain’s wife, Lorna, saw a neurologist on September 11, 
2002 because of intense headaches. The neurologist ordered an 
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) that day. 
 
Recently John McBain received notification that Lorna’s MRI 
has been scheduled for April 27 at 11:45 p.m. — almost 20 
months later. The only problem is, Mr. Speaker, Lorna McBain 
died on March 29, 2003. In fact yesterday was the one-year 
anniversary of her death. And today we ask a question of the 
Premier on Mr. McBain’s behalf. 
 
When will this government shorten the MRI waiting lists in the 
province of Saskatchewan so there isn’t another instance, 
another case, like Mr. McBain’s — the fate of his wife where 
she died waiting undiagnosed, on an MRI waiting list? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re all concerned when 
there are issues like this that are raised. But our goal in this 
province is to provide the diagnostic services to people when 
they need them, and we’re working at that goal. 
 
As it relates to MRIs, it’s become more and more the latest and 
best method of diagnosis and we are working to increase the 
capacity in Saskatchewan. In the last number of years we have 
increased the capacity substantially. We’ve grown 153 per cent 

in the last four years approximately in the numbers of MRIs that 
are being provided, but we see that there are increasing 
demands and we’re working to make sure that those demands 
are met. And if the member opposite will stay tuned, we can 
have more information about that shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it could well be that people in this 
province don’t have long to wait, maybe not even a short time 
to wait. Mr. Speaker, Mr. McBain’s wife passed away six 
months after an MRI was ordered. She passed away 
undiagnosed. There is a chance, there is a chance that Lorna 
McBain could be alive today if she had timely access to an 
MRI. 
 
And so we ask the Minister of Health this question: will he 
show Mr. McBain and his family the respect of an apology for 
how the health care system in this province has let that family 
down, and will he outline today clearly for Mr. McBain and for 
others who languish on waiting lists the measures this 
government is prepared to take to ensure that this sort of thing 
never happens again in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in this present year that’s 
ending tomorrow, we will be doing almost 13,000 MRI 
examinations in the province of Saskatchewan. The three 
machines that we have here have the capacity to do more and 
we’re looking at how we can increase that capacity. And as I 
said earlier, if the member opposite would just wait a little bit, 
he’ll have some more information about some of these things. 
 
We have been working very diligently to provide the best care 
that we can for the people of Saskatchewan and we will 
continue to do that. And I’ll always remind myself that we’re 
always here in this legislature talking about how we can provide 
the resources that help the system. We do that in a way because 
we’re working for our family members, our friends, our 
neighbours, right across the province. We are concerned about 
them all and we will work hard for all of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to the extent that Lorna McBain 
could potentially, could potentially still be with us had she 
received timely access to an MRI examination, I want to give 
the minister another chance. Notwithstanding some 
announcements that might be coming in the next few days, I ask 
this minister or the Premier to stand up and apologize. 
Apologize to Mr. McBain, to his family, and to others who are 
currently waiting, languishing, seemingly forgotten on waiting 
lists — the longest MRI waiting lists in the nation. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated previously, 
we’re concerned about all people who end up with challenges 
within the health care system, but we are working very 
diligently and carefully to use the resources that we’ve got to 
make sure that we provide the best care for the people in the 
system. 
 
And we’ve indicated in our action plan that also as we move 
forward and looking at the national agenda around providing 
medicare, that many of the ways that we’ve been doing things 
over the last number of years have to be challenged and looked 
at to see whether the dollars are being used in the right place. 
And as I said yesterday, that includes looking at how we 
allocate dollars in this province and where they go. 
 
The member opposite has raised a number of issues that relate 
to acute care — some of the very expensive care — and we’re 
looking carefully at those, but we end up then having to look at 
all the dollars spent in the province and how we allocate those. 
 
And I ask the member opposite and all of his colleagues to be 
with us as we look at this very, very challenging problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister may want to take the 
opportunity later to explain why he would refuse the simple 
dignity of an apology to this particular family whose case we 
raised today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s an additional case we’d like to talk about 
today. Forty-year-old Bernie Tyson is a master control operator 
for Global Television. Mr. Tyson saw a specialist in January, 
2003 because of hearing problems and he was put on an MRI 
waiting list. By November, 2003 his symptoms had grown 
worse and he was upgraded to an MRI priority list. His 
appointment for the priority MRI was set for August of this year 
— August, 2004 — 10 months, Mr. Speaker, for a priority 
MRI. 
 
But luckily Mr. Tyson’s file was reviewed by an MRI 
technician who made arrangements to see him immediately. He 
received his MRI and it indicated that he had a brain tumour 
and he needed immediate surgery. 
 
So again we would ask the Minister of Health: how would the 
registry, how would the measures to monitor waiting lists that 
the minister’s been talking about over the last number of weeks, 
how would they have helped Mr. Tyson? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the methods that we’ve been 
using with the Sask surgery registry involves a careful 
assessment of the patient’s need on a standardized method 
across the province. 
 
One of the challenges has been how we do the comparisons and 
how we have a fair and equitable system, and clearly the 
assessments are a crucial part of this. But it’s also the ongoing 
working with the people within the medical system. 

And it’s always a challenge to have something that is fail-safe 
in the whole operation, but clearly you end up having to make 
sure you get the best assessment by the professionals involved 
so that we can provide both the diagnostic skills and then also 
ultimately the treatment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Tyson was told he 
would need immediate surgery. However when he arrived at the 
hospital for his surgery, his neurosurgeon told him that because 
of the extent of the mass in his brain that he could not proceed 
with the surgery. In fact there’s only one place in Canada where 
this surgery can take place, and that’s Toronto. And as we speak 
today, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Tyson awaits for the call from Toronto. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what would have happened had he been forced to 
wait until August for his priority MRI under the current health 
care system provided by this current NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government? 
 
The question to the minister is: if we don’t have the resources 
or the plan here in place to provide Mr. Tyson and others with 
timely MRIs, what arrangements has the minister made or will 
the minister make with other provinces to ensure that above all 
the people of this province who need MRIs — possibly in life 
and death situations — who need MRIs, can access them on a 
timely basis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind all of us 
here and all of the people across Saskatchewan that the way our 
health system works is that you continually consult with your 
doctor to make sure that any changes that have taken place in 
your condition or care are monitored on a regular basis. And 
that then that information is provided to the health system and 
as it sounds like in this case, there were some moves that were 
done to have things done very quickly. 
 
What I would say also is that in Saskatchewan we have 
arrangements with every province in Canada that we will pay 
for the services for Saskatchewan people in those provinces. 
Some of the services we require that people get prior 
authorization before they go to another province, but all the 
doctors in the province and many of the other health 
professionals in the province know the appropriate procedure to 
request that prior approval. And it can happen within hours if 
necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, were it not for the help of the 
technician, Mr. Tyson would still not have his MRI. He would 
still know . . . not know what the problem is. And with respect 
to the province’s out-of-province travel approval committee, the 
process that’s in place, the minister will know as MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) on this side of the House 
will know, that they’re approving nothing, Mr. Speaker. 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

The indication from doctors’ offices is that this committee is 
just simply not approving these sorts of trips anymore — for 
financial reasons or for some reason. At least that’s the 
information, that’s the information that we are getting from 
doctors who discourage patients from even applying for this 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan you can wait up to 22 months for 
an MRI. Normand Laberge, CEO (chief executive officer) of 
the Canadian Radiologists Association has indicated that 
Saskatchewan has the longest MRI waiting lists in the country. 
In fact, according to Mr. Laberge, he says, and I quote: 
 

This government is getting away with murder. 
 
MRIs are a diagnostic tool. Without one it can be difficult to 
determine how severe a patient’s condition might be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’d like to know today, on behalf of Mr. Tyson 
and Mr. McBain, what is the government’s plan to reduce MRI 
waiting lists? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minster of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the information that the 
member opposite has related to, the approval process, is not 
accurate. There are many cases being approved for people that 
require specialized treatment outside the province. 
 
What we do first though, is to see if the treatment is available in 
the province, and that’s the job of the people who are running 
this particular area of the medical services program. 
 
But what we need to remind everybody is that your family 
doctor and the others working with them, including technicians 
and other people who are there, are all part of the health team. 
And I think we have to remember also that many of them have 
skills that are very crucial in assisting the doctors in assessing 
patients. We have to work together with all of them. We have to 
support what they’re doing. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have many, many very capable 
professional people. We’re not a big province though. We don’t 
have all of the specialized procedures and surgeries and other 
things that may be needed. And we make arrangements — 
whether it’s in Canada, the States, or Europe — to get some of 
those things if we don’t have them here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister has just outlined 
is a very nice theory. The fact remains, the fact remains, that 
Mr. Tyson, Mr. Tyson would still not have his MRI. He would 
still be not diagnosed under that system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ask the minister again to highlight what is he 
prepared to do with respect to improving the MRI waiting list in 
the province of Saskatchewan? And we give him a chance today 
again to do the right thing and stand up and apologize to those 
people who have either suffered on a waiting list or lost loved 
ones who have waited on those MRI waiting lists. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of 
concern for all of the patients that the members opposite bring 
forward, as well as all of the patients and all of the people 
within the province that require help. 
 
And we’re working very carefully on organizing how our health 
care system works. We’re also working very carefully to get the 
resources that we have in our province organized in a way so 
that we can provide this care. 
 
One of my frustrations, Mr. Speaker . . . actually, there’s two 
frustrations. One of them happens to be down in Ottawa and the 
kind of contribution they’re providing on the national medicare. 
But the local frustration is the unelected Leader of the 
Opposition who doesn’t come forward with any suggestions 
about how we would solve some of these problems. 
 
And some of his colleagues have said oh, that’s not their job as 
opposition. Well, Mr. Speaker, when it’s a problem that 
concerns all of the citizens of this province, it’s a job for 
everybody. And we all need to work together to do that, and I 
invite the member opposite to come forward with some positive 
suggestions and help us do this task that we’ve got. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Provincial Tax Regime 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
pretty obvious now that the Premier has confirmed that he will 
be raising taxes in tomorrow’s budget. But what’s worse, the 
Premier is now claiming he was honest about tax hikes during 
the election campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier was a lot of things during the election 
campaign, but honest was not one of them. Time and again the 
Premier told voters that his platform was sustainable and 
affordable, that he would not, that he would not have to raise 
taxes. In fact he would continue to cut taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, voters trusted the Premier and he has betrayed that 
trust. Mr. Speaker, can the Premier point to one time, one time 
during the election campaign when he warned voters about a 
tax hike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the question from the member opposite to provide us 
with this opportunity to discuss Saskatchewan’s finances, which 
is an issue of great concern and interest to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Speaking about finances, I think it’s fair to say that given the 
improvements that we have made in reporting and 
accountability over the years, the people of Saskatchewan, like 
the opposition, were aware of the financial situation going into 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

the election last year, as they are aware now of the financial 
situation in Saskatchewan. 
 
The members may groan, but you know, Mr. Speaker, that is 
one of the tremendous improvements that we’ve made — better 
reporting, more reports on our budget during the course of the 
year. Even more reports by the Provincial Auditor. Summary 
financial statements to provide a sense of what the overall 
spending has been in government for previous years. These are 
improvements that we’ve made. I think the financial situation 
was aware to all the people in Saskatchewan, including the 
opposition. If they weren’t, they sure made them aware, Mr. 
Speaker, of what it was. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, for 28 days this Premier looked 
the people of Saskatchewan in the eye and said things that just 
weren’t true. In his own election platform, the Premier 
promised that he would continue to cut taxes. Not raise taxes, 
Mr. Speaker, cut taxes. In fact there is not a word about raising 
taxes. But that’s exactly what he’s going to do tomorrow. He 
didn’t tell the truth, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have the 
Premier’s election platform right here in my hand. Can the 
Premier show me one place in this election campaign document 
where he talked about raising taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a copy of 
that platform, and I’ll get into that in a minute. But I just want 
to say that, again, I think the people of Saskatchewan were well 
aware of our financial situation. And if they weren’t made 
aware of the reports on our budget and the reports by the 
Provincial Auditor, the opposition made sure that they were 
made aware. What was a great puzzle, though, to the people of 
Saskatchewan, to have the opposition on the one hand say, you 
know, the finances of this province are so bad, so bad — but 
then come forward and say, but forget all that; we want to now 
spend half a billion dollars. Well then, the people of 
Saskatchewan said, they can’t be trusted, Mr. Speaker, and 
returned this government, Mr. Speaker. That’s what happened 
in the last election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the platform I have, Mr. Speaker, and I assume the 
same platform, where we said: 
 

Continue to cut taxes responsibly — without jeopardizing 
health and education. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read what the Premier 
said in Yorkton on the day that he released his platform, 
October 17, 2003. And I quote: 

It is a platform that is financially achievable, financially 
viable. It is a platform that provides the room fiscally for 
the ongoing and growing base funding to health and 
education and other valuable public services. And it is a 
platform that provides for the room to receive the 
recommendations of the Boughen Commission on the 
funding of education. It is a platform that is realistic, 
practical, and above all, affordable. 

 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Premier said. What he didn’t say is 
that this is a platform that includes tax hikes. Mr. Speaker, how 
on earth can the Premier claim that he warned voters about a tax 
hike when he said no such thing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I outlined what it is 
that we did say during the election campaign. It was very clear. 
Even then we’re expressing our concerns about the need to 
support health and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what was a great puzzle during the campaign was 
the fact that this party opposite would say on the one hand to 
the people of Saskatchewan that finances are not to be believed 
— that the finances are so poor, worse than made out by the 
Provincial Auditor, worse than made out by anyone, that they’re 
so terrible — but then on the other hand say, but forget all that; 
we now have this proposal to spend half a billion dollars. That’s 
why the people of Saskatchewan said that party cannot be 
trusted. They’re not credible. That’s why they continue to sit on 
that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
fact is, this Premier does not have a mandate to raise taxes, 
particularly the PST. On January 8, CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) radio reported that the Premier’s on 
record saying he does not have a mandate to raise the PST. A 
reporter asked and I quote, do you have a mandate to change or 
raise the PST? And the Premier answered, no, no. 
 
The Premier went on to say, and I quote, we have no appetite to 
increasing taxes. Mr. Speaker, that’s a pretty clear statement. 
The Premier admitted he has no mandate to raise the PST and 
that he has no appetite for raising any taxes. Does the Premier 
plan to keep his word or does he plan to betray his voters by 
raising the PST in tomorrow’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, whether it’s during 
the election, before the election, after the election, we have 
continued to state that the priorities of the people of 
Saskatchewan as we see them are quality health care, education, 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

support for our young people. We think those are the priorities 
now. They were the priorities then. We intend to maintain those 
priorities. We intend to support those priorities. 
 
I find it ironic, Mr. Speaker — maybe there’s a stronger word 
for it — that you would have an opposition that on a daily basis 
comes forward with examples of where, in their view, the 
health care system is not working in their view. And they say 
that the health care system needs additional resources and then 
say, no you shouldn’t have the additional resources. That’s why 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are so cynical about 
opposition parties because it seems to be darned if you do, 
darned if you don’t. That’s the message coming from the 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
now evident that even the Finance minister has now admitted 
that the NDP was covering up a tax hike during the last election 
campaign in November 2003. Back in January the minister 
admitted that the NDP deliberately avoided talking about a tax 
increase. Why would that be so, Mr. Speaker? Because, and I’m 
quoting now from the minister . . . the Finance minister 
opposite, and I quote: 
 

I suspect that anyone who talks about tax hikes is not 
going to be very popular during the course of an election 
campaign. 

 
At least the Minister of Finance is now telling the truth about 
not telling the truth, Mr. Speaker. But not the Premier. He’s still 
looking people in the eye and saying things that just aren’t true. 
Why did the Premier run a dishonest campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
priorities of the people of Saskatchewan are quality health care; 
the priorities are education; the priorities are support for our 
young people. The opposition and the people of Saskatchewan 
will see soon enough that those are our priorities, that we 
remain committed to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one was misled during the election campaign. 
The people of Saskatchewan were clearly aware of the financial 
circumstances of Saskatchewan. That is why we put forward a 
series of commitments for the people that were clearly 
responsible in their nature; as opposed to the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, who are not believed, who are not credible. And that is 
why, Mr. Speaker, they continue to sit on that side of the House 
because they weren’t credible then. And you know what? 
They’re not credible now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 

with leave to move some motions of condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to move 
motions of condolence. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 
members for the granting of the leave. I move, seconded by the 
member from Swift Current, firstly today: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Bernard David Gallagher, who passed away on October 
1, 2003, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1960 until 1971, representing the constituency of Yorkton 
for the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Gallagher was born in Yorkton on July 22, 1925. He 
attended local schools and graduated from St. Joseph’s 
Collegiate. Mr. Gallagher married Dorothy Jean Lang on 
August 1, 1949, and we note today Mrs. Gallagher’s recent 
passing. Mr. Gallagher is survived by his six children. 
 
Mr. Gallagher was elected to this Assembly in the 1960 
general election. He retained his seat in the following two 
elections. Upon leaving this House, Mr. Gallagher retained 
an interest in politics and continued to be active in the 
Liberal Party. Mr. Gallagher was a farmer by profession 
and spent his retirement enjoying both horse racing and 
bridge. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, there will not be large numbers in the House 
today who will remember serving with, or remember the service 
in this House of Bernie Gallagher, but I tell you the historical 
record, the historical record on Bernie Gallagher tells me that 
this was a fiercely independent man, an Irishman, and a fiercely 
independent man who spoke always — always — his views 
whether it was in caucus or in the government benches. 
 
And I think the comments that were shared at the time of Mr. 
Gallagher’s death, recorded by Will Chabun of the Leader-Post, 
will have a great deal to tell us about Mr. Gallagher. 
 
It is reported the young farmer was elected to the Saskatchewan 
legislature as a Liberal from Yorkton in 1960. Quote: 

 
“I think that he probably felt that (the) other elected 
representatives didn’t represent the man on the street — or 
I should say, the man on the tractor,” said his brother, 
Greg Gallagher who is president of the Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party. 
 

And Garrett Wilson a lawyer here in Regina, known to many of 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

us, made this observation: 
 

Bernie was always a gentle soul; he was a good, 
hard-working MLA. 

 
Today, Mr. Speaker, this legislature remembers the contribution 
of Bernard Gallagher to the life of this legislature, the life of his 
community, and the life of this province. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale and seconded by the member for Swift 
Current, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
has made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Bernard David Gallagher, who passed away on October 
1, 2003, was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 
1960 until 1971, representing the constituency of Yorkton 
for the Liberal Party . . . 

 
Ending in the words: 
 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
the members of the bereaved family. 

 
I recognize the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mary Batten, 
who was a Liberal colleague of Mr. Gallagher, described him 
today as a quiet, competent, and loyal man. He served as a good 
conscience for the Liberal caucus. 
 
My colleague, Clay Serby, attended Mr. Gallagher’s funeral this 
past October and described it as a fitting tribute to an 
honourable man. So we remember Bernard David Gallagher 
today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour on behalf 
of the members of the official opposition to stand today in unity 
with the Government of Saskatchewan as we express our 
condolences to the family of Mr. Gallagher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I only know Mr. Gallagher through the 
pages of a book I recently read, Rumours of Glory, by a former 
political columnist, Dale Eisler. It’s a book that highlights the 
rise . . . the two terms of government and then the defeat of the 
Ross Thatcher government which Mr. Gallagher would have 
served in. 
 
And I remember the references to him in that novel as well, and 

agree with the Premier that he clearly was . . . he clearly was 
someone who fought for what he believed and guarded his 
independence and his ability to voice his concerns and those of 
his constituents. 
 
And I know my colleague, the member for Canora-Pelly, would 
also like to offer some comments, but we just want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the opposition that we do join today with 
the Premier and his colleagues in sending our sympathies and 
our best wishes to Mr. Gallagher’s family today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is an honour today to stand in the Assembly to 
recognize a gentleman who gave a lot to the province of 
Saskatchewan, especially to eastern Saskatchewan — 
east-central Saskatchewan. And I know having Bernard David 
Gallagher’s brother, Greg, in my constituency, as a constituent, 
I’ve learned a lot from Greg about what kind of a person his 
brother was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the family that I have been able to get in contact 
with have made some very interesting comments about their 
father, their brother, and how he related to their family. 
 
As indicated by the Premier, Mr. Speaker, Bernard David 
Gallagher was the first child born to Fergal and Alberta 
Gallagher. And I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker — I know the 
family member members already know this — that a history 
book is being compiled that will describe the family history of 
the Gallagher family and the . . . I know family members look 
forward to that history book that will describe the events of 
coming to Canada, and living through the times of probably 
great hardships in the province of Saskatchewan as they 
continue to build their family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, his daughter describes Bernard as a bright man 
with an impressive memory, a man who didn’t mince words and 
didn’t try to blur the issue. You know, Mr. Speaker, I guess 
that’s why, in 1960 in a stronghold . . . in a CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) stronghold of Yorkton at that time, 
Bernard Gallagher decided to contest that nomination. And he 
was successful, Mr. Speaker. And when I spoke with Greg, he 
indicated that he had . . . there was one characteristic that 
Bernard had and that was the ability to make friends. He didn’t 
mince words. He didn’t try clouding things over. 
 
He came to the point and in that way earned friends very 
quickly. And as indicated, he was successful in being elected in 
1960 and then again in the subsequent two elections in the 
constituency of Yorkton. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, after becoming a cabinet . . . after becoming an 
elected member, Bernard continued to show his fierce 
independence. And I guess I’d like to sort of comment that 
probably we saw the first free votes in that Liberal caucus that 
time because Bernard often would not hesitate to vote against 
his party if he thought they were wrong. And as a result, you 
know, your free vote probably originated, I’m sure much to the 
consternation of the then leader, Ross Thatcher. 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, there are many things that his family reports that I 
would like to put on the record. And one of them was that 
Bernard was a person who was faith filled. That’s the 
description that comes to mind for talking about Bernard 
Gallagher. He had the ability to believe in his faith and he was 
often seen saying the rosary on a regular basis. 
 
He lived life to his fullest. And interestingly enough, Mr. 
Speaker, many, many different people of various political stripe 
commented about those strong characteristics that Bernard 
brought to this Assembly. And in fact at his passing, his family 
received a letter from Ed Broadbent that stated that even though 
he disagreed ideologically on certain issues, he had a great deal 
of respect for Bernard Gallagher. 
 
I want to thank Susan Sadoway, who is the late Bernard’s 
daughter, for sharing some of the things that she’s shared with 
me today where she’s . . . comments about the fact that Bernard 
taught his children the gift of acceptance. She says that about a 
year before he was diagnosed with cancer, he lost his eyesight. 
He had been diagnosed with macular degeneration. But he 
didn’t consider that as a disability, and in fact while being a 
palliative care patient in hospital already, he really never 
complained. And she recalls one day a nurse coming into the 
hospital, into his room and asking him if he was in a great deal 
of pain. And Bernard said he didn’t consider it a pain but just a 
mere discomfort. 
 
Bernard was also very generous and giving of his time. Susan’s 
comment, and I quote: “He would give you the shirt off of his 
back.” 
 
He was often seen giving rides to hitchhikers. Obviously as an 
MLA he travelled the province of Saskatchewan and at the end 
of the trip when he was able to drop off his passenger, many a 
time he would give them $20 to help them along on their way or 
maybe just buy them a hot meal — so a tremendous amount of 
respect for other individuals, probably less fortunate than 
himself. 
 
In most recent years, Bernard began a petition to ask that a 
refugee seeking sanctuary at his church be allowed to stay in 
Canada. So he stayed very active and very busy right to the time 
of his passing. 
 
Susan has indicated that Bernard was never pretentious or 
showy. Before he died he made sure his funeral was planned. 
He said that in spite . . . She said that in spite of his blindness, 
Bernard picked out his own casket, although he had indicated 
he would rather be buried in a cardboard box. He indicated that 
he preferred to be taken to his burial spot in an old Cadillac as 
opposed to a shiny new one. Lastly, he travelled to the spot 
where he would be buried and felt the headstones of those who 
were to be his new neighbours. Bernard wanted to be sure that 
his headstone was not larger or more ornate than those around 
him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as indicated, Bernard leaves his four sons and two 
daughters to survive him. As indicated, his wife of many years 
just passed away on March 15. So I would like to extend our 
condolences and my own special condolences to the family of 
Bernard David Gallagher. 
 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 
motion of condolence moved by the Premier, the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. By leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency and to the 
province. 
 
Bernard David Gallagher . . . In recording its own deep 
sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its 
most sincere sympathy with the members of the bereaved 
family. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Before we proceed with the next motion I 
would ask leave of the Assembly if we could revert to one 
business item to complete that, and that is the item of written 
questions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: —Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased to stand on 
behalf of the government to table written responses to questions 
16 through 21 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 16 to 21 have been 
submitted. Thank you very much, members. Returning now to 
Government Orders. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again by 
leave to move other motions of condolence. And again I will 
move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the member 
from Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

Alexander Mitchell, who passed away on July 26, 2003, 
was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1966 
until 1971, representing the then constituency of 
Bengough for the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Mitchell was born on the family homestead in 
Cardross on July 27, 1912. He attended local schools in 
Cardross and in Moose Jaw before joining the family 
farming operation. His marriage to Mary Gall on 
December 25 — Christmas Day, Mr. Speaker — on 
December 25, 1935, lasted over 51 years. 
 
Mr. Mitchell was an active participant in many community 
organizations. He was a member and past master of the 
Masonic Lodge Verwood No. 177. He was a member of 
the Assiniboia Shrine Temple, the Regina Wa Wa Shrine 
Temple, the Mossbank Elks Club, and the Moose Jaw 
Perceptory. 
 
Mr. Mitchell earned his pilot’s licence and later owned his 
own plane. This interest in flying led to his and his wife’s 
30-year involvement with the Saskatchewan Flying 
Farmers Association, including a period on the executive 
as president of that association. 
 
Mr. Mitchell’s involvement in politics began with the 
Bengough Liberal Association. He served as president of 
the association before being elected to this Assembly in a 
by-election in 1966 election. He retained that seat in the 
general election the following year. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Alex Mitchell has been well known in the 
Cardross, the Mossbank, the Assiniboia area of our province,. 
And often the story has been told about Alex Mitchell on the 
day of that very historic occasion in our province’s history 
when the then premier Douglas was debating Ross Thatcher, 
Leader of the Liberal Party, in Mossbank, on the question of 
public ownership and Crown corporations. 
 
And the story has often been told about Alex Mitchell, so 
delighted was he in the performance of his leader, Ross 
Thatcher, so delighted, as the historian has put it, that finally 
someone had stood up to Tommy Douglas, that when the debate 
was over, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the debate was over, they 
say that Alex Mitchell literally jumped to the rafters and swung 
from the rafters in that old Mossbank hall. That story is often 
told. 
 
When Mr. Mitchell’s obituary appeared in the Moose Jaw 
Times-Herald last summer, I remember reading this one little 
sentence, which perhaps very, very astutely summarizes the 
memories of those who have loved and known Alex Mitchell. It 
said simply, Alex was a giant man packed into a small frame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with regret, that this Assembly notes the 
passing of Alexander Mitchell. We extend our condolences to 
his family, and in recording its own deep sense of loss and 
bereavement this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 
with members of the bereaved family. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk):  The motion before 
the House is the motion of condolence been moved by the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member 

from Swift Current, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to his 
province - Alexander Mitchell. In recording its own deep 
sense of loss and grief, the Assembly expresses its most 
sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
I recognize the . . . (inaudible) . . . Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Certainly on 
behalf of the official opposition, I want to join with the Premier 
today and the Premier’s colleagues, in expressing our 
sympathies and expressing our condolences to the family of Mr. 
Mitchell. 
 
Again, perhaps from my recent read of Rumours of Glory, I can 
certainly understand the comments that the Premier has made, 
and the particular anecdote he has told about Mr. Mitchell in the 
wake of the results of that great debate. 
 
As you look at the information that all members of the 
Assembly are presented with here today, of course the story is 
so much more than politics. And as is the case with so many 
Saskatchewan people, community leaders, and members of this 
Assembly, and others, it is the story of community service 
through the Mason and through the Shrine, in Mr. Mitchell’s 
case, and through the Elks Club, and then later through the 
Flying Farmers Association, an organization for which he 
served as president. 
 
And then there’s a brief paragraph, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that highlights Mr. Mitchell’s involvement in politics 
and the reason that we’re now making this motion today, the 
fact that he was elected in a by-election and then re-elected in a 
general election to serve this legislature on behalf of his 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though times have obviously changed 
significantly since 1966 through the five years that followed up 
until ’71 . . . and to highlight that point I think I’d point out, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that I think the budgets at that time, the 
provincial budgets, were in the hundreds of millions of dollars 
compared to where they are at now, Mr. Speaker, well over $6 
billion. 
 
But the point is this, that the service that Mr. Mitchell offered to 
his constituents and to all the people of this province regardless 
of the fact that the issues may have changed, that the size of the 
budgets may have changed, that the scope of the duties may 
have changed, the service is as it is today. It’s important, it’s the 
bedrock upon which we base our system of governing, certainly 
here in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
I know the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy will want to talk 
as well about Mr. Mitchell, but certainly on behalf of the 
official opposition, I just want to join the Premier today in 
extending our condolences and best wishes to the family of Mr. 
Mitchell on this occasion. 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is an honour to speak 
today in remembrance of Alex Mitchell, a long-time resident of 
the Cardross district, who was elected to the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly to represent the then constituency of 
Bengough. 
 
Mr. Mitchell was elected first in a by-election and he served in 
this government, in this Legislative Assembly, under who I 
believe was the greatest Premier this province has ever had, 
Ross Thatcher. As previously noted, Alex Mitchell was born at 
the family homestead on July 27, 1912 where he lived and 
farmed for over 50 years. 
 
Alex was well-known throughout the Cardross district as a 
hard-working, efficient farmer and as a dedicated community 
leader. And as the Premier has indicated, one of Alex’s loves 
was flying and he obtained his pilot’s licence and by the late 
’40s owned his own aircraft. And he and his wife, Mary, were 
active members in the Saskatchewan Flying Farmers for over 
30 years. 
 
Mr. Mitchell represented the Bengough constituency from 1966 
to 1971. Although the boundaries have changed over the years 
and the name is now Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency, the 
majority of the area he represented is the same area I represent 
today. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Mitchell back in 1966 was concerned about some of the 
same issues that constituents have in this area today. In Mr. 
Mitchell’s maiden speech on March 10, 1966 he spoke about 
the need for a nursing home in Bengough, about a two-price 
system for wheat that he felt would benefit smaller farmers, and 
he also spoke about the highways in the area. 
 
And to quote from his speech, Mr. Mitchell, and I quote, 
believed in rebuilding and oiling of No. 13 and No. 36 
highways. He believed that they should be oiled and completed. 
No. 34 Highway will probably not be oiled this year, he said, 
but he will press for a completion of it within two years. 
 
Mr. Mitchell, and I quote, said, this highway is an important 
link to the United States Customs and important to people of the 
Bengough Big River region. 
 
Mr. Mitchell went on to say that he urged the government to 
rebuild and oil No. 13 Highway across the entire province. He 
said it is the only east-west highway except for the 
Trans-Canada Highway. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Mitchell also dreamed big. He 
believed that the government should build airstrips along the 
highways near rural towns. He believed this would be a great 
asset to both towns and the rural economy. Again to quote from 
Mr. Mitchell’s maiden speech, and I quote, the numbers of 
farmers and businessmen who are using light airplanes for 
business is increasing and I am sure this method of 
transportation will grow. 
 

Although I never had the privilege to meet Mr. Mitchell, I have 
heard many stories about him over the years because my dad, 
Darwin Lackey, was Mr. Mitchell’s campaign manager in the 
1967 general election, and I’ve heard many stories about the 
times that they had when they stayed in the old Bengough Hotel 
for the full month of the campaign. 
 
And I spoke to my dad about Mr. Mitchell this morning and I 
asked him what he recalled about the campaign and about Mr. 
Mitchell. And he said that he remembers that it was a 
hard-fought campaign and that Mr. Mitchell only won by 232 
votes. 
 
And so I asked him to describe in his words what he would say 
if he had the opportunity to speak about Alex Mitchell. And he 
said, and I quote: 
 

It isn’t hard to describe Alex Mitchell. He was sincere, 
down-to-earth, a straight shooter, and it was easy to 
campaign with Alex because he was respected wherever 
he went in the constituency, whether people agreed with 
his politics or not. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to quote from Mr. Mitchell’s 
obituary from the Moose Jaw Times-Herald as those who loved 
him most and knew him most best expressed how they felt 
about Alex Mitchell. And from the Moose Jaw Times-Herald: 
 

Alex was a giant man packed into a small frame. He had a 
lot of energy and was a social character. His presence was 
felt and respected wherever he appeared. Active in sports 
in his youth, he later enjoyed dancing, telling jokes and 
stories, and engaging in political argument. He had a long, 
memorable, and meaningful life which touched many 
people. Alex will be sadly missed but never forgotten by 
his family and his friends. 

 
Mr. Mitchell passed away on July 26, 2003, one day short of his 
91st birthday. On behalf of the residents of the former 
Bengough constituency and this Assembly, we express sincere 
sympathy to all members of Mr. Alex Mitchell’s family. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Will the Assembly 
accept this motion of condolence for Mr. Mitchell as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Okay. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, again by leave of 
the Assembly, I move, seconded by the member of Swift 
Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Olaf Alexander Turnbull, who passed away on March 
15, 2004, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 
from 1960 until 1964, representing the constituency of 
Elrose for the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Turnbull was born on December 30, 1917, in 
Kindersley. He attended local schools before graduating 
from the University of Saskatchewan with a Bachelor of 
Science degree in agriculture. Mr. Turnbull married Alice 
Turner on July 21, 1945 and he is survived by his wife and 
their five children. 
 
In his private life, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Turnbull carried on 
the family tradition of farming. He first became involved 
in his local community by serving as a councillor on the 
rural municipality of Kindersley. Mr. Turnbull focused his 
energy in a variety of farming organizations. 
 
He served as a director and as vice-president of the 
Saskatchewan Farmers Union. He was the Saskatchewan 
representative on the federal price stabilization board and a 
member of the Interprovincial Farm Union Council. He 
also served as chairman of the 1959 march to Ottawa farm 
group. 
 
Mr. Turnbull held memberships with the Canadian 
Agricultural Economics Society, the American Farm 
Economics Association, and the Canadian Seed Growers’ 
Association. 
 
Ole Turnbull served one term in this Assembly and 
following his election in the 1960 general election, Mr. 
Turnbull was appointed to cabinet as the minister of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development. He later 
held the Education portfolio from 1962 until 1964. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, not many weeks or months ago, Ned 
Powers of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix did a feature article on 
Ole Turnbull, talking not only about his record of 
accomplishment in public live, and talking about his record of 
accomplishment in the co-operative movement — in later years, 
the director of the co-op college — but, Mr. Speaker, what was 
interesting, and I’m sure Ole Turnbull enjoyed this, the photo 
used in this feature article sees him seated in front of a piano 
with a large saxophone in his arms. For as much as his passion 
for politics and public life, as much his passion for co-operatives 
and co-operation, was his passion for music. 
 
And some of us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who were attending to 
Saskatchewan’s elementary schools when Mr. Turnbull served 
as minister of Education would not have known at the time that 
the introduction of music into the elementary school curriculum 
of Saskatchewan, the introduction of music into the classroom 
when some of us were at school, was exactly the result of Ole 
Turnbull’s combination of love for education, for political 
experience and life, and for music. And that is a gift, that is a 
gift he has given to a generation and now generations of 
Saskatchewan young people. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Ole Turnbull’s funeral was not many weeks ago. 
And at that funeral, the minister who delivered the message, the 
Reverend Brian Walton, said this of Ole Turnbull: 
 

Ole did not just live. He laboured, he lobbied, and he loved 
doing all of this with intellectual prowess and a 
characteristic reservation born of deep humility. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we extend to Ole Turnbull’s family and 
his friends the condolences of this legislature and in recording 
its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly 
expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of the 
bereaved family. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — The motion before 
the House is the motion of condolence moved by the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale, and seconded by the member from 
Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of the former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to his 
province. 
 
Olaf Alexander Turnbull . . . In recording its own deep 
sense of loss and bereavement this Assembly expresses its 
most sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved 
family. 

 
I recognize the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again I want to 
join with the Premier and members opposite in expressing our 
condolences to the Turnbull family, to all the family and friends 
of Mr. Turnbull, on his passing on March 15. 
 
I’m drawn, I’m drawn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to one point, one 
particular line here that resonates with me in a particular way. It 
appears that Mr. Turnbull was 43 years old when he was first 
elected. It also says that he and his wife together had five 
children. Now I don’t know this for certain but I’m sure he 
would have been helping to raise those children while he was 
also serving in this legislature a fair distance from home. And 
many members in this Assembly know from personal 
experience the challenge that that presents. 
 
And so it is an honour to mark not only his service as a member 
of this Legislative Assembly, but also as a member of Executive 
Council in two important roles in the early 1960s. And I know 
that the member for Rosetown-Elrose will also want to share 
some remarks about Mr. Turnbull. But let me just say through 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Premier, that we certainly join 
with him and all members of the Assembly in expressing our 
sympathies and condolences to Mrs. Turnbull and the family 
and friends of Mr. Turnbull. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
am pleased to join with my colleagues in remembering the life 
of Olaf Turnbull, more commonly known as Ole Turnbull, who 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

represented the constituency of Elrose from 1960 to 1964. To 
my best knowledge I never had the pleasure of meeting Mr. 
Turnbull but I understand that he made some remarkable 
contributions to the province of Saskatchewan. And today we 
honour that commitment to his province and the service that he 
provided throughout his lifetime, including the period of time 
that he served as the member for Elrose in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Turnbull was a farmer, but he was much more than a 
farmer. He was an educator. He was a musician. And he also, 
like many of us in Saskatchewan, dabbled in politics. 
 
The area around Elrose — north and south, east and west — has 
been very, very much focused on the political life of the 
province of Saskatchewan. Communities in this area of 
Saskatchewan are vitally concerned about politics and this 
would be the environment that Mr. Turnbull grew up in. 
 
Mr. Turnbull was entering Saskatchewan politics at the same 
time as Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd were at the end 
of their political careers here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Douglas went on to a short term federally, and Mr. Lloyd 
was defeated in that period, 1964, I believe. 
 
But it’s interesting that Mr. Turnbull took on both of their 
portfolios in his short term as an elected official representing 
the people of Elrose. He, as a minister, took on the 
responsibility of co-operatives, I believe for the first half of his 
term, which had been Mr. Douglas’s portfolio, and then the 
second half of his term he took on Education which had been 
Mr. Lloyd’s portfolio. So certainly a very . . . He must have 
been very much trusted by his colleagues taking on that 
portfolio, those two portfolios. 
 
I think he lived an interesting life before his time in politics, 
involved in music, as the Premier had mentioned. He was 
involved in many bands and even in his younger days, tried to 
make a living with music. He was part of a six-piece band that 
went throughout Alberta trying to make enough money just to 
buy their gas to get back home again. He went on to a year later 
joining a band or a group called the Bitz Greater Vaudeville 
Show and when he was in Saskatoon also entertained at two or 
three nights a week at places like the Legion, the Rainbow 
Room, the Cavern and the Bessborough. So Mr. Turnbull 
certainly enjoyed a very colourful life, not only in politics but in 
the area of music as well. 
 
We express our condolences to the family. I understand that the 
Turnbulls raised a family of five. Tragically, Mr. Turnbull is 
predeceased by one of the children, Jane, who was tragically 
killed in a car accident. But we know that the remainder of the 
family very much treasure the memories of a father, a husband, 
a grandfather, and even a great-grandfather. And with my 
colleagues here in the House, I too want to express my thanks 
for his service to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:00) 
 
I understand, just in closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that two 
things happened at the funeral service, the day of the funeral 
service, that were expressly asked for and requested for by Mr. 
Turnbull. 
 

First of all he asked that at the lunch they serve his favourite 
food, which was pickled herring. And that has to reflect his 
Swedish background or some Swedish blood somewheres or 
Scandinavian blood. And secondly he requested that his band 
play that day, and I understand they played for about an hour. 
So it was nice to see that Mr. Turnbull’s requests were fulfilled 
on the day of his funeral as people stopped to remember a man 
who served Saskatchewan and served this province well. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I want to join all of my colleagues in extending 
condolences to the Turnbull family. 
 
I have to tell you that I have known Ole Turnbull since as far as 
I can remember, far back as I can remember. I remember as a 
young child going to the Turnbull farm in the Kindersley area 
when both Ole and my dad were involved in the Saskatchewan 
Farmers Union. They had five kids in their family and we had 
five kids in our family and the Turnbull and Atkinson kids 
would often play together. 
 
Many things have been said about Ole in the legislature this 
afternoon, but I think one of the things that’s not been noted 
that I think needs to be acknowledged is that if it wasn’t for Ole 
Turnbull in the early 1960s, we would never have seen Catholic 
high schools being supported by public, public funding. Up 
until Ole introduced the Bill with the support of Woodrow in 
this legislature, Catholic high school students attended Catholic 
high schools but their parents had to pay tuition. 
 
And that was quite a controversial move in those days. It was 
the early 1960s and the legislation for secondary schools hadn’t 
been changed since the early 1900s. And there were a number 
of people in the province that believed that public funding 
should go to public schools only. 
 
Ole often commented that when Ross Thatcher’s government 
was elected in 1964, and given that he’d only lost by about 30 
votes in that constituency, that that may have been one piece of 
legislation that had contributed to his defeat. 
 
The Premier mentioned Ole’s involvement in bringing music 
education to Saskatchewan elementary high schools. And I too 
was a young child in elementary school in the 1960s and I 
remember enjoying music education as part of our school 
curricula. 
 
One of the things that I remembered about Ole in his later years, 
and he happened to live in the constituency that I represent, was 
his activity when it came to music. And as the member from 
Rosetown has indicated, Ole was involved in a band, and he 
was the founder of the Saskatoon Hobby Band. And they made 
it their practice that they rehearsed every week for about three 
hours and then they played for fun. And I just loved the line that 
he used to crack — it was an old joke — that old saxophone 
players don’t die; they just lose their wind. And that really was 
Ole’s outlook on life. 
 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

In later years after he left this Legislative Assembly, he became 
the principal of the Western Co-operative College of Canada. 
And what I appreciated about him and his involvement in 
co-ops is that he was extremely interested in the new wave of 
co-ops and he encouraged those of us in the ’70s and ’80s to 
think about housing co-ops, worker co-ops, and new generation 
co-ops as they’re called now. 
 
He also encouraged us to go out and get involved in our co-ops 
as young people, run for the board of directors, and he was 
interested in the democratic side of co-operatives, and 
governance. 
 
After he left the co-operative college in about 1982, he did a lot 
of work overseas with CIDA (Canadian International 
Development Agency), working in various developing countries 
ensuring that people in those countries had access to 
information regarding the co-operative movement and how well 
co-ops had moved . . . had worked on the Prairies, particularly 
when we were developing in the ’30s and ’40s. 
 
The other thing that he did after he was defeated, he took his 
master’s in continuing education. And when you think about it, 
when he was elected in the early 1960s — I believe 1960 — 
there were very few people in this province that had degrees. 
And he had a degree in agriculture and after his defeat he went 
back and got a master’s in continuing education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ole Turnbull, even though he served in this 
legislature for four years, he made his presence known by 
introducing changes to the secondary school Act that allowed 
Catholic school supporters and their children to have access to 
public dollars so that they didn’t have to pay tuition. And he 
also ensured that school music . . . or music programs were 
available in our schools. 
 
I know that those people who golfed with Ole every summer are 
going to miss his presence. And he has golfed with people like 
Guy Vanderhaeghe and other younger people who really 
enjoyed his presence on the golf course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my privilege to join with other members in recognizing the 
contribution that Ole Turnbull has made to this province and to 
extend sincere sympathies to Alice and all the members of the 
Turnbull family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think as is clear from the remarks that other 
members have made, Ole Turnbull had a deep, deep 
commitment to the people of his constituency and to the people 
of Saskatchewan. And he had a great passion for publicly 
funded medicare; a great passion for the co-operative movement 
in the province of Saskatchewan; a great passion for public 
education in this province; and a deep, deep concern for the 
well-being of the farm community in Saskatchewan. And he 
contributed in a very significant way on all those fronts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Ole Turnbull was a man of high principle. And I think that one 
of the things that’s very clear, Mr. Speaker, is that the members 
of the CCF who were elected in 1960 were a group of 
courageous men and women. And it took enormous courage, 
Mr. Speaker, to implement publicly funded medicare in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And Ole Turnbull was very much 
playing a key leadership role in that struggle, in addition to the 
contributions that he made as minister responsible for co-ops 
and co-operative development and as minister responsible for 
Education. 
 
And I think that that contribution is important to be 
remembered, because in addition to Premier Woodrow Lloyd 
and Allan Blakeney, it was members like Ole Turnbull who 
helped give Saskatchewan and Canada the gift of publicly 
funded medicare. 
 
He was also, Mr. Speaker, a man who was deeply committed to 
the principles of democracy. And not only did he demonstrate 
that in his commitment to democracy in this legislature, but he 
also demonstrated that in the ongoing commitment that he made 
to democratic process, after leaving this legislature, and 
particularly in his service at the . . . with the co-operative 
college of Canada. 
 
I had the privilege, Mr. Speaker, of serving as an employee of 
the co-op college of Canada shortly after Mr. Turnbull left his 
position as principal and director of the college. And I know 
that he was held in very, very high regard by all members of the 
staff, by all members of the board, and by the large number of 
people from the co-operative movement who would come to the 
college to take classes and engage in discussion. He left an 
incredible legacy to the co-operative movement in his service at 
that college, Mr. Speaker, and we are all fortunate that he made 
that contribution. 
 
I can also say that Mr. Turnbull was always someone who 
would offer friendly advice. He maintained a strong interest in 
Saskatchewan politics throughout his life, and he was often 
willing to offer encouragement and support to myself and other 
members of the legislature when we had the occasion to meet 
him. And I appreciated that very much. 
 
So I think Mr. Turnbull has made an enormous contribution to 
the life of the CCF and the New Democratic Party in this 
province, an enormous contribution as a minister of the Crown 
in this legislature, and an enormous contribution to the farm 
movement and the co-operative movement of Saskatchewan. 
And we are indeed blessed to have had him in our midst, and it 
is . . . I again want to extend sincere sympathies to his family on 
his passing. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Will the Assembly 
accept this motion of condolence for Mr. Turnbull as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Motion is carried. 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 
by leave, and I will move, seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Henry Harold Peter Baker, who passed away on March 
4, 2004, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1964 until 1982, representing the constituencies of Regina 
East, Regina South East, Regina Wascana, and Regina 
Victoria, first for the Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation and then for the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Baker was born on the family farm near Lipton on 
November 24, 1915. He received his early education at 
local schools before graduating from teachers college in 
Regina. Later he pursued his education, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in Chicago where he studied business 
engineering and personnel administration. Mr. Baker 
married Helen Sauer on May 31, 1942 and together they 
had one daughter. 
 
Mr. Baker’s first career was as a teacher. He taught in 
elementary and high schools and spent two years 
instructing RCAF (Royal Canadian Air Force) air crew 
personnel. Mr. Baker then became the secretary of the 
Public Service Commission — a position he held for 14 
years. Mr. Baker was active in a number of community 
organizations including the Frontiersmen and the Boy 
Scouts. 
 
Mr. Baker’s dedication to his fellow citizens was evident 
in his lengthy service in civic and provincial affairs. He 
was an alderman on the Regina City Council for three 
years before his election as mayor for the first time in 
1959. He continued to lead the council until 1970, and 
then for a second period from 1974 until 1979. He was 
Regina’s longest serving mayor. 
 
At the provincial level, Mr. Baker was first elected to this 
Assembly as a member of the CCF in the 1964 general 
election. He retained his seat in the following three 
elections as a member of the New Democratic Party. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, some many in this community — certainly 
in the community of Regina, but I say across the province — 
have many memories of Henry Baker. I think Henry Baker will 
first of all be remembered, not as a member of this legislature, 
but first of all as mayor of Regina, the city that he loved — 
longest serving mayor of the capital city — and was able at this 
time to fulfill both duties, as a member of this legislature and to 
serve as the mayor of Regina. And if there is a tribute to Henry 
Baker, we see it each time we look across the lake and see the 
very majestic and proud Regina City Hall, built under Henry 

Baker’s stewardship. And appropriately I’m told the council 
chamber is named the Henry Baker — the Henry Baker 
chamber. 
 
Henry Baker had a skill of being able to touch people, to reach 
out to people. Now he was not without his moments of 
controversy, as we all know. And he could, Henry Baker could 
inspire a little hostility in some. We all remember the case 
where the other councillors in the Regina City Council voted to 
move Mayor Baker’s salary to $1 per year, and in fact they did 
for a period of time. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But we all, I think who have met Henry Baker or who know of 
Henry Baker, we all accept and realize that if there has been an 
elected individual in this province who had a better rapport with 
people, who would take more time with people and be where 
people are, I’m not sure who it is that would exceed Henry 
Baker’s record. 
 
I just noted . . . Someone was kind enough to look this up for 
me. This is from Henry Baker’s campaign literature in 1964. 
And speaking of the candidate, Mayor Henry Baker, it says: 
 

A deep sense of responsibility, an enormous fund of 
energy to cope with the mounting problems of a growing 
city and yet happily blessed with the faculty to somehow 
have time to bend an ear to the ever present taxpayer’s 
worries, have helped to make him one of Regina’s most 
popular mayors. 

 
The stories, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of Henry Baker are legion — 
are legion in this city — of how Henry would be at almost 
everybody’s funeral if not their wedding as well. 
 
Our former colleague Ned Shillington, when he was sitting in 
this House, used to tell a story of Henry Baker. And Ned was 
off to visit with a couple that were celebrating their 25th 
wedding anniversary, and as Ned looked over to the display 
they had set up at the 25th anniversary, here’s the wedding 
picture of the bride and groom, and Henry Baker right between 
them. 
 
Mayor Baker touched the people of Regina where they lived. 
He served the people of Regina as its mayor, he served the 
people of Regina as one of their MLAs, and served this 
province. There are so many, many fond memories of Regina’s 
longest serving mayor, and a long-serving member of this 
legislature. 
 
And so we express the condolence of this legislature and in 
recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 
Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of 
the bereaved family. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — The motion before 
the House is the motion of condolence moved by the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member from 
Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records its sorrow and regret for the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Henry Harold Peter Baker . . . In recording its own deep 
sense of loss and bereavement this Assembly expresses its 
most sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved 
family. 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member of Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Three years on 
city council here in Regina as an alderman, 15 years as our 
capital city’s mayor, and 18 years here in the Legislative 
Assembly representing the people of Regina, and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I couldn’t agree more with the Premier. 
 
I actually remember watching the news . . . Every single noon 
hour I would rush home from school and watch the news with 
my dad. It came on right after another show that we always 
watched together here on CK TV and . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, it was the, it was the Flintstones, and the 
member for Nutana is correct. I know she would have enjoyed 
that as well. And I remember watching the news with my dad 
and having a keen interest in politics at a, admittedly, 
disturbingly early age. 
 
And so my memory of Mr. Baker is that of his role as the mayor 
of Regina. I remember being surprised when I found out later 
that he had also served this province and this community as an 
MLA, and he served it for 18 years. He sat in this Assembly 
serving the people. So the Premier is correct to say that there’s 
no question that people in this community . . . but people across 
the province will most likely remember his service to his 
community as its mayor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again the list of other forms of service is long in 
the case of Mr. Baker, whether it was the RCAF, the 
frontiersmen, or the Boy Scouts. And it is a, really a testament 
to the memory of a man who was committed to his community, 
committed to the residents of his community, and demonstrated 
that at many levels. 
 
And I, if there was one thing someone were to ask me that I 
would remember of Mr. Baker, I too would remember that 
period of time that his fellow councillors voted for a significant 
wage decrease for Mr. Baker. Again, I was unaware that he was 
also serving in this Legislative Assembly at the time and I do 
remember thinking that that was just patently unfair for that to 
have happened because he was the mayor, and whatever was 
due him, I thought at that early age, was certainly due him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is a day to mark the service of people who 
sacrificed much. No question it was the case in . . . with Mr. 
Baker, sacrificed much to serve, sacrificed time with family and 
friends and personal time to serve — in his case perhaps doubly 
so because of his role as the mayor and then as an MLA for 
Regina. So on behalf of the official opposition, we join with all 
the members of the Assembly in communicating our 
condolences and our sympathies to the family and friends of 
Henry Baker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance, the 
member for Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Before I represented the constituency Regina Douglas 
Park, it was my pleasure to represent the constituency of Regina 
Victoria. And one of the MLAs that represented that riding 
before me was one Henry Baker. 
 
When I moved to Regina after a few years, I ended up living in 
the Regina Victoria area and became active in the local 
executive, political executive for the New Democratic Party 
when Henry was the MLA. And it was my very great pleasure 
to get to know Henry, to have gotten to know him, and to work 
with him. 
 
I was pleased to be able to work as a campaign organizer and 
manager for him in the 1978 and then again in the 1982 
campaigns. It was a real treat to work with him, to have him as 
the candidate, because he loved going out there and meeting 
people. He was always glad-handing; he was always shaking 
hands; he was always mixing; he was mingling. Sometimes you 
get candidates you literally have to push them out the door to 
get them to do anything. But Henry Baker was not one of those 
candidates, Mr. Speaker. So it was a real pleasure to work with 
him. 
 
It was also a real treat to get into discussions with him because 
of his unique experience that he brought to politics, as both a 
Member of the Legislative Assembly and as mayor of the city 
of Regina. And therefore his understanding of issues, his 
perspectives on various issues of the day were very interesting 
to me. 
 
He had a number of qualities that I think endeared him at the 
end of the day to the people that he represented. One of them 
was, I guess you might almost say is an old-fashioned term and 
one we don’t use very much, but he was a gentleman. 
 
He was a gentlemen in the sense that he was unfailingly 
courteous and always polite in every which way — always 
courteous, always polite in every which way, And he was also 
very well dressed. He was always extremely well dressed. And 
when you looked at him and you saw how he treated people 
with dignity and kindness, and you saw the way that he was 
dressed, you’d say well that’s a gentleman. It’s an old-fashioned 
term but to me when I think of Henry Baker I always think of 
him as a gentleman and in a very kind way. 
 
He was also a consummate politician and the Premier has 
alluded to some of his abilities. It’s fair to say that he had an 
ability to always be very attentive — always gave those who 
were making representations to him the sense that they were 
being well listened to, that he was paying attention to their 
concerns. 
 
Further to that he also had a real personal touch in terms of 
always attending meetings and events where there was some 
reason for him to be there, whether it was a family celebration, 
whether it was funerals, and Mayor Baker — I call him Mayor 
Baker, Henry — knew lots of people in Regina. And it was only 
right that he would attend their personal celebrations but also to 
be with them in their time of loss. That was Henry’s way. 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

But he would also attend meetings. And people would always 
remark on the fact that, you know, you could have some 
community meeting and the meeting would go on for three 
hours, and Henry might only be able to come for half an hour, 
or so, or 15 minutes because of his busy schedule, but people 
would always remark on the fact that the mayor cared and the 
mayor was there and the mayor was there to listen. They 
recognized that he had other obligations, but that was the way 
he was. 
 
He also acted on people’s concerns. He was not a person to 
simply listen, let it go; he acted on their concerns. And he had 
to have acted on their concerns because one doesn’t get to be 
elected for the length of time that he was as mayor of the city 
by ignoring people’s concerns, or as the member of the 
legislature for approximately 18 years without acting on their 
concerns. He genuinely cared about people. He liked it when 
they came to him with their problems and he liked helping them 
with their problems. That’s the kind of politician that he was 
and I think that counts for his longevity. 
 
He was also a real leader. He tried to look at where it is that his 
city and his province should go and then to try to bring people 
with him in that direction. One of his main interest areas in the 
city of Regina was economic development. He worked very, 
very hard with the economic development people in the city to 
try to stimulate business development in Regina. I think it was 
largely successful. 
 
When I moved to Regina in the early 1970s, Mayor Baker was 
presiding over a huge building boom in Regina. That created its 
own stresses and strains at that time, but the mayor was 
presiding over a huge building boom in Regina and he 
promoted that. He worked hard at that and I think we need to 
give him a lot of credit for presiding over a very robust period 
of expansion in Regina’s history. 
 
He also provided leadership on issues when it came to senior 
citizens. When he became very active in politics in the ’50s and 
’60s, it was almost a definition that to be a senior citizen was to 
be poor in our society. 
 
Now there have been many changes since the ’50s and ’60s 
because of improved pensions and the like. That’s not to say 
that all senior citizens are now well off. But more senior 
citizens are in a better position than they were, relatively 
speaking, in the ’50s and ’60s. 
 
So to be a senior citizen in those days was to be poor. And 
Henry Baker worked hard, both within the city of Regina and at 
the provincial level, to see what he could do to improve 
conditions, to improve services, to improve housing for senior 
citizens. And I think the record will show that Henry Baker 
provided very strong leadership in providing improvements in 
the lives of senior citizens in the city of Regina. 
 
He also had a flip side. Although he was very concerned and 
worked hard on the interests and needs of senior citizens, he 
was also very interested in young people, you know. And it has 
been mentioned, the organizations that he was involved in. 
 
He was very concerned about young people and even towards 
the end of his term as mayor he continued to champion the need 

for a drag strip facility. Because it was his perception that 
young people needed to have a place where they could safely let 
off steam with their fast cars. So he worked and tried to 
promote the development of a drag strip facility for young 
people in Regina. 
 
I know there was lots of people saying that’s not really a 
priority; we don’t need that. But he believed honestly and 
strongly that young people needed to have those kinds of outlets 
and something needed to be done. And I think that was 
evidence of his concern for young people in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Henry Baker was a larger than life person for me 
and for most people in Regina. He’s an icon. He’s remembered 
to this day. 
 
Whenever I go door to door in the areas that he used to 
represent, I still get elderly people who remember him well and 
who ask me questions about, where’s Henry, how is Henry, do 
you know how Henry is doing. And I think that’s a reflection on 
how he touched the lives of people in his area and throughout 
the city of Regina that they still, after all these years, remember 
him and ask about him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So for those who look to longevity in politics, because he was 
the longest serving mayor in the city of Regina but also a very 
long-serving MLA in this legislature — 18 years; from 1964, I 
believe it was, to 1982. That’s a very long time to be in this 
legislature. If you want to look to longevity in politics, then I 
say you should look to Henry Baker and how he conducted 
himself — his qualities, how he approached people, how he 
listened to people, how he acted, how he provided leadership — 
to get some sense of how you can be successful as a politician. 
 
(15:30) 
 
You know that — if I might just digress for a minute — Henry 
Baker was always very serious about his role as both an MLA 
and as a mayor, and he took it seriously. That’s not to say that 
he was a person without humour, but he took his job seriously. 
But he was also one that from time to time could poke fun at 
himself. 
 
And I remember that before I ran for Regina City Council I told 
him that, look, I’m thinking of running for city council. I think 
you know I have a contribution I can make there. He says, well 
you know, let me just tell you that in my view that there are 
three attributes that you should have as a politician, and I don’t 
know if you have any of them. And I said, well what are those? 
And he said, well I think you should have grey hair. I said, 
why? Because grey hair means that you’re more mature and that 
you’re a bit older, and it’s a sign of wisdom if you have grey 
hair. And I said, well I don’t have that. 
 
And he said, it helps to have a bit of a paunch. And I said, I’m 
working on that one, but why? He says, well you know in my 
day it’s sort of . . . it shows that you’re successful and he came 
from a different generation when if you had a paunch it means 
that you typically worked in white-collar jobs, and therefore 
that was a sign of success. But I, you know, was getting there, 
but I didn’t have that. 
 
And he said, and there was a third thing you should have. And I 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

said, well what is that? And he said, well it’s helpful if you 
want to be a successful politician to have hemorrhoids. I said, 
hemorrhoids? He said, yes that’s so that you can always sit 
down and look concerned about things. 
 
Well I don’t want to comment on that one, Mr. Speaker. But let 
me say that Henry Baker’s good qualities — his ability to poke 
fun at himself, his leadership, his engagement with people, his 
genuine interest in people — account for the fact that he was the 
longest serving mayor in Regina history, was one of the longest 
serving members of this Legislative Assembly, and accounts for 
his great success as a politician. 
 
And all the people of Regina, and especially the people in the 
area of Regina Victoria that he represented and all the previous 
constituencies, will all miss Henry. And along with the other 
members, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my sincere sympathy 
and condolences to Helen and Donna. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to hear this afternoon the tribute to Henry Baker. 
And as has been said, Mr. Baker served not only this 
legislature, but he also served the people of Regina in his 
capacity as alderman and mayor of the city of Regina. 
 
I had the privilege of serving with Henry for four years in this 
legislature. And I marvelled, Mr. Speaker, at his ability to move 
from this legislature to city hall and somehow do a fine job in 
both roles. This was no mean feat. Now it was facilitated 
somewhat at the time, Mr. Speaker, by the fact that there was a 
large majority on this side of the House. And Mr. Baker on 
occasion was able to slip away while the Assembly was in 
progress to attend matters at city hall. But he always attended to 
the needs of his constituents in both his role as mayor and as an 
MLA, and this I found to be quite remarkable. 
 
And as has been said by other members, Mr. Speaker, Henry 
had a real ability to touch people and to be with people at 
important moments in their lives. So he was always slipping out 
of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to attend a wedding, to go to a 
birthday celebration, to go to another event that recognized an 
important time in someone’s life, and to be with families when 
they were mourning the loss of a loved one. He was at many, 
many funerals of friends and family members in the city, Mr. 
Speaker. And he somehow found time to do that in addition to 
all his responsibilities as both mayor and an MLA. 
 
And he attended, Mr. Speaker, to the smallest matter of concern 
that someone would phone him with. He was back in touch with 
him quickly, and he endeavoured to do his very best to attend to 
their concern. And in that sense, Mr. Speaker, he was a real 
model for many of us in the House. 
 
I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that as a new member in the 
Assembly, I appreciated his advice. And I appreciated also, Mr. 
Speaker, his ability to recognize, in caucus, to recognize matters 
that would touch someone and would have impact on the 
community that the government would not always pick up on, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Baker had a keen sense for what issues and 
what policies that were being considered by government might 
be problematic and which ones would touch people in a positive 
way and should be acted upon. And I also appreciated his 
ability in that regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to add with other members . . . join other members in 
extending my sincere sympathies to the family and saying what 
a great contribution Mr. Baker has made to life in Regina and to 
life in this province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion of condolence moved by the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale, seconded by the member for Swift Current by leave 
of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records its sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province, Henry Harold Peter Baker. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, again by leave of the 
Assembly I move, seconded by the member from Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Murray James Koskie, who passed away on March 14, 
2004, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1975 until 1995 representing the constituency of Quill 
Lakes for the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Koskie was born on November 5, 1929 in Sinnett. He 
grew up on the family farm and received his early 
schooling at Humboldt College. He furthered his education 
at the University of Saskatchewan and graduated with a 
Bachelor degree in Education and a Bachelor of Laws 
degree. 
 
Murray married Shirley Ann Hugill on June 24, 1961, and 
together they’ve had three children. 
 
Mr. Koskie practised law before being elected to this 
Assembly in the 1975 general election. He was re-elected 
in the four following elections. Mr. Koskie served in the 
cabinets of two premiers. He held the Social Services and 
Consumer Affairs portfolios in the Blakeney 
administration, and later in 1992 Mr. Koskie was 
appointed the minister of Highways and Transportation in 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

the Romanow administration. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are those of us today in the House who 
served with Murray Koskie in this House, some of us in the 
House today who in fact cut our political teeth alongside of 
Murray Koskie. Some of us served in opposition with Murray. 
We served in the government caucus with Murray. Some of us 
sat around the cabinet table with Murray Koskie, and some of 
us have participated in many campaigns with Murray Koskie. 
The last opportunity I had to do any extensive visiting with 
Murray was in fact during the course of the October-November 
campaign of last year. And those of us who have known Murray 
well and worked with Murray, I think, would be unanimous in 
describing Murray Koskie as a warrior on behalf of social 
democracy. 
 
Murray Koskie taught me a great deal about campaigning — 
first of all about knocking on doors, about meeting people. How 
well I remember working with Murray Koskie in a by-election 
in the constituency of Thunder Creek where together Murray 
and I, Murray Koskie and I, spent some time out at Caronport, 
Briercrest Bible College. First time I had campaigned with an 
experienced campaigner, it was a great lesson. 
 
Murray Koskie, I recall, served on a number of occasions as our 
party Whip. And I would . . . I want to say to current members 
of the House, we think our whips today are tough. They had not 
had the experience of Murray Koskie in bringing discipline to a 
caucus and to some new members of such a caucus. 
 
Murray Koskie had throughout his life, until the very close of 
life, an unwavering conviction to the principles of social 
democracy — an unwaving conviction. 
 
And those of us who served in this Chamber with Murray will I 
think all remember . . . At least my experience is that no single 
voice, no single voice could so fill this Chamber from the seat 
— never mind standing, but from the seat — no single voice 
could so fill this Chamber as the voice of Murray Koskie. 
 
He was a good friend — a good friend of this government; a 
good friend of past governments; a very, very good friend of the 
New Democratic Party; and a very, very good friend of the 
people of the Saskatchewan, particularly the people of the Quill 
Lakes. 
 
I was so pleased to hear that a large number of Murray’s former 
colleagues in this legislature were able to be present at his 
funeral in Muenster. Unfortunately it was the day of the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention, and some us were not able to be there, but I was so 
pleased that a large number of Murray’s former colleagues were 
there. A tribute, a tribute to the regard in which Murray Koskie 
is held by his former colleagues in government and by members 
of the New Democratic Party across Saskatchewan and by the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And so it is with some real regret that 
we extend the condolences of this legislature to Shirley and to 
Murray’s family and friends. 
 
And to recording its own deep sense of loss of bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the Leader of 
the Opposition, the member for Swift Current, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency and to the 
province, Murray James Koskie. 
 
In recording its own deep sympathy, sense of loss and 
bereavement this Assembly, expresses its most sincere 
sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again we join with all 
of our colleagues here today, in expressing our condolences and 
extending our sympathies to Mr. Koskie’s family on his passing 
earlier this month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my own direct memories of Mr. Koskie would 
relate not to the times that he spent serving in two different 
administrations — in terms of his cabinet portfolios — but 
rather when he was an opposition member here in this 
Assembly on this side of the Assembly. 
 
I remember, as a young erstwhile assistant for the government 
of the day, being a little bit concerned whenever Mr. Koskie 
would take to his feet in question period, unsure of whether or 
not he would be asking the minister that I worked for any 
questions because when he asked those questions, he did it 
effectively and he did it forcefully. And yes, as the Premier has 
noted, he did it with some volume to be sure, whether he was 
standing or whether he was seated. And certainly those days too 
were a service to his province when he was serving, not only 
just those who were represented by opposition members but the 
entire province, all the people of the province as Her Majesty’s 
Loyal Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, just the number of years — two decades of 
service to the people of Saskatchewan and successive 
re-elections — perhaps speaks volumes to the esteem that he 
was held in by his own constituents, his family, friends, and 
neighbours. 
 
(15:45) 
 
So on behalf of all of us on the opposition benches, we too wish 
to join with the Premier in seconding the motion and in 
extending our condolences to Shirley and their family on the 
passing of Murray Koskie. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would want to join with the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition in offering condolences to Shirley and her children, 
their grandchildren, family, and their friends on Murray’s 
passing. 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

I was one of the members of the legislature who the Premier 
referred to as having the opportunity to serve with Murray. I 
came to this legislature in 1986. Murray at that time was 
already a seasoned veteran. 
 
He had of course survived the rout of the government and sat in 
a very small rump opposition from 1982 to ’86. And so I think 
it became very clear to many of us that Murray had much to 
offer new members of the legislature in terms of the process 
that takes place in this legislature — the debates, the issues — 
but I think more importantly than that, to learn Murray’s respect 
for this institution and his love for the political party that he 
gave so much to; his work as a social democrat in this province 
in terms of bringing about a better Saskatchewan, a better place 
for not only his family but families of all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And Murray was a very unique kind of an individual. He wasn’t 
always terribly open in terms of his personal life, but I was 
fortunate enough to be a friend of Murray’s and get to know his 
family. I was in Murray’s home in Regina a number of 
occasions, and through these encounters with Murray it became 
very, very clear to me Murray’s passion for education and 
ensuring that his children got through university. 
 
He had a small house right around the General Hospital, and as 
I recall it, it was the main floor that . . . Two of his kids were 
going to university, and they were living there. And Murray 
would live with them during the session, and there weren’t 
enough bedrooms to go around. But so the kids could study, it 
was Murray who slept on the cot in the front room. And so 
those were the things of Murray Koskie that I remember that he 
didn’t share with the general public as a public person. 
 
He taught me — and I know my colleagues would agree — he 
taught us much about loyalty; he taught us much about 
teamwork. As well he taught a lot about compromise. Now 
those who didn’t know Murray well would maybe have a hard 
time to believe that to be the case but it was true. 
 
We would have our discussions in caucus; we’d have our 
debates in some of the backrooms in the legislature into the late 
hours, and the early hours of the morning because Murray loved 
nothing more than a debate on political issues or on social 
issues, philosophical issues. But you know at the end of the day 
Murray understood that it was important to listen. You didn’t 
always have to agree but at the end of the day the team was 
what was important to him. 
 
Murray as well cared about people, as I said and the Premier 
said earlier. His belief in social democracy as a political 
philosophy and a living philosophy of life, a philosophy of 
living was evidenced in the way he treated his children and the 
way he treated Shirley and the way he described . . . displayed I 
think the love for his grandchildren. 
 
It was one of the themes at Murray’s funeral that I heard over 
and over again — his love for his grandchildren and his desire 
to be with them and to let them know how important they were 
to him. So that is a side of Murray Koskie that I was very 
honoured and very pleased to get to know. 
 
Murray, as I said, survived the purge of 1982 I guess when the 

NDP were returned with I think seven or eight members. Very, 
very small caucus; difficult times. The government side was 
huge, so huge they were sitting on the opposition side. And so it 
was very difficult, I understand, sometimes to concentrate, to be 
part of the debate. It was rough times. 
 
But Murray was one of the few members who was able to 
survive a difficult election for the New Democrats here in the 
province. And it was because of his care and his attention to 
detail and his attention to his riding and the people who from 
Quill Lakes sent him here election after election for some 20 
years, that he was able to serve for that period of time as well. 
 
And Murray could often be a little bit humorous. And I recall 
Murray saying one time, you know he said, I’m really glad all 
of you young guys came in here in ’86 because he said working 
with you and being with you makes me feel young again. And 
so I hope we were able to share a little bit of that with Murray 
as well in those early years from ’86 to ’91. 
 
I watched Murray in this legislature, as the Leader of the 
Opposition indicated. You could see some concern on the 
government’s side when Murray, in opposition, rose to speak. 
You could also during a debate, during estimates, see that 
Murray really did have a feel, an affinity for rural Saskatchewan 
and for agriculture. He spent a lot of his time focusing on rural 
issues because he cared about them, and that I think is the other 
reason that the people from Quill Lakes continued to send him 
back to represent them here in the legislature. 
 
And the occasion of his funeral the number of people who came 
to share that afternoon with Shirley and the family, I think was, 
as well, evidence of the respect that he had gained not only as a 
politician but as a person in the community, in Muenster and 
the areas that they lived for those number of years together. 
And I think it made the family feel quite proud of Murray and 
his accomplishments and proud of Murray’s life. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, offer my condolences and those of my 
family to Shirley and the children, their grandchildren. Murray 
was a great guy. He was my friend and I’ll miss Murray Koskie. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and the 
member from Prince Albert in offering my condolences to 
Shirley and Murray’s children as well as his grandchildren. 
 
As the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) said, there were a 
group of us that came into this Legislative Assembly in 1986. 
And we were young, and we were inexperienced, and we 
wanted to take this place like never . . . like no one had ever 
seen before. We had all kinds of questions we wanted to ask the 
government. We wanted to hold them to account, and we had 
our issues. 
 
And many of the members that came in in 1986 were from 
urban Saskatchewan, and Murray represented rural 
Saskatchewan. And we soon all cut our teeth on learning how to 
be on the House Leader’s committee, committees of caucus, 
how to get organized, how to do politics, and how to ask the 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2004 

right questions in the Assembly. And when you had to speak in 
the Assembly, Murray’s job was to make sure he had people 
who were prepared to speak, but he wanted to know what you 
were going to say. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that Murray wanted to ensure that our 
caucus, while it was broadly representative of the Saskatchewan 
perspective, that we kept our eye on the ball. And the ball was 
to raise the kinds of issues that people in the public were talking 
about and to prepare ourselves for the 1991 election campaign 
when we would be the government of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the member from P.A. talked about 
compromise, we learned how to compromise. And when I say 
we learned how to compromise, I’m talking about members 
who wanted to ask questions that represented their particular 
view of the world that didn’t necessarily represent the broad 
view that was necessary in order to form government in 1991. 
 
Murray Koskie also taught us about loyalty and he also taught 
us about discipline. And when I say loyalty and discipline, it 
was loyalty to each other regardless of what had happened in 
that debate in caucus or in a committee. When the decision was 
made, the decision was made and he expected us all to line up, 
including himself, even if he’d lost the debate. And I think that 
was one of the reasons why when we came to government in 
1991, the group of people who had been in that opposition were 
so disciplined and loyal to each other in terms of some of the 
things that we had to do between ’91 and 1995. 
 
The other thing that I remember about Murray in this 
Legislative Assembly is that he was an expert at heckling. And 
I think that the members of the government called him the 
moose, if I recall, because his voice could be heard everywhere 
when he decided to enter the debate from his chair. 
 
I think one of the biggest privileges that I had and . . . because 
Murray had never served in the legislature in the caucus with 
women and when we were elected in 1986 there were three 
women that entered our NDP caucus. And I think one of the 
biggest sort of things that allowed me to be accepted by Murray 
— because he was a tough, rough-and-tumble politician — was 
one night when a few people were getting together he 
designated me as the driver, which meant that I got to come 
along for the ride, so to speak, and witness the joys of being 
with Murray Koskie and others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Murray Koskie was a CCFer and he was an 
NDPer, and he absolutely loved the political party that we all 
represent. He loved the party. And he would go to our NDP 
conventions and he was there watching the debate. And as the 
member from P. A. said, he was a private guy. And he would 
listen to what people had to say, and when it was all said and 
done he would say, don’t you just love the people in our party. 
And we all did. And we all do. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our movement — the CCF and the NDP 
movement in this province — have lost a true and loyal and 
disciplined soldier and warrior. And for those of us who have 
been in political fights in this province, Murray Koskie was the 
kind of person that you wanted to have shoulder to shoulder 
with you as you made your way through those political debates. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this Legislative Assembly has lost a 
member who loved this place and there are many members of 
the Legislative Assembly that love this place, and there are 
some that don’t. They like being a member of the legislature, 
they like doing their work, but this isn’t necessarily the forum 
that they love. Murray loved being in this Assembly, he liked 
question period, he loved the thrust and parry of debate, and he 
liked figuring out how he was going to outwit the opposition or 
the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my deepest sympathies to 
Shirley, Murray’s children, his grandchildren, and obviously his 
brothers and sisters and nieces and nephews and his friends. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I wonder if I 
could ask leave to make a few remarks with respect to Murray 
Koskie. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, my recollection of Murray Koskie 
is one of fondness. I worked with him on a daily basis when he 
was the chief whip of the opposition caucus and I was his 
deputy. And I was his gopher. And, I tell you, running through, 
being his gopher, I really got to know the workings of the 
legislature and the workings of caucus and actually the 
workings of the government through Murray Koskie. He also 
taught us . . . gave us confidence in doing things like asking 
questions in the legislature. And I certainly do appreciate all the 
discussions we had in the evenings. And we did appreciate the 
occasional refreshment — after work of course — as we 
gathered in Murray’s office. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Murray has been described — and I would concur — that he 
was sort of tough on the outside but soft on the inside. Murray 
was the person who had, always had his political nose to the 
ground. He believed in teamwork. And I never knew of 
anybody that could see through and cut his way through a 
political issue and right to the nub of what was important. 
 
And so those of us that were somewhat idealistic when we 
come in, Murray had a way of tempering idealism with reality. 
And he did it in a very direct way. He had a way of conveying a 
message of reality to his colleagues. And I was often the 
recipient of this directness. But I must say that I learned a lot. 
 
Murray expected a lot of himself and he expected a lot of 
performance from his colleagues as well. 
 
It was mentioned several times today about his ability to heckle 
and his voice. I sometimes thought that he had been trained as a 
ventriloquist because although the people on that side of the 
House were able to hear him and people on that side of the 
House were able to hear him, the Speaker very rarely was able 
to hear him. 
 
Well Murray was a person who was very proud of his 
constituency and the people in his constituency. He often talked 
about the innovation, the progressive and prosperous farmers, 
and people who went on to develop manufacturing of farm 
machinery in his constituency and area. 



March 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

And I was very humbled to be able to attend his funeral and to 
be able to meet his family members there. And I would like to 
— alongside of all my colleagues — express my condolences to 
Shirley and his family on the occasion of his passing. 
 
I recognize the member for Milestone. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as one of the opposition members 
who had the privilege of sitting in this Assembly as a member 
sitting across from Mr. Koskie, I think I’d just like to say a few 
words. 
 
I can remember walking into this Assembly, and Mr. Koskie sat 
down about the third bench from the end, and I can remember 
looking at Mr. Koskie, and I don’t know if there was anyone 
who had a look that — you know how teachers are sometimes 
when they look at you, that stern look? — and Mr. Koskie 
would look across at us. And those of us who were on the 
government side of the House that were new to this Assembly, 
we were kind of wondering, now what’s coming out of that 
member at the time. You never knew what was coming out of 
Mr. Koskie. 
 
But Mr. Koskie was . . . could give you that stern look, he could 
give you a firm look, and yes, he could make some very witty 
quips that really, just as they came across the floor, they just 
seemed to gather momentum and steam. 
 
There was another thing about Mr. Koskie when he was 
speaking. He’d be speaking away, he’d be reading, and I was 
just quipping to the member across the floor — remember how 
he used to grab his glasses? He’d be speaking away, he’d just 
tear these glasses off to . . . (inaudible) . . . his point. And he’d 
be . . . and he’d get those glasses going, and just to, just to 
really reinforce the point he was bringing across. 
 
And as a member sitting on the opposite side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m not sure if, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote, and a former member from P.A. as 
well . . . I remember those evening sittings. They were very 
colourful. Mr. Koskie was certainly an individual who knew 
how to make any . . . We used to do a lot more of the evening 
sittings, and he was certainly an individual who could make an 
evening sitting colourful. I don’t know how in the world you 
can do that when you’re getting late at night. 
 
But certainly Mr. Koskie brought a rapport to this Assembly. 
You didn’t always agree with him, but you knew where he 
stood and he was very firm in his convictions and his beliefs. 
And as the member from Moosomin and on behalf of my 
colleagues, we extend to Shirley and her family our deepest 
sympathies on the passing of her husband — a husband, a 
father, a grandfather, an uncle to so many members, and a 
friend to many. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion of condolence moved by the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale, seconded by the member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 
 
Murray James Koskie . . . In recording its own deep 
sense of loss and bereavement this Assembly expresses its 
most sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved 
family. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I move, seconded by the 
member from Melfort: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memories of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana and seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memories of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the House now stand adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now stand adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:06. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................237 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................237 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................237 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................237 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................237 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................237 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................238 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................238 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................238 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................238 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................238 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................238 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................239 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................239 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................239 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................239 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................239 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................239 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................239 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................239 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................240 
 Corner Gas 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................240 
 Update on Fire at Advanced Ag and Industrial of Biggar 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................240 
 Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................241 
 Rose Valley’s Annual Dance Competition 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................241 
 Partners in Employment 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................241 
 Achievements of Young Musician from Eatonia 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................242 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Times for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................242 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................242 
 Provincial Tax Regime 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................244 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................244 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................248 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................248 
CONDOLENCES 
 Gallagher, Bernard David 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................246 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................247 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................247 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................247 
 Mitchell, Alexander 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................248 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................249 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................250 
 Turnbull, Olaf Alexander 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................250 



 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................251 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................251 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................252 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................253 
 Baker, Henry Harold Peter 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................254 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................255 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................255 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................257 
 Koskie, Murray James 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................257 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................258 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................258 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................259 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................260 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................261 
 Transmittal Motion 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................261 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


