















































Hansard: November 17, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 62A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2004, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1771 
 November 17, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present to this Assembly today regarding the 
government’s participation in the CAIS (Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization) program. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contributes funds to the 
latest BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition is signed by people from the communities of 
Grenfell and Broadview. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I present a petition on behalf of people who feel that their 
community will be particularly hard hit by school division 
amalgamation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Again, Mr. Speaker, these four pages of petitions are filled with 
signatures of the people of Burstall. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who have deep concerns over the CAIS program. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this is signed by people from Estevan, Bienfait, and 
Lampman. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the deplorable state of 
Highway No. 35 south of Weyburn. Mr. Speaker, it’s even 
more concerning now because the NDP have decided to turn the 
highway back to gravel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 

And these petitions are signed by residents all across Canada 
and the United States. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again I rise with a petition from citizens who are 
extremely concerned about the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Glentworth, 
McCord, Fir Mountain and Lafleche. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the CAIS 
program. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 

And the citizens on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Leask. I 
so present. 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about the crop insurance premium 
hikes: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Hawarden and Kenaston. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith natural 
gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Vanscoy, Grandora, and 
Asquith. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly and present a petition on behalf of citizens 
of west central Saskatchewan very concerned with the loss of 
autonomy through the forced school amalgamations. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan, and 
continue reorganization of the school divisions on a 
strictly voluntary basis. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good 
citizens of the towns of Kerrobert and Luseland, Saskatchewan. 
I so present. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition of behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are 
concerned with the CAIS program. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contribute funds to the 
latest BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Rhein, Punnichy, Southey, and Cupar. I so 
present. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with farmers and the CAIS program. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contribute funds to the 
latest BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 
 

The signators are from the communities of Langenburg and 
Neudorf, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning funding and service levels at the 
Manitou Health Centre, that’s sessional paper 641. 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 107, 180, 637, 638, 639, and no. 640. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, not surprisingly, I do have 
questions again today. And in the interests of parliamentary 
procedure, I am not using a potato gunny sack as was requested 
by some of my colleagues. I’m using a file folder today so . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Let’s just try to get back to 
parliamentary procedure. The member for southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the comments from 
the members opposite, and perhaps they’ll use some of that time 
to respond to the questions. 



November 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

Mr. Speaker, take notice that I give notice that I shall on day no. 
67 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Crown Management 
Board: are there any other law suits pending against the 
government directly or indirectly related to SPUDCO? 
And if so, please provide details. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 67 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Crown Management 
Board: is any Crown, department, or agency of 
government considering any further investment or 
financial support for future investment in the potato 
industry or a related industry? If so, provide details. 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 67 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: the June 25, 
1998, SPUDCO review conducted by Ernst & Young 
recommended invoices should be prepared when potatoes 
are shipped to ensure that revenue, accounts receivable, 
and inventory amounts are accurately reflected. What 
specific action was taken by SaskWater as a result of this 
recommendation? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 67 ask the 
government the following question: 

 
To the Minister Responsible for the Crown Management 
Board: the June 25, 1998, SPUDCO review conducted by 
Ernst & Young recommended invoices should be prepared 
when potatoes are shipped to ensure that revenue, accounts 
receivable, and inventory are accurately reflected. What 
specific action was taken by Crown Investments 
Corporation as a result of this recommendation? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a series of other similar questions directed 
to other government departments, and I would so table all of 
those, Mr. Speaker. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Cannington. 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 67 ask the government the following 
question: 

 
To the Minister of Finance: please provide the formula or 
the methodology on how the Department of Finance 
determined how much money the Government of 
Saskatchewan would lose over the next three years as a 
result of the smoking ban due to be implemented in 
January 2005? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 67 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: presently there is a deal 

pending between Saskatchewan Agriculture and the 
federal PFRA in regards to transfer of ownership of 
provincial pasture located near Nokomis and the PFRA 
pasture located north of Kindersley. When will the formal 
transfer of these pastures be completed, and how will they 
affect the employee status within the transfer? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a written question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 67 ask 
the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: during the 
calendar year 2001, January 1 through December 31, what 
was the total value of investment authorized by the 
Government of Saskatchewan through order in council for 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
or any of its subsidiaries to invest in Navigata Holdings 
Inc., Navigata Communications Inc., or any successor 
corporation of either Navigata Holdings Inc. or Navigata 
Communications Inc.? For the fiscal year ended December 
31, 2001, what was the net profit or net loss posted by 
Navigata Holdings Inc.? 
 
During the calendar year 2002, January 1 to December 31, 
what was the total value of investment authorized by the 
Government of Saskatchewan through order in council for 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
or any of its subsidiaries to invest in Navigata Holdings 
Inc., Navigata Communications Inc., or any successor 
corporation of either Navigata Holdings Inc. or Navigata 
Communications Incorporated? 
 

I have a similar question for the fiscal year ended December 31, 
2002, and for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2003. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would serve notice 
that I shall give . . . I give notice that I shall on day no. 67 ask 
the government the following two questions: 
 

During the period from January 1, 2004, through 
November 15, 2004, what was the total value of 
investment authorized by Government of Saskatchewan 
through order in council for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Holding Corporation or any of its 
subsidiaries to invest in Navigata Holdings Inc., Navigata 
Communications Inc., or any successor corporation of 
either Navigata Holdings or Navigata Communications 
Incorporated? 

 
And question no. 4, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 67 ask the following question: 
 

For the fiscal period from January 1, 2004, to September 
30, 2004, what was the net profit or net loss posted by 
Navigata Holding Inc.? 

 
(13:45) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — For introduction of guests, members, it’s my 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2004 

pleasure today to welcome several special guests from the 
United States Midwest to this Chamber. They are here 
participating in the legislative exchange co-hosted by the 
Canadian Consulate General from Minneapolis. 
 
With us is the Speaker of the North Dakota Legislative 
Assembly, along with two other elected representatives. And 
also with them we have Canada’s new Consul General in 
Minneapolis here, Mr. Kim Butler, along with Ms. Quinn 
Cheney of his staff are here to guide them and participate in 
additional meetings. 
 
And for more specific introductions, now I would recognize the 
Minister for Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my privilege to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly today, Mr. Kim Perry Butler, who is 
Consul General of Minneapolis. He is sitting in your gallery 
today. Mr. Butler is the new Consul General for Canada at 
Minneapolis. 
 
He is a graduate of the Government of Canada’s accelerated 
executive development program, and he has completed the 
public executive program at Queen’s University. He holds a 
Bachelor of Commerce honours degree from the University of 
Ottawa, and he joined the federal government in 1986. He was 
recently appointed the Consul General in Minneapolis, and this 
is his first visit to Saskatchewan in that capacity. He will be 
using this visit to familiarize himself with Saskatchewan’s 
trade, investment, and advocacy interests in the US (United 
States) Midwest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we welcome Mr. Butler. We thank him for the 
support that he has given to our exchange with North Dakota 
and wish him all the best in his facts finding. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 
Matthew Klein. Matt, as he’s affectionately become known to 
us in the last few hours, is the newly elected Speaker of the 
North Dakota House of Representatives. He has served in the 
North Dakota House since 1993 and sits as a Republican 
member of that Assembly. 
 
He’s on the standing committees of Government and Veterans 
Affairs. Matt was previously in the air force and worked a great 
deal with both the air force and the army on construction 
projects. He’s also a committee member of Industry, Business 
and Labor. He’s also, dear to my heart, he’s particularly 
interested in the administrative rules of the legislature as well, 
something that I have paid a little bit of attention to, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So Mr. Klein has spent most of his education time in North 
Dakota, but in addition to that he did graduate work at the 
University of Southern California and the University of 
California in Los Angeles. He has six children and his wife, 
Isabell, Mr. Speaker. 

I’d like to ask the Assembly to make Speaker Matthew Klein 
welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture, the 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today to be able to introduce to 
you and through you to this Assembly, the Democrat 
representative from North Dakota, Mr. Phil Mueller. 
 
Phil is a farmer. He’s got his Bachelor of Science in education 
with business and English majors, a master’s degree in school 
administration. He spent 12 years working on school board 
issues. He’s on local Cenex board, Draft Prairie Advisory 
Board, Transition Steering Committee, State Board of Research 
and Extension; is also a first responder, married with three 
children, and a very busy man — gets what time he can with his 
wife, Darlene — and he has been in the House since ’99. 
 
I would also like to note that we’re very honoured to have 
North Dakota representatives here. Just in general, with exports 
in the order of $350 million, North Dakota accounts for just 
over 3 per cent of Saskatchewan’s international goods exports. 
Canada is North Dakota’s largest export market, purchasing 
more than 600 million in goods. Within that context, North 
Dakota and Saskatchewan have a very important trading 
relationship, with Saskatchewan’s imports from North Dakota 
ranging from 140 to 180 million over the last three years. 
Leading imports include machinery and agriculture products. 
 
We look forward to working together to build our relationship 
and become even better neighbours in the years ahead. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 
afternoon to rise in the House and welcome our guest, Jon 
Nelson, who represents the seventh district of North Dakota, 
which is north central North Dakota. 
 
We had a very lovely morning together. Jon’s a farmer. He 
attended Minot State University and NDSU (North Dakota 
State University). He attends the Lutheran Church and sits on 
his Lutheran Church council. His wife’s name is Shirley, and he 
has three children. He has been in the House since 1997 and sits 
with the Republican Party. 
 
It’s our pleasure to have him here this afternoon. We had a great 
discussion on growing soybeans over lunch, and I hope he 
enjoys his time in Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to introduce to you and to members of the legislature, 



November 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

three individuals seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. First of 
all, Marc Hankewich, originally from Rose Valley, is now a 
resident here in Regina and works at the University of Regina 
— a little wave, Marc. And on the far right is his sister, Melanie 
Hankewich, who lives in Victoria, British Columbia, joining us 
here today. And seated in the middle is Chris Shaw, also from 
Victoria, BC (British Columbia), originally from Glenbrook, 
Australia. And they’re all here, I believe for the first time, to the 
legislature. So please join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce you to 
three gentlemen seated in your gallery. They are new additions 
to the Saskatchewan Party caucus team. 
 
And I want to introduce you. On the left is Dustin Duncan, 
originally from the Weyburn area, a U of R (University of 
Regina) grad and doing research for us in our office. I’ll go over 
to the far right, which actually might be quite suitable, and 
introduce Will Schenn, who is originally from Humboldt and a 
graduate of the University of Saskatchewan. Both these 
gentlemen have joined our research team and are already doing 
a fantastic job for us, and we thank them for that. 
 
And in the middle, probably he would describe himself here as 
the rose between two thorns, is our director of communications, 
our new director of communications, Ian Hannah. Ian comes to 
us after about a quarter century of broadcast experience in 
broadcast journalism; the last 20 he has spent with CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re very pleased that all three have joined our team. We’d 
ask all members to welcome them and say hello to these 
gentlemen here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We have three distinguished visitors in the west gallery. And 
these ladies have come from a long ways. 
 
I want to pay a particular homage to Claire Larocque, who 
travelled all the way from Camsell Portage. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Camsell Portage is probably about 50 miles from the Northwest 
Territories border. She’s come a long ways to take part of the 
SSBA (Saskatchewan School Boards Association) convention. 
And she’s a board member of the Northern Lights School 
Division. And I want to make sure that people know she 
travelled a long way to get here. She hopped on a canoe, went 
down a raging river for about 100 miles, and then caught a 
plane to get here. 
 
But as well, Mr. Speaker, we have Tina Rasmussen who is a 
board Chair for the Northern Lights School Division. And Tina 
is originally from Green Lake. 
 

And certainly, we also have, to the extreme left is Clara 
Sanderson. And Clara is from Beauval and is a board member 
of the Northern Lights School Division. And we should also 
know that Clara is a very close relative to myself, but even 
closer to Lawrence Yew. 
 
As we all know, Mr. Yew served this House with great 
distinction and is a source of pride for many northern and 
Aboriginal people. And Clara, of course, has the fortunate 
bloodlines to be related to such a great man such as Lawrence 
Yew. 
 
And also, as done yesterday, we also have a couple of people up 
further in the gallery. We have Peter and Doyle. And Mr. 
Vermette, of course, is also with the Northern Lights School 
Division, as Peter is as well. 
 
And we should know that the mayor of the beautiful city of 
Regina is quite happy when Mr. Vermette visits the city 
because he spends a lot of money and the economy, overnight, 
just spikes right up. 
 
So I’ll ask all members of the Assembly to please welcome 
these northern visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to introduce family members at 
any time and it’s a special privilege for me to be able to 
introduce two people seated in the east gallery, constituents of 
Kelvington-Wadena. So I thank the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena for allowing me the opportunity to 
introduce these two people. 
 
I’d like to introduce my dad and my stepmom, Peter and Sophie 
Krawetz. They’re from the fine community of Invermay. 
They’re here in Regina for a number of days as my dad has 
some medical appointments and will be looking after those 
things in the next couple of days. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, most importantly, I had the opportunity to 
talk to dad about agriculture and when dad left last week — I 
believe it was on Tuesday — the home quarter, as I refer to the 
land where we live on, still had oats in swath and it was given 
up by me as far as going to worry about it next year. But for the 
first time that I can recall on our farm, combines rolled on 
November 11, 12, and 13 and I was happy to report to dad 
today that the oats is in the bin. It’s a little tough but, you know, 
it’ll be dried. 
 
And dad tells me that back in his farming career of — well we 
don’t want to say exactly how many years, but it was a number 
of years — he recalls actually threshing and putting sheaves 
into the threshing machine in the month of December when it 
was 17 below. 
 
So we haven’t set a record, dad, but we got the oats off. And 
I’m happy that they’re able to enjoy the proceedings. And I’d 
ask all members to welcome my dad and my stepmom. 
 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2004 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, I am very 
pleased to welcome today a group of people from Wadena. 
They actually have 19 students from Fishing Lake School, and 
we have the teachers, Darren McKee, Sherry Sayese, Gene 
Sunshine, and Fred Desjarlais. I was pleased to visit the school 
last year and honoured to attend the graduation. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 
welcome my two constituents. I’ve met them a number of years 
ago and it’s always an honour to see you again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, I would 
like to introduce to you a gentleman seated in the west gallery. 
He is a constituent, a neighbour, and a friend of mine. His name 
is Allan Barreth. And he’s a very good neighbour, I might add, 
too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Allan here this 
afternoon and I hope you enjoy the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I just want to extend greetings to the 
students from Fishing Lake as well, and I’m very glad to see 
you here. And I will be meeting them a little bit later on as well, 
so I want to say welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And again, Mr. Speaker, in the west 
gallery we have two visitors today who are visiting the 
legislature but are no longer visitors to our province. They have 
very recently relocated to the province of Saskatchewan, now 
making their home here in Regina as recently as the month of 
October. 
 
And I would like all members to greet these two new residents 
of our province who have come from the great province of 
Alberta to Saskatchewan. I’d like you to welcome to 
Saskatchewan and to our legislature, Aaron Peake and Katrina 
Mather. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Dr. Sally Mahood Honoured by College of Physicians and 
Surgeons of Canada 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this year Dr. Sally 
Mahood from Regina Lakeview was named the 2004 
Saskatchewan Family Physician of the Year. I’m also pleased to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that Dr. Mahood has now won national 
recognition for her contributions to the health and well-being of 
her patients and her community. The College of Physicians and 
Surgeons of Canada has named her one of the country’s top 
family doctors for 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these honours are richly deserved. Dr. Mahood 
has been practising medicine in Regina for almost 25 years, and 
like every other family physician in the province, she plays a 
critical role in our health care system. Her responsibilities 
include adult and pediatric hospital admissions, home visits, 
emergency care, palliative care, minor surgeries, prenatal care, 
and delivering babies. 
 
(14:00) 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Mahood is the co-unit head of the 
department of family medicine in the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region. She’s also an associate professor in the 
department of family medicine at the University of 
Saskatchewan and a consultant with the Women’s Health 
Centre and the Planned Parenthood sexual health clinic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Sally Mahood’s dedication to her patients and 
the principles of family medicine make her an outstanding 
example of the role the family physician plays in our health care 
system. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in thanking Dr. Mahood for 
25 years of outstanding service and on receiving this 
well-deserved recognition, both provincially and nationally. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Saskatoon Debaters Earn Invitation to Oxford 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to ask my members 
opposite and on this side of the House to recognize two 
exceptional students in my constituency. The students attend 
Walter Murray Collegiate. Kevin Hovdestad and Vinay Kumar 
Mysore have been actively involved in speech and debate 
throughout these . . . through the Saskatchewan Elocution and 
Debate Association since 1998. They began debating together 
in the year 2000. Since then Kevin and Vinay have participated 
in dozens of debates and tournaments at the regional, 
provincial, and national levels. 
 
Most recently, Mr. Speaker, these fine students attended the 
national high school debate championship in St. John’s, 
Newfoundland, and finished second. Mr. Speaker, this fall those 
two students and the first-place participants will be travelling to 
Oxford, England to participate in the world debate 
championships. 



November 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

Mr. Speaker, I’m rising in the House actually to curry favour 
with these students to make sure that as they move on from high 
school debating to politics that they come on this side of the 
House, so I’m asking members to support that as well. And I 
would ask that members on both sides of the House 
congratulate them and wish them well in Oxford, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres 
Awareness Week 

 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this is SARC Awareness Week 
here in Saskatchewan. SARC, or the Saskatchewan Association 
of Rehabilitation Centres, is a provincial, non-profit 
organization whose goal, as is simply stated in their vision 
statement, is to see that persons with disabilities enjoy full 
citizenship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SARC and its 73 member agencies provide 
services and supports to enhance the lives of people with 
disabilities, and play an important role in creating welcoming, 
accessible, and inclusive communities for everyone. 
 
SARC members are located in every corner of the province. 
They have almost 2,000 staff and support over 4,000 persons 
with disabilities. As well, SARC, SARCAN recycling division 
operates over 70 depots in over 60 communities and is one of 
the most successful recycling programs in the country that 
provides employment opportunities for individuals with 
disabilities. The theme this week is: The People Matter, The 
Work Matters. And that is very appropriate. I think it can be 
safely said that SARC has been operating under the assumption 
that the people matter and the work matters since its inception 
in 1968. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is largely due to the efforts of SARC and its 
members that the people of Saskatchewan have become more 
aware and more knowledgeable about individuals with 
disabilities and that people with disabilities are more and more 
taking their rightful place in our communities. Their goal is to 
make Saskatchewan more inclusive, Mr. Speaker. We fully 
support that effort, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Lorie Annand Receives Award of Distinction 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of the 
Assembly, I rise today to congratulate Miss Lorie Annand of 
Melfort. Last night at the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association banquet, Lorie was the recipient of the Award of 
Distinction. This award is given to a current or former school 
board member who has demonstrated outstanding service and 
made a significant contribution to enhance education. I’m proud 
to say that Lorie Annand, the current Chair of the newly 
amalgamated Melfort Tiger Lily School Division, was selected 

to receive this prestigious award. 
 
I personally have witnessed her commitment to the education of 
our children, having served with her on the Melfort Board of 
Education in past years. Lorie has spent 19 years with the board 
of education, serving seven years as board Chair of the Melfort 
School Division, three years as Vice-Chair, and as of January 
2004 to present, as Chair of the Melfort Tiger Lily School 
Division. For a number of years she’s been a member of the 
northeast branch council and served as an executive member, 
including Chair and Vice-Chair. 
 
Lorie continues to demonstrate her strong leadership support to 
school board members and never stops giving encouragement to 
administration and staff. She was a driving force in the 
amalgamation of the two divisions of Melfort and Tiger Lily 
and was actively involved in the two-phased expansion of 
Melfort & Unit Comprehensive Collegiate to include 
Cumberland Regional College, CanSask, and HRDC (Human 
Resources Development Canada) as one campus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that her family is very proud of her, as all 
of us are in the community, and I’d ask members to join me in 
congratulating her on this award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

Murad Al-Katib and SaskCan Pulse Honoured 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely 
pleased to rise in the House today to say a few words about one 
of Saskatchewan’s fine young citizens, one of the best and the 
brightest whose business, SaskCan Pulse Traders, is located in 
my constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few short years ago Murad Al-Katib of 
Davidson sat down and wrote the words SaskCan Pulse Trading 
across the top of a blank sheet of paper and began a business 
endeavour that in the last 36 months or so has gone from being 
a one-person operation to becoming one of the world’s leading 
processors and exporters of pulse crops. 
 
The combination of Saskatchewan farmers producing more 
legumes than any other province and the obvious business 
acumen of Mr. Al-Katib has resulted in an extremely successful 
company. Since 2001 SaskCan Pulse has created almost 100 
jobs, 50 of them in the last year alone, and currently exports 
products to 33 countries worldwide. At the recent Ernst & 
Young Entrepreneur of the Year, Prairies region, awards, Mr. 
Al-Katib was named Top Emerging Entrepreneur. And, Mr. 
Speaker, just a few days later, SaskCan Pulse was named 
Saskatchewan Business of the Year for 2004 at the 
Achievement in Business Excellence awards and also took 
home the ABEX award for exports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all like to see skill, hard work, and 
achievement rewarded. I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Mr. Al-Katib on his can-do attitude and on his 
success. Thank you. 
 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Camp Easter Seal Celebrates 50th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of the many 
constituency events I attended over the summer, one of the most 
notable was the 50th anniversary of Camp Easter Seal, held on 
August 22 at Manitou Beach. 
 
Camp Easter Seal was opened near Watrous in 1954 as the first 
of four provincial locations. In 1955 the camp was permanently 
set up in its Manitou Beach location where they began camping 
programs designed for children and adults with physical and 
mental disabilities. There are five age groups, including the 
combination of level 4 care users. In addition there are camping 
programs for children with diabetes. There is a great 
opportunity to learn new things and to participate in a wide 
variety of activities. 
 
Camp Easter Seal includes a heated pool, recreation centre, 
large dining hall, the main chalet complex, arts and crafts, 
horseback riding, boating, and hiking. All these and many more 
activities are fully equipped to handle handicapped persons. 
 
Over the last 50 years, countless people of all ages have come 
to enjoy the camping adventures that are available to the 
handicapped persons. Camp Easter Seal has been supported by 
a wide variety of community minded individuals and groups 
including the Kiwanis Club, the Red Cross, Lions Club, 
SaskPower Dragons, Rod and Custom Car Club, and the 
Kinsmen, just to name a few. 
 
I would take this opportunity to congratulate the staff of Camp 
Easter Seal on a remarkable 50th anniversary and offer my 
sincere thanks for the invitation to attend the celebration. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating the staff at 
Camp Easter Seal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 

Colleen Bailey Honoured by the Organization of 
Saskatchewan Arts Councils 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Two 
weeks ago the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts Councils 
held their annual convention in my Yorkton constituency. For 
those who may not be aware, this organization plays a 
incredible role in the cultural life of the province. As an 
umbrella organization for community arts councils and schools 
across the province, OSAC (Organization of Saskatchewan Arts 
Councils) helps ensure that the visual and performing arts are a 
vibrant part of Saskatchewan’s cultural landscape. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the course of the convention, Colleen 
Bailey, a long-time friend and constituent, was honoured for her 
significant and ongoing contributions to the arts in the province 
and was made a lifetime member of OSAC. Mr. Speaker, and 

even more appropriate was that Colleen received this 
recognition right in Yorkton. Ms. Bailey was the founding 
member of the Yorkton Arts Council. Thirty-five years ago 
when OSAC held its first annual convention in Yorkton, 
Colleen Bailey was the founding president. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Colleen Bailey has been a committed and an 
enthusiastic supporter of the arts for pretty much her entire life. 
Among her many other accomplishments she is the current 
Chair of the Saskatchewan Arts Board, a past Chair of the 
Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival, and has been the 
governor of the Dominion Drama Festival. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the arts inform and enrich our lives in a way 
beyond measurement. They tell us not only who we are, but 
who we can be. I ask my colleagues to join in congratulating 
Colleen Bailey on her recent honour and in thanking her for all 
she has done to ensure that the arts continue to be strong and 
thriving in our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Water Quality in the Vanscoy, Grandora and Asquith Areas 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, people in the Vanscoy area are 
having some disturbing news today. Testing has been done on 
their drinking water and 15 test results have come back. Some 
exceeded drinking water standards for uranium, nitrates, and 
coliform. One of the wells also exceeded the standard for 
arsenic, an extremely powerful poison. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone in this House wants to make sure all 
Saskatchewan residents have safe drinking water. My question 
to the Minister of Environment is, what steps are being taken to 
assure people in the Vanscoy, Grandora, and Asquith area have 
safe drinking water? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course our first priority is for the health and public safety here 
and for all of Saskatchewan’s citizens. To this end 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority has been doing some 
testing in the Vanscoy area in the last few days. And as soon as 
we determined the health risks that existed in private wells, we 
notified the local homeowners and landowners about these risks 
and we advised them of the proper routes that they should take. 
As well to this end, Saskatchewan Watershed Authority is 
trying to identify the source of this contamination so we can let 
people know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, there is a public meeting tonight 
in Vanscoy and I certainly will be there and attend that meeting 
to tell them the minister didn’t have an answer to the question. 
 



November 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

Mr. Speaker, this is a matter of monitoring for water quality. In 
light of what has happened in the past in Walkerton and North 
Battleford, people in Saskatchewan learned first-hand that the 
government must be diligent in monitoring water quality. Can 
the minister tell this Assembly when the last time the water in 
this area was tested? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of 
things I would like to say. The water in this area was tested in 
the summer this year, and we have the results so we have a 
good baseline to determine what the private wells were and 
what they’ve changed over the course of the time. And as well 
this meeting this night, that the member opposite speaks about, 
is how to identify or work together with Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority. We’re working together with the local 
people so we can identify issues such as this. 
 
So I would urge the member opposite not to inflame the 
situation. We have a working meeting tonight. The local people 
are getting together to identify a committee so they can work 
with Saskatchewan Watershed Authority and not be reckless or 
foolish about this. We have this information here, we’re sharing 
it with the local people as soon as we get it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, at this meeting tonight the people 
of Vanscoy and Grandora and Asquith will want to know when 
the last time the water in this area was tested and the results 
dating back to that time. And I was wondering if the minister 
will accompany me tonight to that meeting in Vanscoy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I have no problem 
about going to the meeting tonight; we’re thinking about this. 
But again this meeting was set up ahead of time. The purpose of 
the meeting was to put together a working group of people so 
they could work with Watershed Authority to identify and work 
on the issues that they’ve identified over the past few months. 
Clearly we don’t want to inflame the issue here. We’ve got the 
information. These are private wells. We’ve been talking to the 
people giving them the information about the contamination in 
their waters. And so we’ll work to get that information out. We 
deal with this as best science guides us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for the Canadian Agricultural Income 
Stabilization Program 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier of the province. Yesterday we 

learned that . . . through the Finance minister, that the province 
has some $900 million more than it budgeted to have this year. 
Yet when we asked the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture 
as to whether they had an intention then to live up to their full 
commitment to fund the farm safety net CAIS program, the 
answer was no. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, not only that, 
but in the course of saying no remember what . . . here’s what 
the Minister of Agriculture for the province of Saskatchewan 
said about if he were to fund, if he were to keep his 
commitment and fund his share of CAIS. He said it would be 
like throwing money away, Mr. Speaker. That is the words that 
he used on page 1760 of Hansard. He said it would be like 
throwing money away. 
 
(14:15) 
 
In one of the worst years on the farm we have seen, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) crisis, in terms of the early frost and the poor 
harvest conditions, when asked about more assistance for 
farmers, this minister says it’s like throwing money away. Does 
the Premier accept that kind of conduct from his ministers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it would 
help if the member opposite listened occasionally as well as just 
shot it off. Mr. Speaker, we did give clear answers around this 
and, Mr. Speaker, very clearly what we are working on is trying 
to get a fair and just deal from the federal government. 
 
This reaction from the folks opposite is something like the 
characters who like to circle the wagons and shoot inward. The 
focus needs to be out there on a federal government which has 
put together a program that is not just and will harm all the 
people of this province. We need to make sure that the program 
is just and that it is sustainable and that with the other resources 
that we have, we can do things that will help agriculture move 
forward, Mr. Speaker. It is not just about doing these programs 
to meet business risk management. It’s about doing agriculture 
in a way that will lead us into a successful agriculture future for 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing that that minister 
would be talking about where we should be shooting inwards or 
outwards when he is busy, in the face of a farm crisis, shooting 
at rural Saskatchewan and producers. Here is exactly what the 
minister said yesterday in Hansard. He said: 
 

When we got the numbers from the federal government 
that spoke about the kind of dollars that would have to go 
into the CAIS program in this province, it did not fit with 
the very basic spirit of the nation of Canada. 
 
(He says) . . . the members opposite would have us just 
bow to that unfairness . . . and throw the money away. 

 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2004 

This side of the House does not believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
helping producers when they need help and the framework of a 
program that the government agreed to, we don’t believe that 
that’s throwing money away. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Apparently, apparently the Minister of 
Agriculture, of all people, believes that helping rural 
Saskatchewan is throwing money away. I want to know from 
this Premier, does he accept that kind of conduct? Does he 
agree with the view of his minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very clear that 
we have been working consistently to deal with a situation in 
this country which is unjust, a situation that needs to be 
addressed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 
member from Kindersley to refrain from the quantitative aspect 
of this heckling. 
 
Member for Regina Qu’Appelle, the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also 
important to note that when we were talking about the numbers 
involved in CAIS, the first numbers that we were given were in 
the neighbourhood of 250 to $360 million. And if the Sask 
Party is advocating that we should have just said yes, of course, 
we’ll sign that blank cheque, that is akin to throwing the money 
away, Mr. Speaker, throwing it into the federal government 
coffers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want to make sure that the farmers in this province are well 
protected — not just this year, but next year and into the future. 
We not only want to provide the protection of the CAIS 
program and the crop insurance program, we want to be able to 
invest in the future of agriculture in this province, in programs 
of research and development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there is a great future for agriculture 
in Saskatchewan. We are investing in that future, Mr. Speaker, 
and we want the federal government to carry their rightful 
share. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in the course of 
that answer, the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote is 
heckling, chirping from his seat. That’s right, Mr. Speaker, old 
SPUDCO himself, which underscores the fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that the only, the only people throwing money away in rural 
Saskatchewan is the NDP through things like SPUDCO. And 
it’s not their money to be thrown away, it’s the taxpayers’ 
money. 
 

This question to the minister is direct. Yesterday he said, 
standing by rural Saskatchewan and farm families . . . What he 
said was standing behind farm families was throwing money 
away. We want him to stand in his place and apologize to rural 
Saskatchewan for those comments and we want him, Mr. 
Speaker, to keep the government’s commitment to CAIS and 
support rural Saskatchewan when it’s in the time of need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I have to say the 
ridiculous spin that the member opposite is putting on to this 
issue does nothing to enhance his image or the image of his 
party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they care about agriculture in this province, if 
they really care about the farmers in this province, they want to 
stand up and get a just deal from Saskatchewan. They have 
worked together with us on some programs, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always good when we pull together to find a solution and 
especially when we’re dealing with the national government, 
Mr. Speaker. And I would like to see the members opposite, if 
they really care about Saskatchewan farmers, stand with us as 
we push for equity in our agricultural programs. If they want to 
see agriculture move forward and be successful, it is incumbent 
upon them to take those actions and to be with us as we move 
forward into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 
minister’s question is pretty simple. When he and this Premier 
and this party decide that it is time to stand up for and beside 
rural Saskatchewan, he’ll just have to look ahead of himself and 
his party and see that the Saskatchewan Party has been there all 
along. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Consider the record of this minister, Mr. Speaker. 
Consider the record. This is the same minister, when we talked 
and debated about the NDP’s plan to hike nursing fees, he 
yelled from his chair, he said it’s the right thing to do. That’s 
what he said. This minister ran around in the last election 
scaring seniors who had Sask Party lawn signs. He told them 
that if they voted for the Sask Party, they’d lose their health 
care. Now this minister is saying that standing by rural 
Saskatchewan is like throwing money away. Mr. Speaker, what 
does it take for this Premier, what does it take for this Premier 
to take that minister out to the woodshed and discipline him for 
those kinds of comments and actions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I think it really . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I recognize the 



November 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it is a sad day for the legislature when the member 
opposite, the Leader of the Opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please. I 
recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it is a sad day for the Saskatchewan legislature when the 
Leader of the Opposition gets into the kind of distortions and 
twistings of history that he is into today. It is pathetic, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I think if . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Members on this 
side, members on this side, the floor belongs to the Minister of 
Agriculture. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think if we’re going to look at agriculture and the 
history of where we have been and what we have worked at in 
this province, we need to look at the kind of things that have 
been drawn out of agriculture over the years, and the support 
that some of the members opposite gave to drawing those things 
out of the province. For example, many of them were gung-ho 
to get the Crow rate taken off, Mr. Speaker. At the most 
conservative estimates, that cost this province, that cost this 
province $300 million a year. And they like to see that . . . 
(inaudible) . . . the corresponding dollars were never put into 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Well that lasted about 30 
seconds. Now we need another 30. The Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the corresponding dollars were never put back into invest in 
value-add, which was the hope if that was taken out. Mr. 
Speaker, we recognize the importance of adding value in the 
agriculture sector, and the importance to rural Saskatchewan of 
doing that. We need the resources to be able to invest there, Mr. 
Speaker. We are working diligently to make sure that we get a 
square deal from the federal government so that we will have 
the resources to invest in a good future for agriculture. That’s 
where we’re headed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what a sad day is in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s a sad day when a government, 
when this NDP government goes to Ottawa and demands 
changes to a program that it knows is a 60/40 program. And 
then it gets those changes, Mr. Speaker, and it refuses to fund 
them. And then when pressed on their decision not to fund the 
commitments it’s made to producers, it said, it would be like 
throwing money away. In the face of what we’ve seen on the 
farm this year, helping producers, helping rural Saskatchewan, 
the minister says, is like throwing money away. 
 
That is sad, Mr. Speaker. It’s sad in terms of what that might 
mean for many farm families who want to meet their expenses, 

who want to provide for those families. It’s sad for what it 
might mean for the countless businesses across this province 
that depend on those producers to have the resources that they 
could have and should have, if the government only kept its 
word. And it’s sad when they have to get lectured by the 
Minister of Agriculture — their Minister of Agriculture — who 
says helping them is like throwing money away. I’ll give him 
another chance — stand in his place, we say to him, and 
apologize to rural Saskatchewan and our producers. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it is very 
clear to anybody that has listened, who has been a part of 
what’s going on here, that the member opposite is just engaging 
in wild distortions trying to make a storyline that’ll get picked 
up. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not going to work. Because thinking 
people know that what we are doing right now is trying to get a 
very square and just deal from the federal government so that 
we will continue to have the kind of resources that are 
necessary to invest in a prosperous future for agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we were to put those hundreds of millions of 
dollars that are drawn up in the CAIS program, and those 
hundreds of millions of dollars that really are a product of an 
inequitable system that puts Saskatchewan paying five or six 
times the provincial per capita average, Mr. Speaker, it would 
be akin to throwing those dollars away and not investing them 
in the future of agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, no wonder, no wonder rural 
Saskatchewan has no time for this Premier or that party that’s 
represented over there. The disdain that that side of the House 
holds for rural Saskatchewan is alarming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, remember what the NDP lawyers told those 
plaintiffs in SPUDCO? Remember that? We’re going to beat 
you because you’re just a bunch of dumb farmers. That’s what 
their NDP lawyers said to farmers who were facing the 
SPUDCO scandal. Now we have a Minister of Agriculture who 
wants to lecture the farm families in the province of 
Saskatchewan; who tells them that giving support, the support 
that they’ve committed to, I would suggest — I would suggest 
strongly, Mr. Speaker — giving that same support to farm 
families is like throwing money away. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
I think rural Saskatchewan would like to throw something away 
here too. I think they’d like to throw that Minister of 
Agriculture away. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I’d think they’d like to see him, Mr. Speaker, 
without these obligations and duties. I’m asking him again if 
he’ll apologize for his comments to Saskatchewan farm families 
and to rural Saskatchewan? And I’m asking this Premier to 
inform this House if he accepts this kind of conduct from his 
ministers, Mr. Speaker? And if he does he deserves the 
reputation he has in rural Saskatchewan. 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if anybody owes 
the people of rural Saskatchewan an apology it’s the member 
opposite. Mr. Speaker, we are trying to get the most for the 
people of Saskatchewan, not the least. Mr. Speaker, if we were 
to have gone ahead and signed that blank cheque . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
if we had agreed to going with the plan that Ottawa threw on us, 
Mr. Speaker, we would be accepting the fact that we should just 
take the least for the producers in this province. Mr. Speaker, 
the member opposite truly does owe the farmers and the people 
of rural Saskatchewan an apology for the distortions that have 
been put forward today and in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we want is clear, reasonable thinking about 
how we can move into a successful future of agriculture. And, 
Mr. Speaker, with all the name calling and twisting that comes 
from that side of the House we’re not going to get there. But 
with the work that we’re doing, we will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Amalgamation of School Divisions 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last four years, the school boards around 
this province have been through some pretty tumultuous times, 
but in particularly over the last six months since his 
announcement on May 13. 
 
Mr. Speaker, four years ago school boards were asked by the 
former minister to reduce by 25 per cent — a target he didn’t 
even think they could meet and they have met it, Mr. Speaker. 
But that wasn’t good enough. That wasn’t good enough. 
 
The minister decided to flex his powers and force amalgamation 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. If that isn’t bad enough, last 
Friday in a news conference, Mr. Speaker, the minister stated, 
he went on answering a question by saying that “We’ve put 
millions and millions and millions of dollars into education over 
the last number of years and school boards have not reduced the 
property tax whatsoever.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the money that the government has put in hasn’t 
even covered the increases that are responsible of this 
government such as teachers’ contracts and utility rates. Mr. 
Speaker, does the minister honestly believe that school 
divisions should reduce the property tax when they face a 
chronic, habitual underfunding of education by this NDP 
government? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite and 
I think all members in this House know that this legislature has 
voted significant new monies to education over the years. 
 
Last year we voted sufficient funds in order to fully fund the 
teachers’ salary increases and that that money has been used 
appropriately. We certainly do also believe though that we need 
to do more on property tax relief. That is why the 
supplementary estimates tabled by the Minister of Finance 
provide $55 million this year and next year for property tax 
relief that will go directly to property taxpayers. That was a 
commitment we made; that is a commitment we will keep. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, last month the Minister of 
Learning accused school boards of being irresponsible with the 
money he just said that they’ve given them. On October 7 the 
minister is stated as saying, and I quote from the Leader-Post. 
Minister Thomson is stated, and the quote goes: 
 

We’re trying to find a school system that is sustainable to 
make sure the resources aren’t . . (get this) squandered in 
board rooms . . . (Mr. Speaker). 
 

Is that what he thinks of school boards around this province is 
that they squander the money that they are given by the 
provincial government? 
 
Is it the same type of squandering that has gone on around the 
cabinet table when this government over the last four years has 
put $4 million into amalgamation and as of May 13 thrown that 
completely out of the window because it made no difference 
whatsoever, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Is it the same cabinet table that has squandered $35 million on a 
SPUDCO deal that they think is a great deal? 
 
Mr. Speaker, does this minister truly believe that school boards 
around this province squander money? And if he does, please 
inform us which boards he means. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to say that the members 
opposite certainly deserve an A for creative writing today. 
They’ve managed to work SPUDCO into every one of their 
questions. SPUDCO has nothing to do with education, believe it 
or not. This’ll be shocking to many of the members opposite, 
but it’s true. 
 
Let me say this with regard to the issue around spending money 
in boardrooms as opposed to in the classrooms. Everyone 
understands that we need to make sure the maximum amount of 
money is available to the classrooms. As I said this morning to 
the school board associations, I think that the trustees have done 



November 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

a good job in dealing with the system they have in front of 
them. 
 
But let’s be very clear about this. The system that we have in 
place today with 81 boards, some of whom have no schools, 
many of whom have very few students, does not ensure that the 
maximum amount of money is spent in classrooms as opposed 
to on administrative structures. This reform that we have 
introduced, that we will complete, will provide better resources 
for classrooms, for teachers, and for the schools. And that is 
why we have undertaken it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely astonishing that 
the minister would stand in this House and say that losing $35 
million on a rotten potato deal has nothing to do with education. 
It has something to do with every citizen in this province, 
including the students of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve just been at the SSBA 
conference for the last three days, as I know the minister has 
stopped in at the odd time. And school boards around this 
province are saying the plan that this minister is introducing is a 
province wide and an inch thick, Mr. Speaker. It has no plans 
for future success because, Mr. Speaker, the plan simply hasn’t 
been thought out. He is expecting these school boards to take 
over as of January 1, 2006. School boards around the province 
are saying that just is too tight of a timeline. 
 
I’m asking the minister today, will he at least listen to some of 
the school boards — because he hasn’t so far in any of the 
consultation — will he at least listen to some of the school 
boards and set the implementation back to at least July 1, 2006 
or August 1 and give the newly elected school boards at least 
another six months to implement his plan which is that thick? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, you know, on the one hand the 
critic argues that the agenda is so deep and so broad that it’s 
going to take more time to implement. On the other hand he 
says, oh, it’s just an inch thick and there’s nothing to it. Well, 
which is it? 
 
I would say to the member opposite this. The school boards that 
I have talked to as I have travelled around the province argue 
that they need to get the stability put back into the system, that 
we should get the reforms undertaken, and we should provide 
that path forward. That is what we’re doing. The boundaries 
will come into effect on January 1 of ’06. Later today I will 
introduce legislation to allow for school board elections in ’05. 
That’s the approach we’re going to move forward. That is what 
boards are telling me that they think is necessary in order to get 
the system moved forward and so we’ve got a sustainable, 
affordable education system. 
 
That’s our commitment; that’s our approach; that’s what we’re 

doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Crown 
Management Board. 
 

Utility Rate Rebate 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased 
today to announce that our government has met its commitment 
to provide Saskatchewan families with the lowest cost utility 
rate bundle in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we made this 
commitment a year ago. We promised Saskatchewan families 
that they would enjoy the lowest costs in the country for a 
bundle of basic utility services that includes residential 
electricity and natural gas, basic phone service, and car 
insurance. We said we would have the lowest cost this year and 
every year. And, Mr. Speaker, we have achieved that goal 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be providing every Saskatchewan family 
with a utility rebate of $137. By doing this, the total cost of our 
utility rate bundle for 2004 will be the lowest in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, every household will 
receive the same $137 rebate. That is the fairest way to provide 
the rebate. We will not be providing cash rebates and the rebate 
is meant to help pay for utility costs so it will be provided only 
as a credit on utility bills. 
 
Most people will get the rebate as a credit on their residential 
SaskTel phone bill in December. SaskTel charges will be 
subtracted from the credit until the full credit is used even if this 
takes a few months. If people do not normally get a SaskTel 
bill, they will arrange to apply the rebate as a credit to their 
SaskPower or SaskEnergy bill. Application forms will be 
available in December on CIC’s (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) Web site at www.cicorp.sk.ca or 
by calling our toll free number at 1-866-366-6611. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people own our public utilities and 
they receive many benefits from that collective ownership. This 
utility bundle rebate is one more of those benefits. And with 
this rebate, our government is keeping a very important 
commitment to Saskatchewan families. They will, Mr. Speaker, 
enjoy the lowest cost utility rate bundle in Canada this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government does not take commitments 
lightly. When we make a commitment, Mr. Speaker, we keep 
that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2004 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to hear the minister 
having something to say about the utility rate bungle . . . I’m 
sorry, I meant the utility rate bundle promise. She and her 
colleagues have had so much to say on this issue in recent 
months. 
 
In September last year, Mr. Speaker, the Premier had a type of 
epiphany and promised the lowest cost bundle of utility rates in 
Canada. Then the Minister of CIC tried to interpret the 
Premier’s vision and did a little bungling of her own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, initially the minister didn’t know if this was going 
to be a one-year promise or a four-year promise. And, Mr. 
Speaker, here’s what the minister told the media this morning. 
She said, and I quote: 
 

Obviously, I was confused too. I came in with not a lot of 
knowledge about the commitment. 

 
Now those aren’t words that exactly instill real confidence. And 
here’s what the Premier had to say about the rebates this 
morning. He said, and I quote, “It’s not a perfect mechanism”. 
Mr. Speaker, the first time in several years, I have to say that 
I’m in complete agreement with the Premier on his analysis. 
 
This plan is a rush job to paper over a poorly conceived 
promise. The plan is not fair. The minister will get exactly the 
same rebate as a single mother with three children living in 
Cumberland House or Moosomin or any other community. This 
plan is inconsistent since not all of the $54.1 million is actually 
going to consumers. Administration will eat up some of that 
amount. And this is all happening while SaskPower rates are 
going up substantially, with only a small portion of that rate 
increase coming back in the form of a rebate. 
 
This NDP government is trying to say Merry Christmas to the 
people of Saskatchewan with an early Christmas gift. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of this province won’t forget that this 
government has too often played Scrooge instead of Santa. 
That’s bad enough, but being bought with one’s own money 
really is an insult. Lower utility rate increases would be a much 
better gift for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Any further ministerial statements? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 76, The Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 76, The Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Public Works and Services Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 77, 
The Public Works and Services Act be now introduced and read 
for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 77, The Public Works and Services Act be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation Repeal Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 78, 
The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation Repeal 
Act be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation that Bill No. 78, The Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation Repeal Act be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 



November 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 79, The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 79, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 80 — The Education Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 

2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 80, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 80, The Education Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 

Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(14:45) 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, I wish to 
advise members that I am tabling the members’ accountability 
and disclosure reports for the fiscal year ended March 31, the 
year 2004, and furthermore that I’m tabling the audited 
financial statements, auditor’s opinion, and schedule of fixed 
assets for the government and opposition caucuses for the fiscal 
year ended March 31, the year 2004. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the policy field committees — the Economy Committee and 
the Crown and Central Agencies Committee — I move the 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:47. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1772 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1773 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1773 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1774 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1775 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1775 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1775 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1776 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1776 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1776 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1776 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Dr. Sally Mahood Honoured by College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1776 
 Saskatoon Debaters Earn Invitation to Oxford 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1776 
 Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres Awareness Week 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1777 
 Lorie Annand Receives Award of Distinction 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1777 
 Murad Al-Katib and SaskCan Pulse Honoured 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1777 
 Camp Easter Seal Celebrates 50th Anniversary 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1778 
 Colleen Bailey Honoured by the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts Councils 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1778 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Water Quality in the Vanscoy, Grandora and Asquith Areas 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1778 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1778 
 Funding for the Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1779 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1779 
 Amalgamation of School Divisions 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1782 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1782 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Utility Rate Rebate 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1783 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1783 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 76 — The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Amendment Act, 2004 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1784 
 Bill No. 77 — The Public Works and Services Act 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1784 
 Bill No. 78 — The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation Repeal Act 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1784 
 Bill No. 79 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1785 
 Bill No. 80 — The Education Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1785 
TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1785 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


