















































Hansard: March 22, 2004


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 39 
 March 22, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with the 
widespread concern that the government may in its upcoming 
budget apply a broad-based sales tax which would include 
meals, I’ve been asked to present the following petition on 
behalf of my constituents. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from constituents from the 
community of Abbey, as well as Shackleton, Lancer, Elrose, 
Moosomin, and White City. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the Arcola, Regina, 
Kisbey, Carlyle area, and none from Newfoundland today. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, a number of communities in my constituencies are 
sending forward a petition that I’d like to present on their 
behalf. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 

not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from Canora, 
and Kamsack, Sturgis, Rama, the Cote First Nations. And 
Yorkton and Melville are also included in the position . . . in the 
petitions I present today. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the Commission on Kindergarten to Grade 12 
Education’s recommendation to expand the provincial 
sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do not tax our 
food. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Tisdale, 
Watson, Codette, basically all over the northern part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
for fairness for Crown lease holders. It’s addressed to the Hon. 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and legislature 
assembled. Mr. Speaker, it is concerned that there are 
indications that the government of Saskatchewan is 
contemplating major changes to its lease policy for Crown land. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land leases. . . lessees maintain their first option to 
renew those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Lucky Lake and Demaine in the constituency of 
Rosetown-Elrose. And I am pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the expansion of the PST (provincial sales 
tax). The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

Esterhazy, Stockholm, Saskatoon, Windthorst, Yorkton, 
Tantallon, Yarbo, and the city of Melville, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition I would like 
to present on behalf of several of the signatures from the 
Esterhazy area. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the raising the PST on restaurant 
meals, or putting it on to restaurant meals. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing’s Kindergarten 
to Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people, people 
from Fort Qu’Appelle, Lebret, Vibank, and Sedley. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
from people concerned about the proposed expansion of the 
PST. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission of Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by over 400 people from 
Estevan, Lampman, Macoun, Bienfait, Roche Percee, Midale, 
Alameda, Redvers, Carnduff, and even Anchorage, Alaska. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well this 
afternoon on behalf of the citizens concerned about an 
expansion of the provincial sales tax. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
Signatures on the petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities like St. Brieux, Pilger, Melfort, Regina, Star City, 
Weldon, Kinistino, Naicam, all through the Northeast. 
 
I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition with citizens concerned about the increase and 
expansion of the PST. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, cover a number of 
constituencies. They’re from Melfort, Spalding, Lumsden, 
Humboldt, LeRoy, Watrous, Muenster, Prince Albert, Elfros, 
Annaheim, Burr, St. Gregor, Quill Lake, Bruno, Pilger, 
Saskatoon, Lanigan, Rama, Invermay, Englefeld, Watson, 
Redvers, Nipawin, Lake Lenore, Rosetown, Kamsack, Canora, 
Guernsey, and Airdrie, Alberta. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, but also signed by residents throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned with the expansion of the 
PST. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of Yellow Grass, 
Weyburn, Lumsden, McTaggart, Lang, Midale, Radville, 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

Regina, Osage, Pangman, Fort Qu’Appelle, Stoughton, 
Avonlea, Moose Jaw, Khedive, Coronach, Goodwater, Minton, 
Saskatoon, and also Red Deer, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from citizens who are extremely concerned with this 
proposed tax on meals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Rockglen and Fife Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Turtleford 
Shellbrook, pardon me, for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s implementation of the possible tax on meals. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Rosthern, 
Duck Lake, Prince Albert, Laird, and Waldheim. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
here concerned about putting PST on restaurant meals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission of Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Signed by the good citizens of Govan, Regina, Liberty, Colfax, 
Stalwart, Imperial, Craik, Bethune, Nokomis. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of concerned citizens worried about the expansion of the 
PST, specifically with the cut to jobs that it will cause for young 
people. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission of Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from many communities but 
primarily from the community of Kerrobert. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning the financing of kindergarten to 
grade 12 recommendation to extend the provincial sales 
tax on meals; 
 
A petition concerning the renewal of Crown land lessees; 
 
A petition concerning the dispute over the water level of 
the Qu’Appelle river system; and finally 
 
A petition concerning the repairs to Highway No. 22. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker presents the 
first report of the Standing Committee on House Services, 
which is hereby tabled. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Regina Douglas Park, that the first report 
of the Standing Committee on House Services be now 
concurred in. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Regina Douglas Park, that the first 
report of the Standing Committee on House Services be now 
concurred in. 
 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
(13:45) 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 8 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization: have the assessments for pasture land for 
2003-2004 been adjusted in relation to the emergence of 
the BSE case in May of 2003; and if not, why not; and 
what measures are being considered to offset this? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all the members of the 
House, I would like to introduce a special delegation that we 
have sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is a six-person delegation of gender equity officials from 
South Africa. This is a working tour by officials of the South 
African Government Gender Machinery, specifically officials 
from the Office of the Status of Women and their departmental 
gender focal point persons from the provinces of Limpopo and 
Free State. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will attempt names but I apologize to our guests 
if I . . . if they aren’t quite right on. And I would ask that you 
please stand when I call your name: Ms. Masawa, who is the 
deputy director, the Office of the Status of Women in Free 
State; Ms. Tsotetsi, special program officer, Municipality and 
Local Government of Free State; Mr. Daniel Nkala, special 
program officer, the Health-Gender Focal Point in Free State; 
Ms. Ntsala, special program officer, the Office of the Premier in 
Free State; and Ms. Kgare, senior administrative assistant, 
Office of the Premier, State of Limpopo; and Ms. Phasha, 
senior administrative assistant, Office of the Premier, State of 
Limpopo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our special guests are accompanied by Corinne 
Bokith, the executive director from the Status of Women office; 
Donna Braun, senior policy analyst from the Status of Women; 
and Irene Bauer, deputy chief of protocol. 
 
This visit is funded by the Canadian International Development 
Agency. And, Mr. Speaker, as we all know we live in a very 
small world, and any chance that we have for an exchange of 
ideas and programs benefits us all, right across the world. 
 

So, please, I ask that the House welcome our guests to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I 
also would like to introduce a variety of women’s groups that 
are here in attendance today for a member’s statement to help 
recognize International Women’s Day. 
 
Seated on the floor with us today is Georgina Heselton and her 
husband, Allan, from the DisAbled Women’s Network of 
Saskatchewan. In the west gallery . . . Or in the Speaker’s 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, there’s Tania Theriault and Christiane 
Soucy from the Fédération provinciale des fransaskoises. Also, 
Francine Proulx-Kenzle, the Assemblée communautaire 
fransaskoise. And Amy Stensrud from the Provincial 
Association of Transition Houses. 
 
Also we have Shirley Leibel and Laura Ross from the 
Provincial Council of Women; Kripa Sekher from the 
Saskatchewan Action Committee on the Status of Women; 
Sherri Doell from the Sexual Assault Services of Saskatchewan; 
Laura Small from the Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan. 
Also, Bonnie Roach and Allia Koback from the Women Today 
Canada. 
 
And these women . . . women’s organizations are accompanied 
by our officials from the Status of Women office — Corinne 
Bokitch, Donna Braun, Melody Wood, Julie Johnson, Jocelyn 
Mohr, and Gail Quinney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my role as Minister Responsible for the Status 
of Women it’s been a privilege to work with these women’s 
groups and have the opportunity to travel around the province 
and see the work that they do in our communities and the 
services they provide and the support that they provide to 
women throughout the province. It truly has been a privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on International Women’s Day and throughout 
this month I would hope that and ask that all members of the 
Assembly welcome these groups to the Assembly and give 
them a warm round of thanks for the work that they do do. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister to welcome the delegation from the provinces of 
Limpopo and Free State. And I’d also like to welcome the 
officials from the Status of Women and the protocol office. 
 
I understand that Saskatchewan has twinned with the province 
of Free State since 1995 and that there’s been some beneficial 
partnerships have taken place. I’m hoping that the delegation 
will consider sharing their weather with us as well and maybe 
taking home some of our snow when they return. 
 
And I’d also like to welcome the women that are from the 
various women’s groups that came, representing the 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

International Women’s Day. And I thank you all for your part 
in making Saskatchewan a very better place to live. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
minister in introducing Laura Small. Laura and I were 
colleagues at Western Economic Diversification. It’s a pleasant 
surprise to see you here this afternoon. And I’d also like to add 
that Laura is the new president of the Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce. So welcome, Laura. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to my colleagues in the legislature, it’s a pleasure to introduce 
today three guests who have joined us on the floor: Cheryl and 
Gerald Sim who farm in the Rosetown area and their son, Trent, 
who is a mixed operator in the Swift Current area. I’d ask all 
members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with 
pleasure that I introduce to you some friends in the Speaker’s 
gallery, to all members of the Assembly as well, of course. 
Seated in your gallery — if they would stand please — John 
and Deb Broadly from Meadow Lake who are owners and 
operators of Meadow North Agencies. I had the pleasure of 
visiting with them as well on Friday evening at the brokers’ 
convention in Saskatoon where there were many other brokers. 
 
And they have been long-time friends and it’s just great to have 
them here with us and with me today so please join me in 
welcoming them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 
today to introduce to you and welcome to the legislature 25 
students from the Southeast Regional College in Weyburn. Mr. 
Speaker, they are seated in the east gallery and also with the 
students today are their instructors, Twyla Molnar and Bev 
Kulach, and college coordinator, Laura Hamilton. 
 
I hope you enjoy your stay today and I’m looking forward to 
meeting with you in about an hour or so, and I’d like all 
members of the Legislative Assembly to help me in welcoming 
them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Coronation 

Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly a good friend of mine seated in the west gallery, 
Gunnar Passmore, who’s well known to many people 
throughout the province as a union representative with the Sheet 
Metal Workers Association. Gunnar and his wife, Dee, are great 
people who live in the village of Sedley and as I’ve already 
stated Gunnar certainly does his work broadly around the 
province and Dee works as a nurse in Regina. Anyway, please 
join me in welcoming Gunnar Passmore. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

International Women’s Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 8 was 
International Women’s Day, a key date for women worldwide 
as evidenced by our provincial, national, and international 
guests that are here today. 
 
Although International Women’s Day has come and gone, I 
want to draw attention to this important date to inform the 
members of the House that in Saskatchewan we have come to 
celebrate International Women’s Day throughout the month of 
March. 
 
International Women’s Day marks women’s efforts over the 
years to attain justice and equality for themselves and for their 
children. Today more women have their own independent 
sources of income; more women are entering jobs denied them 
in the past; more women are attaining higher levels of 
education; more women than men are starting their own 
business. These are positive gains, yet many women still face 
barriers to achieving success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is taking action to advance 
women’s equality throughout the province through the action 
plan for Saskatchewan women which was released last fall. The 
importance of International Women’s Day was confirmed as a 
priority in the action plan through the government’s 
commitment to the annual support of International Women’s 
Day events. Thanks to a grant program through Saskatchewan 
Labour’s Status of Women office, women’s groups and 
organizations that serve women are holding activities in 
communities all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the legislature and the people 
of this great province to join me in recognizing and celebrating 
the accomplishments of women in the home, in the workplace, 
in our communities, and in all of society every day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

International Day for the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, and again a very warm welcome to 
our special guests in the gallery today. On behalf of the official 
opposition I am pleased to bring greetings to the delegates from 
the provinces of Limpopo and Free State in South Africa, as 
well as those accompanying you on your tour here in Regina. 
We sincerely hope that your visit will not only be informative 
and enjoyable but that you’ll find much useful information on 
government organizations, policy-making, legislation, and best 
practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in welcoming this delegation from South Africa I 
am both honoured and humbled — honoured that they have 
chosen to be here with us today and humbled because I know 
they come from a country that has seen much horror and 
bloodshed due to oppression and racial discrimination. 
 
While most of us have grown up in a peaceful and harmonious 
society here in Canada, we’ve also had our own clashes 
between races and culture. While we can’t begin to know the 
hardships and personal struggles that those living under this 
kind of oppression face on a daily basis, we all have a 
responsibility to see that we’re never part of this shameful 
practice and that we do whatever we can to stop it. 
 
Yesterday, March 21, was the International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and there is a reason why 
this day is honoured worldwide. Racial discrimination doesn’t 
stop at borders. It can be passed from one generation to the next 
and it breeds on fear and ignorance. Through understanding and 
acceptance of other races and cultures, we will learn that we are 
indeed all equal, and that diversity and respect go hand in hand. 
 
I ask all members to recognize March 21 as the International 
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

Saskatchewan Broadcaster Harry Dekker 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great sadness 
that I rise today to mourn the loss of a great Saskatchewan 
broadcaster. 
 
Harry Dekker passed away over the weekend at the age of 81. 
Mr. Dekker was a pioneer in the Saskatchewan broadcast 
industry who will be remembered for a great many things that 
he accomplished throughout his lifetime. 
 
Named to the Canadian Broadcast Hall of Fame in 2001, Mr. 
Dekker took an interest in broadcasting at an early age — 14 
years old in 1936, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Dekker got his start with 
CFQC Radio in Saskatoon at the age of 18, working up the 
ranks to program director by the late ’40’s. In 1951, he married 
broadcast colleague Christine Wiebe. The two went on to host 
the first-ever husband and wife radio show in Western Canada, 
the Double Dekker Breakfast Club. The couple moved the show 

to CJNB North Battleford three years later, and under his 
leadership as station manager CJNB underwent two frequency 
changes, power increases, and the construction of a new studio 
and office. 
 
Mr. Dekker will be remembered by his many fans, colleagues, 
friends, and those who grew to love and know him over the 
course of his career. 
 
Most of his sons, save one, in fact went into broadcasting and 
he was also the mentor for a number of other radio personalities 
we know today including John Gormley and Murray Wood, Mr. 
Speaker. The only son that didn’t go into radio, Chris, is a 
friend of mine and today, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all of the 
opposition members in the Assembly, I would like to extend our 
sincere condolences to the Dekker family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racism  
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, on March 21, 1960, a group 
of demonstrators gathered in the town of Sharpeville, South 
Africa, to protest the so-called pass laws that restricted their 
freedom of movement under the apartheid regime of that time. 
 
According to reports, the crowd was neither violent nor 
threatening, and yet the South African police felt threatened. 
They opened fire on the crowd, and 40 seconds later 69 people 
were dead and 180 wounded. Among the victims were women 
and children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to commemorate the Sharpeville massacre the 
United Nations proclaimed March 21 as International Day for 
the Elimination of Racism. Canada was one of the first nations 
to support this proclamation, and now over 40 years later we 
continue to dedicate March 21 to all past and present victims of 
racism, discrimination, and intolerance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, racism in its many forms is still a tragic reality in 
many societies in the world, including ours. Some of it is overt, 
but most of it is silent and institutional which makes it difficult 
to overcome. 
 
(14:00) 
 
But we do know that racism grows out of ignorance and fear 
and that it can only be dispelled through education and 
understanding. To that end, let us continue to work together 
here in Saskatchewan to eliminate racism, celebrate diversity, 
and make social justice and equality a reality for all people. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Fire in Hog Barn 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday, 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

March 18 a massive fire consumed a farrowing barn which is 
part of a hog operation for the Bear Hills Pork Producers near 
the community of Perdue; 400 sows and 3,500 piglets were lost 
in this fire, creating a substantial economic setback for the 
operation. Fortunately none of the employees were injured. 
 
Thanks to the efforts of 25 firefighters from the Perdue and 
Biggar fire departments, and the assistance of some of the local 
farmers who hauled water to the site, the breeding, gestation 
barn, and finishing barns were saved, leaving hope that the 19 
employees that work at the operation will be able to retain their 
jobs. 
 
Earlier this month the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool announced its 
plan to sell the hog operations, leaving some question as to the 
future of this site. A spokesperson for the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, which is the majority shareholder in the company, has 
said that it’s too early to really determine what’s going to 
happen at that site when it comes to whether the barn will be 
rebuilt. 
 
I would like to thank those 25 firefighters from Perdue and 
Biggar as well as the farmers that assisted in battling the blaze. I 
would also like to extend my regards to the operators of the 
barns and express my hope that the 19 employees at that 
operation will retain their employment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

Rural Women’s Month in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. This year, in 
recognition of the ongoing contributions of rural women to the 
development of this province, March has been declared Rural 
Women’s Month in Saskatchewan. 
 
Requests for this proclamation came from numerous sources 
including women’s institutes across the province, the 
Saskatchewan representative to the Women’s Advisory 
Committee of the National Farmers Union, the Whitewood 
Women’s Network, and the Partners for Rural Family Support 
of Humboldt. 
 
Rural Women’s Month provides us an opportunity to raise 
awareness and foster appreciation of the varied and vital roles 
that rural women play and have always played in building this 
province. Whether we’re talking about Saskatchewan’s 
economic development or the enlightened social policies the 
province has put in place over the years, the contributions made 
by rural women have been immeasurable 
 
Rural women have had and continue to have a huge impact on 
the development of health care, education, and social services in 
Saskatchewan. They serve as volunteers, small-business 
owners, service providers, and leaders in their communities, and 
they’re also one-half of most of the farm operations in the 
province, if not farmers in their own right. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to acknowledge the contributions 
that rural women have made to this province, from 

homesteading days to present, as well as to thank all those 
groups and individuals whose caring, time, and effort have 
made Rural Women Month in Saskatchewan a success. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

World Water Day 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to share 
with my colleagues in this Assembly the importance of today, 
March 22, which is World Water Day. 
 
The United Nations declared March 22 to be World Water Day 
back in 1992 to recognize the importance of this very important 
natural resource. And after the tragic events that unfolded in 
Walkerton, Ontario, as well as in North Battleford, quality 
water is not something that anyone should take for granted. 
 
According to the United Nations, Mr. Speaker, 1 billion people 
around the world do not have access to safe drinking water. At a 
special world leaders’ summit in 2000, it was pledged cut in 
half by the year 2015 the amount of people who are unable to 
reach or afford safe drinking water. 
 
The theme of World Water Day is water and disaster. And its 
goal is to enhance awareness towards preventing water-related 
disasters. I am sure all members of this Assembly will take a 
moment today to reflect upon the importance of World Water 
Day and the access to safe drinking water. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Surgical Waiting Lists 
 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this week 
the Saskatoon Health District begins cancelling so-called 
elective surgeries in order to save $200,000. The head of 
orthopedic surgery says patients are already waiting up to three 
and a half years for surgery and these cancellations will increase 
the waiting time by a couple of months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are already waiting far too 
long for surgery. The question to the Premier is this: why is his 
government allowing that wait to grow even longer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 
would be glad, of course, to speak to specifics. But I do want to 
say today on the very important eve of a federal budget, the 
challenges facing health care across Canada, whether it be in 
our emergency wards, whether it be in waiting lists — and this, 
Mr. Speaker, is true across Canada — will need to be addressed 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

by a greater federal input in health care funding in Canada. 
 
Tomorrow, Canadians I believe wait with baited breath to see if 
the national government in Ottawa will, in fact, demonstrate 
their concern for the health care of Canadians by improving the 
level of fiscal and federal funding for health care across 
Canada. 
 
As we challenge with shortening our waiting lists in 
Saskatchewan, as we make the appropriate and necessary 
changes, if we are going to sustain publicly funded medicare for 
Canadians for the long term, much will be riding on what 
happens tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it is important that this government 
take responsibility for health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cheryl Sim of Rosetown is one of these people on 
the waiting list. She’s just 57 years old, but she’s suffering from 
a pinched nerve at the base of her spine due to two deteriorating 
vertebrae. 
 
Cheryl went on the waiting list July 2003, but while she was 
waiting for surgery on her back, her health declined further and 
she needed to have her left hip replaced. So in December she 
was placed on a different waiting list for hip-replacement 
surgery. While Cheryl waits on a waiting list, she’s suffering a 
domino effect of increasing health problems. The joints are 
suffering under the strain, as you can imagine, and she’s been 
forced into a wheelchair. 
 
Cheryl Sim is one example of a patient who is forced to suffer 
for months and years waiting for so-called elective surgery. To 
the Premier, how long must Cheryl wait? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the previous 
question, the member opposite raised the issue around the cases 
that were changed in Saskatoon this month. Of those cases — 
there are about 90 patients — 25 of them received their care 
sooner, and 6 of them decided they didn’t want to go ahead with 
the surgery, and the others are being done in the first three 
weeks of April. So I just wanted to make sure I corrected the 
statements that the member made there. 
 
As it relates to all of the surgery in Saskatchewan, we are 
working very carefully to develop the best system in Canada 
around tracking the surgery. Patients will get care and our 
ultimate target, as we announced this morning, is 18 months on 
elective surgery, but all surgeries will be assessed in six 
categories. We will have optimum times for all of those things 
— first place anywhere in Canada that’s done that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While Cheryl Sim is 
being shuffled from one waiting list to another, notwithstanding 
targets of 18 months, every day her pain gets worse, her 
mobility gets worse, and her ability to function becomes more 
limited. Cheryl says, and I quote: 
 

I hear my situation referred to as non-life threatening, my 
surgery requirements elective — as though they are a 
whimsical choice I have made. This illness threatens my 
life every day. It holds me hostage in my home and denies 
me many choices you take for granted. The system is not 
working. 

 
Close the quote. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, when is Cheryl 
Sim going to get the surgery she desperately needs and 
deserves? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My concern is 
for individual patients like Mrs. Sim, and I know all of us have 
that concern. We end up then trying to make sure that our 
system works to provide care on a regular, predictable basis. 
 
In Saskatchewan the Canadian Institute for Health Information 
shows that we have the highest rate of hip replacements in the 
country along with Alberta. So we’re providing many of these 
services, but we have a backlog. We know that; we’re working 
towards that. And we anticipate that we’ll have some 
information about that in the coming weeks. 
 
But what we want to do is to make sure that we have care for 
those people in a priority basis and in a fair-ways basis and an 
open basis — and that’s what our Surgical Care Network is 
going to do because we want to be able to provide good care for 
all of our Saskatchewan residents, including Mrs. Sim. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 
minister would talk about priorities because even though the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) health system is failing her 
badly, here’s what she goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

I know there are others waiting far longer than I. There are 
many with death-threatening symptoms whom are system 
is failing at a growing rate but it seems to me that pitting us 
against each other based on who might die first is totally 
barbaric.  
 
Surely the cost of my internment in a total care facility 
which will become necessary without intervention far 
outweighs the cost of the treatment I’ve been judged 
unworthy of. 
 

Mr. Speaker, how much longer will Cheryl have to wait? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we work with the 
professionals — the surgeons and others within the system — 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

and we also have in our new Surgical Care Network, surgical 
care coordinators who can answer questions for patients, make 
sure that they go back for further consultation with the doctors 
if it requires that they move in the whole waiting list. 
 
But one of our challenges clearly is to understand how and why 
people wait in the system. And we have been operating on 
anecdote and stories and things that don’t relate to actual facts 
for many years. But in Saskatchewan we are going to have the 
information that will be provided by the surgeons, by the health 
administration people, so that we actually have the ability to 
manage and put resources so that people like Mrs. Sim can have 
some very clear target time frame for when their surgery is 
going to be done. 
 
That’s what we want to do. We want to provide the best care we 
can for our Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that anecdotal story and her 
family are here today, so the minister will have every 
opportunity to deal directly with this situation. And I put it quite 
simply through you to the Minister of Health: when will Cheryl 
get the surgery she needs? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the surgeries are provided in 
Saskatchewan on the advice of the doctors and surgeons who 
are involved related to the space that’s available in our 
operating rooms. They set the priorities. We work together with 
them to make sure they have the best information possible. We 
will continue to do that, working with the professionals because 
that’s what we have to do. 
 
Ultimately though, it goes right back to the Premier’s earlier 
response. If we are going to maintain a health system that has a 
standard across Canada, which is our national medicare system, 
we need the federal participation. We need the dollars that come 
on a basis that makes sure that every Canadian gets the best 
care possible. We’ve been taking a real kicking in that area. 
 
We also have the other problems with equalization which are 
also of a concern to the province of Saskatchewan. All of those 
issues do relate to how we provide services, but we’re going to 
make the best use of the dollars that we’ve got to help 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Termination of Director of Emergency Medicine 
at Royal University Hospital 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my questions are 
for the Premier. Two weeks ago the NDP fired Dr. Jon Witt as 
the head of the emergency medicine at the Royal University 
Hospital for expressing serious concerns about understaffing 
and patient safety. 

Last week the Saskatchewan Party released letters of support 
for Dr. Jon Witt from all of the other doctors and nurses that 
work with him at RUH (Royal University Hospital). And today 
I want to table four more letters of support for Dr. Witt from 
emergency room physicians across Canada. 
 
The chief of emergency medicine at Toronto East General 
Hospital calls the NDP decision to fire Dr. Witt “appalling”. 
The chief of emergency medicine at St. Michael’s Hospital in 
Toronto writes this of Dr. Witt and I quote: 
 

You did what we all . . . try to do every day: the right thing. 
Advocating for our patients and for the quality of care in 
our . . . (emergency rooms) is . . . the reason we were hired 
in the first place. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister do the right thing today and 
reinstate Dr. Witt as head of emergency medicine at Royal 
University Hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there were some challenges 
in the emergency ward at the Royal University Hospital in 
Saskatoon. Those were raised with me. I raised them with the 
senior managers, administrators, doctors in charge of the 
Saskatoon Health Authority and they have made some decisions 
around how they’re going to move forward to make sure that 
patients get good care at that emergency ward and the other 
emergency wards that they have in their area to take care of. 
 
We will continue to work together with them because they are 
working on the ground, and they will make sure that the patient 
care is the best that’s possible. That’s how this government 
works. We work with the professionals and others who are 
running the system because that’s the way that it’s important to 
do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Witt wrote a letter to the 
minister raising serious concerns about patient safety due to 
understaffing. But the minister says that Dr. Witt didn’t follow 
the right process and couldn’t substantiate his claims, and so he 
was fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the doctors and nurses who work with Dr. 
Witt, along with ER (emergency room) physicians across 
Canada, support him. And yet the minister says Dr. Witt didn’t 
follow the right process and didn’t substantiate his concern. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the words of dozens of front-line health 
care professionals isn’t good enough, maybe this information 
will be. The Saskatchewan Party has acquired a briefing note 
from the Saskatoon Health Region on ER waiting times at 
Royal University Hospital. It says the average wait time to see a 
doctor after entering emergency department with someone 
having a heart attack was 24 minutes. 
 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, is it acceptable to this NDP government that 
someone having a heart attack has to wait almost half an hour to 
see a doctor once he gets into the emergency room? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we work with the 
professionals who are monitoring and working in the 
emergency wards, and their job is to make sure that the care is 
provided there in a safe basis. 
 
I know that some allegations were made by Dr. Witt. He was 
given opportunity in . . . through the Saskatoon Health 
Authority processes to substantiate those allegations. The 
information I have was that he could not or would not 
substantiate those allegations, and they have been dealing with 
him. 
 
If there are further issues that are arising in the emergency 
ward, they will be clearly raised with the Saskatoon Health 
Authority and with the doctors there. And we will make sure 
that the patient care for people in Saskatoon and area is the best 
that it can be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Dr. 
Witt and the emergency room professionals at RUH hospital are 
indeed health care professionals who are advocating and 
expressing concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the information acquired from the 
Saskatoon Health Region, the average waiting time for someone 
presenting with angina, a precursor to serious and immediate 
heart problems, is 45 minutes. The average waiting time to see a 
doctor for someone going to the emergency with chest pain is 
one hour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, medical professionals often describe the first 60 
minutes after a patient suffers a heart attack as the golden hour. 
It is critical for patients to get to a hospital, see a doctor, and 
have treatment initiated as soon as possible. And yet this report, 
which was tabled by Dr. Witt to the health care system in 
Saskatoon, says that it takes at least 30 minutes to see a doctor. 
 
Will the minister explain why he didn’t view this unacceptable 
waiting time as hard evidence of serious problems with 
understaffing and patient safety at Royal University Hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member opposite has referred to a 
report which I do not have, so I would ask that he table that. I 
also ask him to table the two letters he referred to on Friday, 
which I have been unable to find, related to support for Dr. Witt 
so that I can further investigate those. 
 
But what I would say is that we have some very capable, 
professional people who are providing care in the Saskatoon 
Health Authority, in all three of the emergency wards, and they 
are working together with their senior management to make 

sure that good care is being provided in Saskatoon. 
 
I think the appropriate place to sort out a lot of these care 
management issues is in the Saskatoon Health Authority. But 
when the member opposite raises them in this House, then I will 
be finding out exactly what happens. But I need the information 
that he’s got, and I would ask him to provide that. 
 
Our goal is to make sure that our health system provides good 
care at all times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister relies so heavily on the senior management of the 
Saskatoon Health District. All of this information was in their 
hands, but I will be pleased to table it here as well. 
 
The hard truth is that Dr. Witt did the right thing by raising 
legitimate issues related to understaffing and patient safety. And 
for that, despite the excuses by this minister, they fired him. In 
so doing, the NDP have poisoned the environment at Royal 
University Hospital and created a huge barrier between the staff 
at RUH and the health region administration. 
 
It is finally time for the minister to take positive action. Will he 
do the right thing – reinstate Dr. Jon Witt as the head of 
emergency medicine at Royal University Hospital, and then 
launch an independent investigation into the issues raised by 
Dr. Witt with regard to understaffing and patient safety, headed 
by an out-of-province emergency medical professional? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the senior doctors and 
management in the Saskatoon Health Authority have been 
working on this particular issue and dealing with a number of 
challenges related to the Royal University Hospital emergency 
ward and also Dr. Witt. 
 
They are continuing to work on that, and I have faith that they 
will be able to sort out a solution which will provide the best 
care and continue to provide the best care for Saskatoon 
residents. I think it’s important that we provide the support to 
make sure that this particular facility provides good care 
because it’s one of our flagship facilities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

Out-Migration in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my question is to 
the Premier. Statistics Canada released information today on 
Saskatchewan’s population. And once again, unfortunately, the 
news is not good. That’s because Saskatchewan continues to 
lose young people to other provinces — 3,500 in the past year 
alone, Mr. Speaker. And what’s more disturbing, Mr. Speaker, 
is that more than 17,000, 17,000 since the member for 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

Saskatoon Riversdale has become Premier just three years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much longer will parents and grandparents 
have to be subject to a lack of a plan by this government to 
reverse this trend? How much longer will we have to say 
goodbye to our children and our grandchildren as they leave 
Saskatchewan for jobs and opportunities in other provinces? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 
the question. And I’m pleased to report to the House that 
actually over the last year, out-migration, which has been a 
problem in our province, dropped by more than 10 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. And the net out-migration, the number of people 
moving out over the number of people moving in, was the 
lowest it’s been in five years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Do we need to do more? Yes, we do, Mr. Speaker. Are we 
doing more? Yes, we are, Mr. Speaker. We have a new regime, 
a taxation in oil and gas which has resulted in record oil and gas 
drilling. We have a new regime in mining which is leading to a 
25 per cent increase in mining exploration, Mr. Speaker. And 
despite the problems we’ve had in agriculture, we’re going to 
be building oil and gas, building mining, building forestry, 
building manufacturing to continue to tackle the challenge that 
we face, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the member 
opposite recognizes that the trend is still there, although getting 
better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number from StatsCanada today tells a sad 
story because behind every person that leaves Saskatchewan is 
a family that says goodbye to a son, a daughter, or a grandchild. 
With every family that leaves this province, there’s a school 
that loses a student, a kids’ soccer team that loses the coaches, a 
community that loses a small business. 
 
And every time a family leaves, so do the dollars, tax dollars 
that could be used to reduce hospital waiting lists, help to 
reduce education property tax, or rebuild a crumbling road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what specific steps is the NDP government taking 
to address this record – five straight years, five straight years of 
young people and families leaving Saskatchewan to build 
careers and opportunities in other provinces? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it was good to hear 
something from the member opposite that we don’t hear from 

the members opposite every day, and that is, the situation is 
getting better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, that is the point that I made in 
my first answer. And I said, do we have more work to do? Yes 
we do. Are we headed in the right direction? Yes we are, Mr. 
Speaker, because the numbers the member refers to indicate that 
we are moving in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year, I mean 2002, the figure for net out-migration, the 
number of people we lost, was close to 7,000, Mr. Speaker. 
This year it will be about 3,500, so we’ve cut it in half for this 
year. 
 
Do we have more work to do? Yes we do, Mr. Speaker. Are we 
committed to getting the job done over the next course of this 
term of government? You bet we are and we will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Support for the Livestock Industry 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, last week this government’s 
Throne Speech made just one brief passing reference to the 
BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) crisis. The NDP said 
they would work with other governments to open the borders. 
Once again the NDP’s actions did not match their words. 
 
Today the Prime Minister of Canada is in Alberta announcing a 
billion dollar aid package, mostly for cattle producers. The 
Premier of Alberta is in Washington trying to get the border 
reopened, and the Premier of Saskatchewan is sitting here, 
doing absolutely nothing to help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why didn’t this Premier go to Washington with 
Ralph Klein? Why isn’t the NDP government providing its 
support to this important trade initiative? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite raises 
the matter of the Prime Minister being in Alberta to announce 
BSE support. I want to join with that member, I’m sure, and all 
members in acknowledging with welcome arms this new 
federal support package for BSE. 
 
I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve made our point, that 
now in trade injury the federal government has finally accepted 
the reality that that trade injury payment – whether it’s in BSE 
or elsewhere – should be the 100 per cent support of the 
national government. And so we’re looking forward to that 
support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Today, Mr. Speaker, I am fully aware 
that my colleague, Ralph Klein, is in Washington, DC (District 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

of Columbia). He’s in Washington today, Mr. Speaker. There 
will be many areas in which the Premier of Alberta and I will 
disagree, whether it be the Wheat Board, publicly funded and 
administered medicare, and some other issues. But on this 
point, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of Alberta and myself — and I 
would say all Canadian premiers — are in 100 per cent 
agreement. 
 
And I am very confident that the Premier of Alberta in this 
venue will be taking the message from Canadians, from 
Canadian premiers, to the corridors of Washington as we have 
taken it, as I most recently spoke with the American consulate 
here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I agree that Ralph Klein has 
been a very effective spokesman for Canadian cattle producers, 
far more effective than this NDP Premier. But that’s the 
problem. The NDP is always letting someone else carry the 
ball, especially when it comes to sticking up for Saskatchewan 
agriculture. 
 
Today the federal government announced a billion dollar 
assistance package, mostly for BSE, with no help or input from 
this NDP government. Today Ralph Klein is in Washington 
fighting to get the border reopened with no help from this NDP 
government. Mr. Speaker, when it comes to addressing the BSE 
crisis, the NDP is all talk and no action. Why? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite seems 
to have a short-term memory. Was it not but months ago that 
his now friends in Ottawa that he praises in this House stopped 
funding to support the livestock producers of Saskatchewan? 
And who filled in the difference? Who filled in the difference? 
The Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This member stands in the House today 
and would argue this government has done nothing to support 
the livestock industry in Saskatchewan when he knows that 
from the treasury of this government has gone $55 million in 
support of the industry — and by the way, Mr. Speaker, with 
the criticism of members opposite; with the criticism of 
members opposite who say we shouldn’t be spending those 
dollars, Mr. Speaker. We have stood with our livestock 
producers. We stand with the federal government. We stand 
with other Canadian provinces in saying to our American 
friends and neighbours: open the border; open it on science; 
don’t open it on politics or close it on politics; open it on 
science. The period is now and the time is right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 

The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I have 
several documents which I would now like to table. 
 
First of all is the members’ accountability and disclosure reports 
for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2003. 
 
Second, audited financial statements, auditor’s opinion, and 
schedule of fixed assets for the government and the opposition 
caucuses for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2003. 
 
Thirdly, financial statements for the offices of the independent 
members of the Legislative Assembly for the fiscal year ended 
March 31, 2003. 
 
Fourth, end-of-term financial statements for the offices of 
independent officers of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And last of all, the audited end-of-term financial statements, 
auditor’s opinion, and schedule of fixed assets for the 
opposition caucus. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to move a motion under 
rule 49. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked . . . requesting leave to 
move a motion under rule 49. Would the Premier state the 
nature of the motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The nature of the motion, Mr. Speaker, 
will be to ask of this Assembly a unanimous vote providing 
from this Assembly to the federal government our position on 
what we believe is the inequity and unfairness of the current 
equalization system in Canada, particularly as it pertains to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave and given an 
explanation. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Equalization Program in Canada 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. At 
the close of my remarks I will be making the formal motion 
which we have discussed with the members of the opposition. I 
understand that motion will be seconded by a government 
member and then there will be debate and perhaps an 
amendment from the opposition, and finally we will come to 
what I hope can be a unanimous vote. 
 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

The matter here today, Mr. Speaker, of some urgency, given the 
federal budget tomorrow, given the immediate or soon-closed 
renewal period of the equalization formula and program, and 
given the information that has been made widely available to 
Canadians now through the very exceptional work of Professor 
Tom Courchene makes this, I believe, a very, very timely 
debate. 
 
I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, today by talking a little bit about 
the role of equalization so that all members and the general 
public, I hope, can have an understanding of the important role 
of equalization — what is equalization intended to do. Well 
shortly put, Mr. Speaker, equalization is a national program, a 
federal program, that is now constitutionally enshrined; a 
program which seeks to bring a reasonable level of services to 
all Canadians at a reasonable level of taxation no matter where 
we live in Canada. 
 
It is one of those national programs, like federal transfers of all 
sorts, which seek to bind the nation together, to give glue to this 
federation, this nation that we love and call Canada. It is one of 
those programs which seeks to bring us together, to bind us 
together. The theory here, Mr. Speaker, is good. The theory is 
good. It is the right thing to do for we as Canadians to forge 
national programs that should support regions of the country 
and support Canadians wherever we live with that stated goal of 
a reasonable level of service for reasonable levels of taxation 
wherever we live. It is the right thing for the national 
government to do. 
 
And I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that the equalization program 
has worked relatively well up until the early 1980s — 1982 to 
be exact. And what went wrong, Mr. Speaker, in 1982? At that 
time the federal government changed the formula for 
equalization from what was once a 10-province standard to a 
five-province standard. Under the 10-province standard, Mr. 
Speaker, the economies and the relative strengths and revenue 
potentials of all Canadian provinces were taken into account. 
Then the equalization dollars were apportioned based on 
relative strengths within the Canadian Confederation. 
 
In those early years of the 1980s, the national government opted 
to reduce the 10-province standard, national average of all 
provinces, to a five-province standard — a five-province 
standard, Mr. Speaker. And the five provinces chosen at that 
time were British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, 
and Quebec. 
 
In that new five-province standard began the difficulty that is 
singled out on Saskatchewan, because under that five-province 
standard suddenly our wealth in energy, oil, and gas rose 
extremely high in the 5 per cent . . . in the five-province 
average, simply because the other provinces — particularly at 
that time — had very, very minimal energy resources. So just to 
point this out to you, Mr. Speaker, and to members present. 
 
As Tom Courchene identifies in his report, under the 
10-province standard, Saskatchewan — under that standard — 
accounted for 48.9 per cent of heavy oil resources. Under the 
five-province standard, Saskatchewan is claimed to account for 
94.2 per cent of heavy oil resources in Canada. 
 
Under the 10-province standard, what is defined as third-tier oil, 

under the 10-province standard, Saskatchewan was credited 
with 36.9 per cent of the resource. Fair. Under the five-province 
standard, we are accounted for 97.4 per cent of third-tier oil. 
 
You see the problem that was created when we moved to the 
five-province standard. What that has led to, I would argue, Mr. 
Speaker, is that Saskatchewan over the years has been singled 
out for unfair treatment under equalization. 
 
Even worse, Mr. Speaker, while other provinces in the 
Confederation have had this inequity addressed through 
individual accords, namely the provinces of Nova Scotia and 
Newfoundland, no such accord has been offered or given to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now then we add on the change that came to the mining 
revenues, the mining revenues. And you will know, Mr. 
Speaker, that the former minister of Finance, now the Minister 
of Industry and Resources, and I tackled Ottawa on this issue 
and had some success, but limited success. We count that to 
represent another 40 to $50 million in lost equalization to this 
province, resources rightfully belonging to the people of 
Saskatchewan that have been taken out. 
 
So we have a circumstance now in Canada, we’re under a 
five-province standard. Saskatchewan is unfairly singled out 
because of our oil and natural gas revenues and the potential 
that we have in growing that specific industry, that specific 
sector of our economy. 
 
Now bad enough that we’re singled out under the treatment, 
then along comes a federal government in the last number of 
years which has reached right into the pockets of Saskatchewan 
residents and taken our money more than dollar for dollar, so 
that for every dollar we put in one pocket from revenue from oil 
and gas, the national government has reached into our pocket 
and has taken out more than a dollar — more than a dollar. 
 
Now that’s documented by Professor Courchene as having 
happened over these last number of years. When this has 
become now a matter of public discourse, the national 
government has responded. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the response today. 
What has the response created? Well we’re told now by the 
national government that we will receive $120 million in 
payment. I underline this, Mr. Speaker. They say this is 
one-time money — one-time money. They say that this 
provides for the money that they have taken out of our pockets 
over the last number of years, money that they have lifted from 
the people of Saskatchewan and here it is back. 
 
So get this. They take our money, then they just give it back, 
and expect the province of Saskatchewan to be pleased with the 
result. Well, Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the work that has been 
done. But, Mr. Speaker, this is only but the start of the work 
that needs to be done — only but the start. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So for this period of 17 to 18 years 
which Ottawa has now reviewed, they come to us and say, well 
here’s a cheque for all the money that we stole of $120 million. 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

Well over 17 years . . . And by the way, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
only operating on one narrow category under which 
equalization is defined; it comes to oil and gas. There are eight 
of those categories. This is only dealing with the one category 
where they’ve taken more than a dollar in clawback. 
 
Now what if we were to extend that to some of these other 
categories where more than a dollar has been taken? There 
would be millions of dollars more even under this, their 
methodology. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 17, 18 years of inequitable 
equalization and we receive a cheque for $120 million — that 
represents about $7 million a year. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is 
not the solution to the inequity or unfairness of equalization as 
it has affected Saskatchewan. 
 
Then they say but oh, but hold it, we promise not to do it any 
more. We promise not to claw back more than a dollar on a 
dollar under the Crown lease category. We’re not going to do 
that any more. We’re going to quit reaching into your pocket 
and taking out more than a dollar for a dollar. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is not, that is not the solution to the 
inequity that has faced the people of Saskatchewan under this 
flawed equalization program ever since 1982. So it’s little 
wonder we perhaps feel a little less than satisfied. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, the third point they say to us is now just 
be patient and we’ll look at the entire circumstance regarding 
equalization over the next equalization review period which 
begins this April and extends for five years. 
 
Now officials from the Department of Finance tell me that if, if 
successful in this round of negotiations and seeing some change 
to equalization, that in fact, in fact if changes were to be made 
they would not be made then till five years from today, 2009. 
And the officials tell me that any change to equalization usually 
takes two, three, four and five years to implement, which could 
take us to 2013, 2014, before we see an answer that’s fair and 
equitable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province, this government, the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I hope this legislature unanimously today 
says we are not going to wait until 2009 or 2014 for a solution 
to the unfairness that affects the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, just so that we clearly 
understand the inequity, just so that we clearly understand the 
inequity of what’s wrong with the current formula and its 
application, it is vividly illustrated in this current fiscal year 
which is now coming to an end. 
 
In this current fiscal year, our sister province to the east, 
Manitoba — similar population, very similar economy — this 
fiscal year the province of Manitoba will receive under 
equalization $1.2 billion. Saskatchewan this year will receive 
about $120 million. 
 
The member asks, how much? That means to Manitoba 10 
times the amount of equalization that is coming to the province 

of Saskatchewan. 
 
(14:45) 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, you take the period of years from 1991-92 to 
present and compare the amounts of equalization that have 
come from the national government to Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan in that period of time, Manitoba has received 
over $10 billion more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that could be argued, Mr. Speaker, that could be argued as 
fair if in fact the formula was recognizing the benefit to the 
people of Saskatchewan from oil and gas revenues and activity 
in the energy sector. But no — instead of benefiting the people 
of Saskatchewan, they’ve been reaching in here and clawing it 
back more than a dollar on a dollar. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, therefore we propose, and we’ll lobby 
and we will do battle towards the following solution. 
 
First of all, in terms of any retroactive payments, let us be sure 
that we’re addressing all of the categories where we have been 
inappropriately clawed back. Not just the one, but all of the 
categories. Point number one. 
 
Point number two. Beginning today, beginning next week, 
beginning immediately, this province seeks to establish with the 
national government an accord that protects our energy, oil, and 
gas resources in a fashion that is fair and equitable with the 
Atlantic, with the Atlantic provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’re not asking for anything special. 
We’re not asking for any unique treatment. We only want for 
our people what is fair, what is fair. Point number two. 
 
Point number three. We will continue, continue to pressure, 
work, and lobby to see an adjustment to this matter of the 
mining, the mining tax revenues that are coming to 
Saskatchewan. This unfairness is costing us today 40 to $50 
million in appropriate equalization. 
 
And fifth, fourth, Mr. Speaker, fourth, our long-term goal is to 
establish again in Canada a 10-province standard that brings 
equity and fairness to all the regions and all the people of 
Canada. 
 
Now that said, Mr. Speaker — and I want to close with this 
before I read the motion — what is our ultimate goal? The 
ultimate goal of this government, the ultimate goal of this 
government is to see a strengthened economy that gets us right 
out of equalization altogether. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to reflect a little on an opportunity that I had to serve 
in this legislature as the minister of then Social Services. When 
we introduced into this province the Building Independence 
program, the Building Independence program, we became 
aware that in the practice of social assistance in Saskatchewan, 
what were we doing for those families who went and earned 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

some of their own income, what did we do? Well we deducted 
it straight off the welfare cheque, right off the social assistance 
cheque — therefore no real incentive to those families to 
maximize their own potentials, their own benefits. Well we 
changed that, Mr. Speaker. We changed that to give incentive, 
to help families build their independence. We changed that, Mr. 
Speaker. And you know what, as a result? More that 40 per cent 
or about 40 per cent of our families receiving social assistance 
are now independent of social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this principle is no different. This province wants 
to build its economy, wants to maximize its tremendous 
potential, particularly in energy, particularly in oil and gas. We 
want to maximize that potential. We want those revenues of 
those resources which constitutionally belong to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Make no mistake about that. These are not 
resources belonging to the national government, these are 
resources constitutionally belonging to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And we want to maximize the economic 
opportunities from those resources and we want to maximize 
their return to the people of Saskatchewan from those resources 
to provide quality health care, quality child care, safe 
neighbourhoods, and good education. 
 
Under this confiscatory equalization scheme that has singled 
out the province of Saskatchewan, we are being handicapped in 
doing that. The sooner, Mr. Speaker, we can see that change, is 
the sooner that we can see our economy grow, it’s the sooner 
we’re out of equalization altogether. That’s our goal, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member of 
Saskatoon Massey Place: 
 

That this Legislative Assembly extend appreciation to Dr. 
Thomas J. Courchene for his recent research and 
publication, “Confiscatory Equalization: The Intriguing 
Case of Saskatchewan’s Vanishing Energy Revenue,” 
which has provided important and respected validation of 
arguments in equalization that Saskatchewan has been 
making for many, many years; and 
 
that this Legislative Assembly express grave concerns 
that, given the federal government recent actions and their 
commitment for future review, Saskatchewan will 
continue to be significantly disadvantaged in equalization 
in comparison to the provinces of Newfoundland and 
Nova Scotia; and 
 
that this legislature confirm the position of the province of 
Saskatchewan that fairness and equity in the treatment of 
resource revenues must be integrated into the federal 
equalization program similar to fiscal arrangements with 
Newfoundland-Labrador and Nova Scotia; and further, 
 
that the Premier meet with the Prime Minister as soon as 
possible to seek a solution that will provide Saskatchewan 
with fair and equitable treatment within the equalization 
program and thus within the federation itself. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — On the motion moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Massey Place: 
 

That this Legislative Assembly extend appreciation to Dr. 
Thomas J. Courchene for his recent research and 
publication, “Confiscatory Equalization: The Intriguing 
Case of Saskatchewan’s Vanishing Energy Revenues,” 
which has provided important and respected validation of 
arguments in equalization that Saskatchewan has been 
making for many years; and 
 
that this Legislative Assembly express grave concerns that, 
given the federal government’s recent actions and their 
commitment for future review, Saskatchewan will continue 
to be significantly disadvantaged in equalization in 
comparison to the provinces of Newfoundland and Nova 
Scotia; and 
 
that this Legislative Assembly confirm the position of the 
province of Saskatchewan that fairness and equity in the 
treatment of resource revenues must be integrated into the 
federal equalization program similar to fiscal arrangements 
with Newfoundland-Labrador and Nova Scotia; and 
further, 
 
that the Premier meet with the Prime Minister as soon as 
possible to seek a solution that will provide Saskatchewan 
with fair and equitable treatment within the equalization 
program and thus within the federation itself. 
 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise as seconder of the motion, although not 
pleased that we have to have this debate at all in the sense that 
the case for fairness that the province of Saskatchewan has is so 
clear that this is not a matter where we should be having to have 
debate in the Legislative Assembly to convince the federal 
government, including its representatives in Saskatchewan, that 
there has to be some change to the way the province is treated. 
 
The Premier spoke very eloquently about the origin of the issue. 
I would like to discuss with the House, and for the benefit of 
anyone watching or who may be reading Hansard, some of the 
effects of the issue and what is happening. 
 
The Premier pointed out that there are several areas where 
Saskatchewan is being unfairly treated and I’d like to outline 
those areas in four parts. 
 
The first area identified by Professor Courchene — and I want 
to add that these areas have been identified to the federal 
government by our own ministers and Finance officials for 
many years — but the first area, Mr. Speaker, is the area of oil 
and gas Crown leases. This is where the Government of 
Saskatchewan owns oil or gas rights and an oil or gas company 
comes along and they want to drill for oil or gas. And they will 
bid on land in order to have the right to do that, and of course 
that’s something that we’re encouraging. And we are having 
record land sales generally because people are interested in 
investing in oil and gas in Saskatchewan. So what happens is, in 
a typical year, we may be paid $100 million for oil and gas 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

rights by oil and gas companies. 
 
Now the difficulty is, we take in $100 million, and the federal 
government reduces our equalization payment by $200 million. 
I want to underline that. For every dollar that we take in in 
Crown leases for oil and gas, the federal government is 
reducing equalization by $2. 
 
How can that be right? It can’t be right. And so there are three 
other things that they’re doing that I’m going to talk about in a 
moment. But I want to say, what the federal government said on 
Friday is, they will give us $120 million, but what that $120 
million is, is that money that they’ve confiscated with respect to 
Crown leases. In other words, they’ve taken money that did not 
belong to them, that belonged to the people of Saskatchewan — 
that 120 million — and they’ve said, we’ll give that back to 
you. 
 
Well of course, what else could they do? So that’s the one issue. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the one and only thing — the one and 
only thing — that the federal government has said that they will 
do. 
 
But there’s three other areas, and I want to outline them for the 
House. The second area is, and the Premier has referred to it, 
the mining tax base. Now here what the House needs to know, 
and the public needs to know, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal 
government is attributing more of the wealth from mining to the 
province of Saskatchewan than actually exists in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan produces about 14 per cent — 
that’s one-four per cent — of the value of mining production in 
Canada. But over the last several years the federal government 
has said, in calculating our equalization, that we have over 50 
per cent of the mining wealth. 
 
Now how does that make sense, Mr. Speaker? It doesn’t make 
any sense. So the Premier and I had to go to Mr. Manley about 
a year and a half ago when he was still the federal Finance 
minister, when the federal government wanted to take $300 
million back, and we had to say this is not right, obviously. And 
they relented and only took $150 million back, so they didn’t 
take the other 150 million. 
 
But the point is, each and every year we estimate that the 
federal government is clawing back 40 to $50 million, because 
of this problem, that is entitled to the people of Saskatchewan. 
But the federal government is not giving us that money which 
we’re entitled to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now so that’s number two issue; number one, I’ve already 
talked about. 
 
Number two, the mining tax base. The federal government gave 
their response on Friday — their preliminary response because, 
as the Premier said, we’re not done with this issue. 
 
What did the federal government say they would do about the 
problem of the mining tax base, Mr. Speaker? They said we 
would look at it when equalization was renewed. When will 
equalization be renewed? It will be renewed, Mr. Speaker, in 
the year 2009. That is five years from now. And when 
equalization is renewed, the other thing the House has to know 
is that it takes effect over the next five years. 

So that what the federal government is saying about this grab of 
40 to $50 million a year is, wait five years and we’ll talk about 
it; wait ten years and maybe you’ll see some change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough. That’s unacceptable. It’s 
unacceptable to this government. It’s unacceptable to every 
member of this House. It’s unacceptable to every person in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Now we have the third thing the federal 
government is doing to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ve talked about how they’re taking $2 for every dollar when 
we have Crown leases. I’ve talked about how they’re 
shortchanging us 40 to $50 million on mining. 
 
The third thing they’re doing is for every dollar that 
Saskatchewan earns in royalties for oil and gas, every dollar we 
take in, the federal government deducts between $1.08 and 
$1.25 from our equalization. Well how does that work, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
So you try to build the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
You try to build the economy of Saskatchewan, and you are 
penalized by our federal government. You’re penalized for that. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And the Premier is right, Mr. Speaker, when he says that unlike 
the Building Independence program in Social Services, where 
when people start to work you let them keep some of their 
money, unlike that, Mr. Speaker, when we try to build the 
economy of this province in mining and oil and gas, we are 
fined by the federal government. We’re fined, we’re punished 
for that, Mr. Speaker, and that can’t be right. It simply can’t be 
right. 
 
And on these latter two points, the mining tax base and the 
taking away of the $1.08 plus for every dollar we take in, in oil 
and gas royalties, what is the answer of the federal government 
that we heard on Friday? The answer is we’ll talk about it in 
2009 and it may change by 2014. And that is unacceptable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I want to point out, I said there was a fourth issue here. 
The fourth issue is this, Mr. Speaker, that when faced with a 
similar situation in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland, when they 
complained about the situation — which I think they’re right to 
complain about it as we have — the federal government made a 
special deal with Nova Scotia and with Newfoundland. They 
said for every dollar you take in, we’ll only take 70 cents back 
— only 70 cents. 
 
Now why, Mr. Speaker — every member of this legislature and 
every person in the province should ask — why is it fair that 
you take 70 cents of the dollar earned by Nova Scotia or 
Newfoundland but you take $1.08 to $1.25 earned by the 
province of Saskatchewan. How can that be fair? 
 
And what did the federal government say about that on Friday? 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

What was their response? Their response again was, oh well 
we’ll talk about that toward . . . when we’re renewing 
equalization. It wasn’t mentioned that the renewal discussion 
takes place five years from now, to take effect over the next five 
years after that. In other words, Mr. Speaker, no answer at all. 
And that’s not acceptable. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Professor Courchene, in 
The Globe and Mail had this to say on March 4. He said: 
 

The long-term solution to equalization may be more 
complex, which is why the federal government and its 
representatives in this province are talking about dealing 
with it in the year 2009. 
 

But we can’t wait until 2009. Professor Courchene says: 
 

That starting with the fiscal year 2001-02, the earliest year 
for which the equalization books are still open, 
Saskatchewan’s energy revenues should be accorded the 
same treatment as the energy revenues of Newfoundland 
and Nova Scotia.  
 

Specifically: 
 

. . . the maximum equalization tax-back rate for each . . . 
(Saskatchewan) energy revenue category should not 
exceed 70 percent. 
 

And then he says, surely that would be more equitable and more 
in the spirit of the equalization program. 
 
And surely it would, Mr. Speaker. Because what is happening 
here is that when you tax economic development, when the 
policy of the federal government is to tax economic 
development in Saskatchewan, you then prevent or discourage 
economic development, which prevents Saskatchewan from 
becoming a have province. 
 
And ironically, one of the things that Professor Courchene says 
is that if Saskatchewan was treated more fairly in equalization, 
if we were given what we were entitled to, we would have the 
means to put into place more policies that would promote more 
development which would lead to Saskatchewan becoming a 
have province and we’d be out of equalization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And because of the perverse way in which 
the federal government is treating this province — and bear in 
mind, that other than giving back $120 million that they have 
stolen from this province over the last several years, the 
reaction of the federal government, Mr. Speaker, is they’re not 
going to do anything at all — bearing that in mind, I want to 
refer just to some of the words of Professor Courchene in his 
paper. He says: 
 

. . . Canada’s equalization program has more than fully 
confiscated Saskatchewan’s energy . . . (resources.) 
 

He says: 
 

. . . (there is) a marginal equalization tax-back rate on 

own-source energy-revenue increases of 125 percent. 
 

He says that: 
 

. . . these equalization clawbacks or tax-backs are nothing 
short of astounding . . . 
 

He says 
 

. . . the operations of equalization for Saskatchewan 
involve tax-back rates of a magnitude that the federal 
government is simply not willing to apply to energy 
revenues in Nova Scotia (and) . . . Newfoundland. 

 
I wonder why the differential treatment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He says — and I’m just going through his paper: 
 

. . . any attempt by Saskatchewan to match any (or all) of 
these lower tax rates (in Alberta for example), especially 
for mobile factors, is fully stymied because of the voracious 
appetite of the equalization energy clawback . . . with 
Saskatchewan’s energy revenue increases subject to a 
tax-back rate of 125 percent . . . the differing fiscal 
situations of these two energy-rich provinces could not be 
starker.  

 
He says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Nor could the equity and efficiency implications . . . 
 
He points out that Ottawa has ensured that equalization offsets 
would not be confiscatory for Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, 
as noted above. But what about Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
The answer of the federal government, other than giving back 
$120 million of money which was stolen from this province, 
confiscated over the last several years, the answer was, wait 
until 2009 and we’ll talk about it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is unacceptable. It is unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, 
that it has also been indicated by representatives of the federal 
government in this province that somehow, whatever happens 
in equalization has been agreed to by the province of 
Saskatchewan. And they refer to some agreement in 1987. I 
want to report to the House and to anybody listening to this, Mr. 
Speaker, that is not how equalization works. Equalization is 
unilaterally determined and implemented by the Government of 
Canada, by the federal government. 
 
It is true that they will say every five years — as I’ve indicated 
they say they will again in 2009 — they will ask for the 
province’s views, and we have made our views known, Mr. 
Speaker. But at the end of the day, they impose equalization. 
That is how they arrived at special deals with Nova Scotia and 
Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker. That is how they arrived at those 
deals; they decided that’s what they were going to do. 
 
And I want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, this — that I have 
always considered myself to be a Canadian first. One of the 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

reasons is that I believe, as a country, we share the benefits of 
our country; we share the challenges of our country. That is 
what Confederation is all about. 
 
But I put it this simply, Mr. Speaker: as long as the federal 
government is not willing to redress the challenges that this 
issue presents — and in particular the three areas that I’ve 
outlined where they have said that they will do nothing except 
start to talk about it in 2009 — as long as that situation 
continues to exist, Mr. Speaker, it is the simple fact of the 
matter that Confederation is not working as it should for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that cannot be denied. That cannot be denied. 
And, Mr. Speaker, when the emperor has no clothes, sometimes 
someone has to stand up and say, as the Premier has and as I 
have, and as I hope the opposition will, the emperor has no 
clothes. 
 
And in this particular instance, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately we 
have to say very clearly that as long as this situation is left 
unredressed, Confederation is not working as it should for the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And in the interests of 
this country, Confederation is going to have to be made to work 
fairly and equitably as it should for the people of this province. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into debate this afternoon on the motion as 
presented by the government opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with great interest to the remarks of the 
Premier as he described the conditions that Saskatchewan faces 
and the need to put forward an emergency debate today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier made reference to the fact that the 
year that created great difficulties for the province of 
Saskatchewan was 1982. And he made reference to the fact that 
there are other provinces, like Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, 
who have negotiated their own accords and have determined 
that 70 per cent of their developing oil and gas sector needed to 
be protected; and in fact those accords are working quite well 
for those provinces. And he said today to this Legislative 
Assembly, we have an emergency. We have a situation that 
Saskatchewan is facing that needs to be dealt with by an 
emergency motion. It’s a 12-year emergency. 
 
While there may be a concern about tomorrow morning’s . . . or 
tomorrow afternoon’s budget from the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker, I daresay that the Premier, with all of his influence 
with the new Prime Minister, will not be able to change that 
federal budget. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, where has this government been for well over 
20 years? Where have they been regarding the equalization 
payments that they received? You know, I looked at the 
Provincial Auditor’s report that is produced on an annual basis 
and it’s a document that I’ve made reference to many times in 

this Legislative Assembly, and it’s called Understanding the 
Finances of the Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make reference to a number of years. In 
the year 2000 . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I want to qualify for all 
people who are listening and watching that indeed this 
document is produced on what is called summary financial 
budgeting. It is the entire economy of the province. It’s not just 
the General Revenue Fund where this government has been 
misleading the people of Saskatchewan, and in fact we have had 
deficit budgets. We have had three years of deficit budget. 
 
So let’s take a look at the year 2000. In the year 2000 — I’m 
not going to break down the equalization and the Canada health 
and safety transfers — I’m going to look strictly at monies we 
received from the federal government. Mr. Speaker, in the year 
2000, the amount of money that we received was $1.5 billion 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The floor . . . I recognize the 
member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
the colleagues opposite, I would, you know, want to provide 
this very valuable information so that not only can the people of 
Saskatchewan better understand equalization, but the two 
members from Moose Jaw might be able to better understand 
equalization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, when we looked at 
the report that the Provincial Auditor’s produced, in the year 
2000 we had $1.5 billion worth of federal transfers. And in that 
year, we had a surplus for the province of Saskatchewan of 
$406 million. Mr. Speaker, in 2001 we had $1.02 billion — 
significantly less from the federal government — but we also 
saw an increase of $500 million of own-source revenue from 
some windfall in oil and gas. You know, Mr. Speaker, the 
surplus was still 461 million. 
 
Now let’s take a look at the last two years where we have 
completed audited financial statements. In 2002, from the 
federal government, 1.5 billion — but not a surplus, Mr. 
Speaker; a deficit of $483 million. In 2003, Mr. Speaker, a 
transfer from the federal government of $1.4 billion but not a 
surplus again, Mr. Speaker — a deficit of $654 million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we concur with the Premier that we 
need to address concerns that face the equalization formula . . . 
Because as I looked at Professor Courchene’s document, it was 
a very intriguing document. And the Premier made reference to 
all of the years that this study alludes to. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
make it very clear that Professor Courchene’s information is for 
one year, one fiscal year. He makes reference to the documents 
of 2000-2001. And the members opposite, I’m sure, have had a 
chance to look through this document, as I have, and to 
highlight some of the concerns. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Professor Courchene says very clearly — and I 
quote from his document — on page 3 he says: 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

A distinction is made between the remedies that can be 
applied immediately and those that need some lead time. 

 
So what he’s saying to this government opposite is, there are 
things that you can lobby for immediately. And the concern 
about the oil and gas lease rates on Crown land has been raised 
with the federal government and the federal Finance minister 
responded on Friday. Was it adequate? I’m not an economist to 
be able to say that that’s the correct transfer, but I’m sure our 
officials in the Finance department have had some concern 
about those documents. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the money that the Finance minister, Mr. 
Goodale, referred to, he referred to three years. He referred to 
1999, 2000, and 2001 as the years where the calculations just 
seemed to be out of whack — out of whack. Now three years — 
that’s 1999, 2000, and 2001 — where were our officials to raise 
that concern after those three significant years? 
 
The member for Saskatoon Massey Place — I’m sorry, Mr. 
Hon. Member — the member for Massey Place made reference 
to the fact that the mining tax is being raised on an ongoing 
basis and he was successful in bringing back $150 million. 
Where were his officials and where was that former Finance 
minister when this information came to light that indeed we 
were being chiselled out of $120 million? Now it’s been raised, 
and I read with interest that Ottawa will pay back $120 million 
discrepancy. Now if that discrepancy continues to be part of the 
calculations that the federal government is using today, we need 
to be there, Mr. Speaker. We need to lobby and say, this type of 
calculation is unacceptable. But to sit there and say, well now 
it’s an emergency and we have a problem because the 1982 
formula isn’t working so well for Saskatchewan, is outright 
ridiculous. 
 
This government has not had a plan, it has not had a vision of 
how to deal with Ottawa. It has not been lobbying, and as a 
result we’ve seen the kicking in many, many areas, Mr. Speaker 
— many areas where the federal government has not come 
forward and dealt with Saskatchewan like it has with other 
provinces. And we can attribute that to the fact maybe that 
we’ve had an NDP government in this province for over 12 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I look back at the information 
that the former Finance minister, Mr. Melenchuk, provided to 
this House when he presented the budget. And the budget is 
presented to us on an ongoing basis and the minister makes 
reference to the equalization formula, talks about the fact that 
the formula is going to be down a bit because our oil and gas 
revenues are up a bit and makes no reference to the fact that the 
equalization formula is failing Saskatchewan. He’s never done 
that in the last four budgets that I’ve had a chance to look at 
very closely. 
 
But now I look at, I look at the current Finance minister’s 
quarterly documents that he provides to the Legislative 
Assembly and I look at the third year . . . third-quarter report. 
And in the third-quarter report released by the Finance minister 
he says this, and I quote: 
 

Equalization is forecast to be down $165.0 million from 
Budget. The decrease is primarily due to revised population 
estimates from the 2001 Census . . . 

 
Now he’s blaming the federal government for the fact that 
they’ve taken back equalization because the province of 
Saskatchewan hasn’t been doing so well on the population side, 
and in fact the numbers that the federal government received 
and used to calculate Saskatchewan’s equalization were wrong. 
They were too large because the province continues to lose 
population as we brought forward today in question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for this government to suddenly say everything’s 
wrong with the formula and there is nothing wrong in the 
province of Saskatchewan is also totally ludicrous. 
 
We have a province that is failing. We have a province that is 
losing population and the minister himself states that the 
equalization formula, and by the way the Canada health and . . . 
CHST (Canada Health and Social Transfer) transfer is forecast 
to be down $42.5 million from the budget and again this 
decrease is primarily due to revised population estimates. So we 
have lost over $200 million from the former minister’s budget 
because the province of Saskatchewan is losing people. That’s 
the real reason that we have a problem. 
 
As we look at oil and gas, as we look at the development of 
Saskatchewan, of course we have to have a fair and equitable 
plan to ensure that our development and our revenues that are 
raised within the province of Saskatchewan are treated fairly 
like they are for Nova Scotia and Newfoundland. But that does 
not, that does not allow this government to say that we have a 
deficit budget for the last two years and probably three years 
and it’ll be into the fourth year come March 31 when we see 
this government’s plan, and that indeed we will have a deficit 
because there is an emergency problem with equalization 
formula. That simply is not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan I think, are starting to see 
through this mirage and this smoke that this government is 
bringing forward time and time again. It is starting to look at the 
real situation and say, we understand that we have a province 
that just is not growing. 
 
We have a province where people don’t even bid on contracts 
when it comes to some of the construction industry area. 
 
We have a province where the population is declining. We have 
a population where the government is planning for the fact that 
each year for the next five years, they will plan for the fact that 
we will have nearly 3,500 less students in our K to 12 system 
each and every year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s the problem with this province. We have a province 
that’s not growing, and we need to change that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened to this government 
blame everyone else. I listened in 2002 when the government 
said, we have a problem in this province because of the 
September 11 terrorist attack. 
 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

Last year we were told it was the agricultural producers of this 
province who were at fault and in fact that that couldn’t . . . 
could not be achieved. This year we have a BSE problem and 
the border is closed, so it’s another situation that the 
government has no control over. 
 
And now just days before a provincial budget we have this 
government coming forward and saying, we have an emergency 
because the equalization formula isn’t good, when in fact just 
on Friday we saw, we saw the promise of $120 million to 
correct what must be an inadequacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve looked at the monies that the . . . have been 
transferred to this province in the area of health development. 
We’ve raised . . . Over the last couple of question periods we’ve 
raised a number of health issues. And I’ve looked also at the 
mid-year report, where the Finance minister’s indicated that he 
has received $79 million of federal health money that has been 
set aside. 
 
It’s not being used to ensure that the so-called cost containment 
of the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority and its goal to save 
$200,000 by delaying surgeries until the first three weeks of 
April — it’s not being used to offset that and ensure that people 
who are on waiting lists for 18 or 28 months are dealt with. It’s 
set aside. It’s set aside into a fiscal fund and will be drawn on 
according to the needs of the province. Again, Mr. Speaker, a 
lack of vision by this, by this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of sort of understanding the simple 
look at equalization, I asked the Minister of Finance for a 
description of what was to occur with equalization for the last 
two budgets. And I quote from the Finance minister’s own 
documents, from the officials that provided this. And it says 
this: 
 

For budgeting purposes, Saskatchewan reports its 
equalization collections on a receipts basis. Equalization 
receipts consist of the current year entitlement and prior 
year adjustments. This differs from the federal 
government’s reporting of equalization, which is based 
solely on the current year entitlement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the part that I think confuses a lot of 
ordinary folks in the province of Saskatchewan, when we start 
to look at a method whereby we as a province need to go back 
30 months. Thirty months of actual calculations are used to 
determine whether there will be further adjustment to the 
equalization payments. And the member opposite made distinct 
reference to the fact that we have some ability to correct 
something that was at least 30 months old, but not any further 
back than that. And there is an opportunity to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a need to move forward and to look at 
changes to ensure . . . While we have indicated that the motion 
that has been presented has, as its basis, good points to it . . . It 
recognizes the work that Professor Courchene has done on one 
fiscal year, that as I have indicated, and he makes some 
recommendations that we as a province can look at to ensure 
that we can correct, in the short term, some of the weaknesses, 
and we can look at long term. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the intent of the government’s motion is 

acceptable. However it has to be made clear to people in 
Saskatchewan, to the federal government, to everyone, that we 
are not going to use the equalization formula as an excuse, as a 
reason why this province can’t do better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the member for 
Swift Current: 
 

That the following be added following the words “within 
the federation itself”: 
 
but that the Assembly recognizes that the equalization 
formula in itself is not the primary reason for the current 
financial difficulties being experienced by the provincial 
government and will not be used as an excuse for past or 
current budget deficits. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly, seconded by the member for Swift Current: 
 

That the following be added to the words “within the 
federation itself”: 
 
but that the Assembly recognizes that the equalization 
formula in itself is not the primary reason for the current 
financial difficulties being experienced by the provincial 
government and will not be used as an excuse for past or 
current budget deficits. 

 
Recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter the debate and second the motion by my 
colleague, the member for Canora-Pelly, with respect to this 
equalization discussion that we’re having this afternoon. 
 
I think what our amendment does, Mr. Speaker, is strengthens 
the original motion because it ensures that the federal 
government knows that this government will not use the 
equalization formula as it currently exists, as it has existed for 
years, as an excuse for yet another deficit budget under this 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess in making that case I’d point out 
comments by the federal Minister of Finance and the Member 
of Parliament for Regina Wascana on the weekend where he 
was concerned as well, I think, in his comments that this NDP 
government would be somehow trying to deflect attention from 
another pending deficit budget away from the deficit budget and 
on to some other issue like equalization. 
 
And so I think that this amendment, when members opposite 
look at it, they will realize that this strengthens the motion. This 
lets the federal government know clearly that this Assembly 
understands that the equalization formula is not an excuse for a 
deficit budget. So the Minister of Finance federally will know 
beyond a shadow of a doubt that this is not about politics on the 
part of the Premier, the current Minister of Finance, or the 
former minister of Finance who sounded, frankly, a little 
apologetic for not having been on this file a whole lot sooner. 
And well he should be, Mr. Speaker, given the number of years 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

that have lapsed. The Minister of Finance federally worried, 
mused publicly on the weekend that perhaps this issue was 
driven more on their side of the House, on the NDP side of the 
House, by a desire to hide yet another deficit budget. 
 
And this amendment, if those members vote for it, will send a 
signal to the federal government that no, this is bigger than any 
current fiscal year. This is bigger than the last even number of 
deficits coming from that government. This is bigger than 
politics. This is about an unfair formula. This is about an 
equalization formula that seems to recognize one thing in the 
case of Atlantic provinces when it comes to their oil and gas 
revenue and quite another for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But without this amendment, I think the Minister of Finance 
federally and the federal Liberal government will be quite right 
in speculating that the motion was more about NDP politics 
than about fixing the equalization formula and ensuring 
Saskatchewan is getting its fair share. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I would say this to you, Mr. Speaker, that it’s little wonder, 
it’s little wonder that this government would seek to deflect 
attention from the deficit that’s pending or the deficits that 
they’ve tabled in this legislature over the last number of years. 
 
And the reason that I would suggest that, Mr. Speaker, is . . . 
can you imagine the caucus meetings over there? Can you 
imagine the caucus meetings between those new members and 
those members who were around for the Romanow-MacKinnon 
era of this Assembly. 
 
And imagine how they shared information back and forth when 
they realize that Mr. Romanow’s administration handed over, 
according to the Provincial Auditor now, a half billion dollar 
surplus to this current sheriff in town, Mr. Speaker, who 
promptly turned that surplus into a billion and a half in 
additional debt for the province. And a deficit in this current 
fiscal year of $463 million is the estimate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why they want to change the subject. They’ve taken 
those surplus budgets from a previous government, and they’ve 
turned them into deficits – and apparently in the bargain 
learning nothing from what everybody should have learned 
from the 1980s regardless of what side of the House they live 
on or what province they lived in, in where every single 
province was maxing out their credit card, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has returned to those practices in its last 
successive budgets, so now this government says, well it’s the 
equalization formula federally; that’s the problem. My 
colleague for Canora-Pelly quite rightly pointed out that this is 
only the latest in a long line of excuses that we’ve heard from 
members opposite. They blamed grasshoppers, and they blamed 
drought, and they blamed BSE, and they blamed international 
terrorism. They blamed everything they could possibly blame, 
but they have not taken any responsibility. And the members 
opposite all hold up their hands and say, what else are we going 
to do? 
 
Well, you know what, Mr. Speaker, not just a few 10 years ago, 
I’m sure members opposite will remember that commodity 

prices in agriculture were low, that there were regional droughts 
around this province, that there were federal provincial issues, 
that there were huge cuts from the federal to the provincial 
governments in terms of transfers for health care. And the 
government, ironically their predecessor, still managed to 
balance the books, so there is no excuse, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
no excuse for mismanagement except that, except that, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a different leader of the party right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — There’s a different Premier today than there was. 
And the cabinet’s all changed. If you look at that front bench, 
the cabinet’s all changed. And it’s kind of back to the ’80s in 
terms of fiscal policy, and it’s back to the 1970s in terms of 
economic policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now they come before the Assembly with a motion, the 
spirit of which, the intent of which is solid because opposition 
members will agree that the equalization formula as it exists 
today should be improved on Saskatchewan’s behalf. And were 
we sitting on your right-hand side, Mr. Speaker, we would be 
also pushing the federal government for some changes and 
some redress on this issue in terms of the equalization formula. 
 
But we would also be sure to let the federal government know 
that we were only doing it based on the facts of the issue, based 
on the merits of our argument — not as an excuse or some sort 
of an explanation to our own people for anything. 
 
On the first day upon assuming these new duties, I did send a 
letter to the Premier in offering our support, and so we would 
want to do that today. We’d want to support the motion. I do 
want to make some things clear, Mr. Speaker. One thing we’ve 
made clear already; this is not an excuse for yet another NDP 
deficit budget. 
 
And perhaps even more importantly, perhaps more importantly, 
what you don’t hear from the NDP side, and what you will hear 
from our side on this whole issue of equalization is that we are 
not content. We will never be satisfied to simply negotiate a 
better deal for Saskatchewan as a have-not province. We want a 
plan for this province. We want to implement a plan for this 
province that will take us to being a have province. And that is 
all of the difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, our vision, our dream one day is to 
not have to have this debate about whether or not we’re getting 
enough welfare or enough assistance from the other provinces. 
We would rather not be having this debate at all. 
 
This government seems to stop short — silent after asking for 
more assistance — but stops short of any plan or any indication 
that they’ve got a plan to take us to the next level. So there are 
some differences, some very key differences between this side 
of the House and that side of the House on some of the issues 
around equalization. 
 
We also point out, as the member for Canora-Pelly did, that this 
situation that we agree with, this redress that needs to be done 
. . . The problem is exacerbated, Mr. Speaker, by the fact that 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

under this government we continue to lose population. 
 
So there are some very, very key differences between our side 
and that side in terms of how this issue is advanced. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of the need for this equalization 
formula to be changed to reflect the fact that frankly our oil and 
gas is, in many cases, is difficult to recover in the long-term as 
now what we’re seeing being recovered in Atlantic Canada . . . 
And that’s part of the rationale that the federal government has 
offered already for not making this change. 
 
So today I encourage all the members to strengthen this motion 
by voting for the amendment moved by my colleague, the 
member for Canora-Pelly. And let me just read it again: 
 

That the following be added following the words, “within 
the federation itself”: 

 
but that the Assembly recognizes that the equalization 
formula in itself is not the primary reason for the current 
financial difficulties being experienced by the provincial 
government and will not be used as an excuse for past or 
current budget deficits. 

 
I’m happy to be able to support this amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to make a few comments. Much has been said by the 
previous speakers on this particular topic. 
 
I want to, at the outset, just capture what I think is the essence 
of what it is that Dr. Courchene, the author of this report on 
confiscatory equalization . . . And I think the seed or the spark 
that has led to this debate in Saskatchewan about equalization 
and how it affects us is the following quote from Dr. Courchene 
in his report where he says, in referring to the Government of 
Saskatchewan — the Government of Saskatchewan, he states, 
quote, every dollar it makes, it and its citizens are worse off 
fiscally. Every dollar it makes, it and its citizens are worse off 
fiscally. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How’s that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — So the member asks, how does 
that work? Well what that means is that for every dollar that we 
generate in oil and gas and now in mineral resources, the federal 
government is taking more dollars out of Saskatchewan through 
reducing equalizations to the province than we are making off 
our own resources. 
 
That captures, I think, captures the essence of what it is that Dr. 
Courchene is saying in his report. And I think it’s the essence of 
the issue before us and why it is that we are so upset. And not 
just us, also Dr. Courchene. 
 
If you go through the report — and remember that this is an 
academic dealing in a rather dry, arcane area of public 
administration and public policy — that he would, in his report 

and without . . . without repeating any of the words that he uses, 
uses words such as: confiscatory, confiscated, astounding, 
inequity, expropriate, damaging, nightmarish, disturbing, 
voracious, stark, insult, expropriated, staggering, arbitrary, 
vanishing, intriguing, perverse, pervasive, dramatic, 
appropriated, transgressed, dilemma, problematic, saddling, not 
fair — that’s two words — failure, cavalier, artificial, 
expropriating, patently unfair — two words — and finally, 
immiserizing, which pertains to economic impoverishment. So 
that when an academic uses words such as that, you begin to 
understand why it is that Saskatchewan politicians are rather 
upset when they read his report and begin to analyze what it is 
that the federal government is doing. 
 
Well what does this mean to us in dollar terms, Mr. Speaker? In 
the year in question that Dr. Courchene looked at, the year 
2000-2001, I think the total value that he felt that we would . . . 
should have received if we had received the same treatment as 
Newfoundland-Labrador and Nova Scotia, meant to 
Saskatchewan something in the neighbourhood of $311 million. 
 
Now the members of the opposition might say, well that’s not 
really all that important and it’s inconsequential and it really 
doesn’t have any real impact on our budget. The fact of the 
matter is $311 million is more than the Government of 
Saskatchewan spent that year on all of the highways in the 
department. So that may not be much to the members of the 
opposition, but it’s a lot, a lot of money where I come from, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My sense is that if you look forward into the future, it would 
mean roughly on average $100 million a year, depending on 
what happens to resource royalties. But a reasonable estimate 
into the future would be $100 million a year. And where I come 
from, Mr. Speaker, that’s a lot of money. 
 
Now again, the opposition might say that, oh we ought not take 
that to have . . . you know, to use that as any way to comment 
on our budgets and our financial position in Saskatchewan. But 
where I come from, $100 million is a lot of money and $100 
million would have a significant impact on an annual basis on 
our budget. It would have a very significant impact on our 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I hasten . . . and I would not support, I would not support 
the opposition amendment because I bet — and I can rest 
assured — that the Minister of Finance and federal officials 
would take that amendment, throw it back at us, as they will 
with all of the comments that we made with the opposition that, 
oh well this is not a major issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well this is an endemic problem that we have in Saskatchewan 
with the opposition. You can always count on them to 
undermine the position of the Government of Saskatchewan 
when it comes to dealings with the federal government. It never 
fails. Whether it’s agriculture, it doesn’t matter what it is, you 
can always count on the opposition in Saskatchewan to 
undermine the position of the provincial government when it 
comes to dealing with Ottawa. 
 
Again petty, petty politics . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I recognize the 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, again, again as 
we’ve seen in the past, petty politics trumps solidarity — petty 
politics trumps the well-being and what should be a unanimous 
position of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. A new 
leader — same old approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I can just simply deal with one issue and that is 
the question of our ability to provide services at a reasonable 
rate of taxation. And at the essence, I mean that’s what 
equalization’s supposed to be all about. When you look at, for 
example, the Boughen report and the appendices to the 
Boughen report, and you look at appendix A, and you look at 
page 130 where the Boughen Commission . . . And it refers to 
the source of its data as being Statistics Canada so it’s not our 
statistics; these are the statistics that are published by the 
federal government. 
 
And when they look at that and they look at the question of 
provincial expenditures as a percentage of the gross domestic 
product, okay, the GDP, GDP which more or less provides 
some sense of your ability to raise revenues — and you would 
think then that given our GDP and our ability to raise revenues 
that we should have more or less an adequate level of services, 
you know, relative to the taxes that we impose on ourselves — 
when you look at that, their conclusion is that Saskatchewan’s 
expenditures at 20.9 per cent of GDP is the lowest, the lowest 
of all of the provinces that receive equalization. 
 
And when it comes to important and vital public services such 
as health, Saskatchewan’s expenditure, based on GDP, is lower 
than all of these other provinces that receive equalization; 
lower, as it is also with education; lower than all these other 
provinces that receive equalization. Dr. Courchene says that the 
purpose of equalization is to ensure that citizens of every 
province have access to reasonably comparable public services 
at reasonably comparable tax rates — reasonably comparable 
public services at reasonably comparable tax rates. 
 
Now the members opposite are always complaining about how 
our tax rates are not comparable and higher than all the other 
jurisdictions, and we would differ with that. But even if you 
accept for a moment that our tax rates are comparable to other 
jurisdictions, given the level of public expenditures — and we 
certainly would take credit for any administrative efficiencies 
that we’ve been able to achieve over time which has resulted in 
a lower per capita expenditure on areas such as health care — 
but the fact of the matter is that when you look at the Boughen 
report, it is very obvious that we’re not able to provide the level 
of public services that other provinces that receive health care 
are able to provide in Canada. Something is wrong here. 
Equalization is not working for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s time we sent a message. We should not support the 
amendment. We should support the motion and make our 
position clear to Ottawa that equalization is not working for 
Saskatchewan, full stop, period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:45) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize . . . The questions before the 
Assembly are the main motion moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Massey Place; and the amendment to the main motion moved 
by the member for Canora-Pelly, and seconded by the member 
for Swift Current. 
 
We will vote first on the amendment to the first motion, to the 
main motion. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
amendment? 
 
Those in favour of the amendment say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Call in the members for a standing vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 15:46 until 15:53. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The motion before the Assembly is the 
amendment to the main motion moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly, seconded by the member for Swift Current: 
 

That the following be added following the words, “within 
the federation itself”: 
 
but that the Assembly recognizes that the equalization 
formula itself is not the primary reason for the current 
financial difficulties being experienced by the provincial 
government and will not be used as an excuse for past or 
current budget deficits. 

 
Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — Of the amendment, please rise. 
 

Yeas — 26 
 
Wall Elhard Heppner 
D’Autremont Krawetz Draude 
Hermanson Bjornerud Stewart 
Wakefield Morgan McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Kerpan Merriman Hart 
Dearborn Chisholm  
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment, please rise. 
 

Nays — 28 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I declare the amendment 
defeated. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
The Speaker: — Debate resumes on the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Question has been called. On the main motion 
moved by the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. Will the members 
take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Morin, seconded by Mr. 
Borgerson. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
certainly a real pleasure to be able to be here in the provincial 
legislature on this the third day of sitting and in response to the 
Throne Speech of the government. 
 
I think members will know that I have taken a fairly roundabout 
route to come to this Chamber — sitting on city council; sitting 
in the Parliament of Canada, Mr. Speaker; being elected to the 
chamber of commerce on two occasions in the Battlefords; and 
working with numerous community groups throughout the area. 
In between times when I wasn’t serving the public in elected 
capacity, Mr. Speaker, I represented the community in the 
media, writing on political issues, writing on issues relating to 
agriculture, writing on issues relating to business throughout the 
community. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I feel that even though it has taken me a while 
to get to this esteemed Chamber, I am very happy to be here 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I appreciate the support of my colleagues, 
Mr. Speaker. I am going to work hard to ensure that I continue 
to earn that support throughout the term of this office. 
 
I am also proud, Mr. Speaker, to have the confidence of the 
people of the Battlefords, and I thank them for expressing that 
confidence in the most recent election. As I indicated in my 
introduction, Mr. Speaker, I have worked fairly hard with the 
people of the Battlefords, and I am grateful that by a good 
majority they have said that they respect and trust the work that 
I have done, and that they will respect and trust the work that I 
am about to do. I am very flattered and humbled by their 
continued trust and I commit myself to maintaining that trust 
for as long as I am privileged to sit in this place. 
 
I know that that won’t always be very easy, Mr. Speaker, 
because I, like every other member in this Chamber, have to 
make decisions every day. Every day that we are here we have 
to make decisions. And making decisions means making 
choices. And our choices aren’t always the same, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By the end of the day however I trust that I will keep the 
confidence of my constituency and the people of Saskatchewan 
when they assess the choices that I am about to make. I’ve done 
a lot of work in the community, throughout the province, and I 
have very few regrets over the time that I have served my 
community. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Over the years I’ve made a lot of choices both for my 
community and for myself and I have very few regrets related 
to those choices. But, Mr. Speaker, I do have a couple of regrets 
that in my opening remarks to the legislature I’d like to refer to. 
 
I regret that I didn’t have this job in mind when I got married 
two years ago. I’m sorry that I imposed this new lifestyle on my 
wonderful spouse, Cheryl. Two years ago we got married here 
in Regina. However she stood by my side throughout the entire 
election campaign and for the past three months as I’ve 
prepared for my cabinet responsibilities here in Regina. I thank 
her very much for being so caring and so wonderful and I want 
her to know that despite the kilometres difference between us, I 
will feel her warmth and her support always while I am here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And, Mr. Speaker, I also regret that my 
father is not with us any more to see what I have achieved on 
behalf of my family and my community. My father was always 
a great influence on me and throughout my life, and I don’t 
think I ever took the time to tell him how much the way he 
lived his life influenced the way that I have wanted to live mine. 
 
My father was active in our community. He loved his family 
and he was a very, very good and caring individual. We didn’t 
always share the same political beliefs, but he always 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

encouraged me in whatever I was doing. 
 
We lost my father in the last days of the election campaign. One 
of his last activities was repairing one of my election signs on 
his back fence. I know he would have been proud to have seen 
the results of the election evening on November 5, and he 
would have been very pleased to see my subsequent 
appointment to cabinet. 
 
And I want him — because I know he’s watching today — and 
my mother back in North Battleford, I want them to know that 
when I make any decision here in this Chamber, that I will ask 
myself two questions: number one, what would my dad do in 
this situation; and number two, what would my dad think of this 
decision. 
 
He worked hard to build a good reputation for the Taylor family 
in the Battlefords and I will work hard to uphold that reputation 
and serve the people of The Battlefords in this Chamber. 
 
While we’re talking about losses, Mr. Speaker, I want to take 
just a moment to recognize the most recent loss in The 
Battlefords of Harry Dekker, a Hall of Fame broadcaster from 
the city of North Battleford. And my condolences to the Dekker 
family on their loss. 
 
I know what they’re going through. The Dekker family was in 
the hospital on another matter the night that my father passed 
away, and they were very helpful in helping my mother and 
myself deal with that loss that evening. And when I heard that 
Mr. Dekker had passed away this weekend my heart sank. And 
my heart goes out to that family as they deal with the 
consequences of this very tragic loss, personal loss. The 
community of the Battlefords will also suffer a great loss in the 
loss of Mr. Dekker. 
 
Speaking of The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker — and I want to do 
that today as well — I’m very proud to represent the people of 
this constituency which has so much to be proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on February 19 of this year, the Battlefords 
Regional Economic Development Authority, our REDA, 
engaged all economic development stakeholders in the 
Battlefords region to identify their strengths, limitations, 
opportunities, and challenges through a co-operative and 
collaborative process. 
 
I was pleased to be able to attend that meeting, as were 
members of city council, as were members of the town council 
in the town of Battleford, as were representatives of the 
chamber of commerce, the economic development authority 
itself, the city’s economic development office, the tribal 
council, and others who have an interest in the Battlefords. 
 
And much of what the Battlefords is capable of achieving will 
be enhanced, Mr. Speaker, by the vision that has been set out in 
the Throne Speech, but more on that in a couple of minutes. 
 
Some of the strengths identified by our regional economic 
development authority, Mr. Speaker — primarily tourism, 
business friendliness, entrepreneurial capacity, strengthened 
services, and resources. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in tourism alone, the Battlefords is accessible 
from every part of this province, thanks to some great highways 
that were built by this government in co-operation with the 
federal government as well. We are the hub of five major 
highways, including the Yellowhead, that travel through that 
part of the country. We are a gateway to the North, to the West, 
to the East. 
 
We live in an area that is esthetically pleasing, a very pleasant 
place to live and raise a family along the North Saskatchewan 
River with the rolling hills. We are on the edge of the parkland 
and very close to the lakes in the North. Our access to fishing, 
hunting, summer and winter sports, Mr. Speaker, makes the 
Battlefords a very pleasant place to live. 
 
Of course, we have an abundance of historic sites. We all are 
aware, very much aware, Mr. Speaker, of Battleford being one 
of the oldest settlements in Western Canada, and of course the 
other historic sites in the area, Cut Knife, Frenchman Butte, 
those sorts of communities that carry a tremendous amount of 
history forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should mention at this point, town of Battleford 
this year, 2004, celebrating its 100th anniversary as 
incorporated as a town — 100th anniversary, Mr. Speaker, this 
year, town of Battleford. I welcome . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I welcome every member of this 
legislature and any person in the province of Saskatchewan and 
elsewhere who wishes to travel to the town of Battleford this 
summer for the celebrations that are going to take place. By all 
means get in your car, your recreational vehicle, bring your 
boat, bring your golf clubs — come and join us in the 
celebration of 100 years. 
 
Also while you’re there, recognize and realize the tragic loss in 
the town of Battleford last year with the loss of old Government 
House, the first seat of government of the territories in this part 
of the country. We have to find a way, municipal governments, 
provincial governments, federal governments, to in the very 
near future recognize the value of that old Government House, 
its property, and what we can do. 
 
I also want to recognize, Mr. Speaker, the fact that a tourism 
promotion in the town of Battleford this weekend was very 
successful in an awards program. The Battlefords Chamber of 
Commerce in conjunction with Battlefords tourism ran a 
program called Battlefords passport program. This welcome to 
the Battlefords passport program was recognized as an award 
winner in the Saskatchewan Tourism awards of excellence in 
the 2003 promotional marketing campaign award of excellence. 
So we . . . that took place March 19, just this past weekend, at a 
very special meeting in Saskatoon. So my congratulations to 
them. 
 
We are a very creative community, Mr. Speaker. We have an 
awful lot to be proud of there. We have an awful lot to support. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker, but I know that with the time flying 
the way it is that I want to, I want to move on to a number of 
other things that I think are important as we carry on here. 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign, the election 
campaign that brought me to this place, that brought all of the 
members in this Chamber to this place, very hard fought 
campaign, Mr. Speaker, a campaign that was settled on a 
number of very important issues, a number of important 
commitments made by this government — what did the people 
hear during that election campaign? Well number one, they 
heard that we want to make this an affordable province, Mr. 
Speaker, with the lowest utility bundle rates . . . bundle of rates 
in Canada. They heard that we want to have quality health care 
for every citizen of this province. They heard that we want to 
have a green and prosperous economy. They also heard we 
want to have this place for youth, for young people in the 
province. 
 
On Friday, Mr. Speaker, just before I was planning on saying a 
few words to the Chamber — as I’m now continuing to do so 
today — on Friday, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
made quite a speech on how we, that is the New Democratic 
Party, were breaking our promises already with regards to some 
of those commitments to the people of Saskatchewan. Well I 
don’t know what crystal ball the member was looking at, but 
here we are, Mr. Speaker. It’s the third day of this sitting, this 
legislative sitting, and I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, I can 
assure the Leader of the Opposition and the people of 
Saskatchewan that our commitment to those goals set out in that 
election campaign and others remain as strong as ever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you. We will deliver to the people 
of Saskatchewan what we said we would deliver. This 
government has integrity, but more important, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has vision. The public said during the campaign 
that they wanted change. And, Mr. Speaker, they said they 
wanted us to manage that change. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we can be trusted to manage that change. 
And a lot of what was said in the Throne Speech gives us the 
direction and shows the people of Saskatchewan the vision that 
in fact there is some change. We accept the challenge, Mr. 
Speaker. And even though there will be tough spots for all of us 
to get through together, we will get through them. And at the 
end of our current mandate we will see change, we will see 
progress, and we will see a better Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m proud to . . . Or pardon me, Mr. 
Speaker. The Throne Speech identified clearly the long-term 
vision of the government. This will be a province of greater 
opportunity, greater wealth, greater prosperity, and greater 
understanding than at any other time in our history. I’m proud 
to be a citizen of this great province. And with the challenges 
that we face, I’m proud to be a part of this great government. 
 
Some of the things that we have done leading up to the election 
campaign have led to an improvement in the Saskatchewan 
economy, Mr. Speaker. And I want to refer members of the 
opposition and members of the Saskatchewan community, I 
want to refer them to the back page of the Saskatchewan 
Business magazine, December 2003/January 2004 — a 
two-month combined issue. 

The back page, written by Saskatchewan’s Paul Martin, 
speaking quite often on behalf of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce, speaking on behalf of those who value growth in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Paul Martin is an individual who 
has worked hard to recognize how growth is important in this 
province. Page 30, the back page of Saskatchewan Business 
magazine, Mr. Martin quotes the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan as saying that intangibles . . . Just 
a minute. 
 

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan 
. . . waded into the (waded into the) debate over the 
province’s future with a detailed assessment of the 
numbers — the indicators showing how Saskatchewan 
stacks up. Called Saskatchewan Check-Up, it provides an 
objective examination of . . . (the reality in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker.) 
 

And what did ICAS (Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
Saskatchewan) find? Mr. Martin writes in this check-up: 

 
From 1993 to 2002, corporate profits in this province rose 
by an impressive 154 per cent. That compares to 155 per 
cent in Alberta and (only) 101 per cent for Canada. British 
Columbia (profits) rose . . . only (by) 82 per cent, Ontario 
by a measly 47 per cent and Manitoba by 127 (per cent). 
 

We were, in terms of business profits for those years ’93 to 
2002: 
 

We were number two in the nation . . . (only slightly) 
behind (the province of) Alberta. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is the place to be, the place to be. 
 

From 2001 to 2002 — . . . (Saskatchewan) actually 
surpassed everyone, posting a 17 per cent gain in 
corporate profits compared to Alberta’s 16 per cent and 
just over nine per cent nationally. 
 
Taxpayer supported debt — something the business 
community has long raised as a deterrent to investment — 
declined as Saskatchewan posted the best performance in 
Canada over the 1993-2002 period. In 1993 our public 
debt was 50 per cent higher than Manitoba’s. Today, we’re 
tied with Manitoba with a debt-to-GDP ratio of just over 
20 per cent, compared to more than 46 per cent a decade 
earlier. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we are a province on the verge of significant 
progress, and what Mr. Martin says; it’s attitude, Mr. Speaker. 
The naysayers should recognize the reality and support the 
future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And I guess the only other thing about 
our economy I should mention, Mr. Speaker, is the latest 
numbers that came out here just shortly. Saskatchewan job 
numbers increased in February — 1,500 more people employed 
February of this year over February of last year. And of course 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

the latest 2004 KPMG competitiveness study continues to rank 
Saskatchewan’s major cities highly throughout the midwest, 
definitely the place to be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, despite the challenges of financing of 
government, providing services and programs to the people of 
Saskatchewan, I am very excited about the future of this 
province. I’m excited to be here in this place where we can have 
such an influence on our future. 
 
My father worked hard all of his life, was respected, was 
successful, and was very happy. Mr. Speaker, I have been 
blessed because despite all of the challenges I think that I too 
have been successful. I hope that I’m respected but I know for 
sure, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very happy. And if we can achieve 
all that we set out, my son, your son, your daughter, your 
grandchildren, Mr. Speaker, they will have the opportunity to 
be successful, to earn respect, and to be happy for many, many 
years in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — On the day of the Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, I had a tear in my eye as the group of young people 
from St. Michael’s College in Yorkton sat in this gallery — 
actually stood in this gallery — and sang a song with the words: 
 

Open your eyes and look towards the future; open your 
eyes and find discovery. 

 
I think those words set out the future for Saskatchewan and I 
was very, very pleased to hear their beautiful voices singing 
those wonderful words here in this Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the enthusiasm in this province; we have 
the drive, the opportunity, and the courage. If we can find a way 
to work together we will achieve our goals and Saskatchewan 
will indeed be the home we have always dreamed that it could 
be. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote the president of the 
Battlefords Chamber of Commerce. In his most recent 
newsletter to the business community in the Battlefords. Mr. 
Keith Bossaer of the Battlefords Chamber of Commerce writes: 
 

At a recent President’s Banquet you will have heard me 
say, “If your dreams are bigger than your fears, you will 
always come out on top!” 

 
That’s the quote from the president of the chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s not be afraid to dream and let’s not let the 
fears of the opposition dampen our ability to dream. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is my first opportunity to 
rise and speak in this House and I would like to congratulate 

you on your recent election as Speaker and through you would 
like to congratulate all of the MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) who were elected and re-elected on November 5. 
And I would like, Mr. Speaker, to take this opportunity to thank 
the citizens of Saskatoon Southeast who had the confidence and 
chose to elect me on that day. 
 
I recognize as well that the tradition of the House is not to 
heckle members on their first time up in the House and would 
like to share with the other members some of the camaraderie 
that existed during the orientation session that we had earlier in 
this session. 
 
I was commiserating with some of my fellow Saskatchewan 
Party MLAs at the orientation session. I was speaking with Mr. 
Merriman and Mr. Cheveldayoff and was mentioning to them 
that I felt there was something wrong with my office, that it was 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just want to bring to the member’s 
attention that it’s customary for us to refer to other members by 
their constituencies or by their titles. I invite the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast to continue. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I should have 
referred to them in the correct sense, the other members from 
Saskatoon, and was mentioning that I felt my office was 
perhaps issued to me in error; that it was too small and lacked a 
fireplace and lacked certain other amenities such as size and 
large, oval-shaped windows. Unbeknownst to me, the hon. 
member from Saskatoon Meewasin was two steps behind me 
and leaned back over his shoulder and said, perhaps it’s because 
I’ve got your office. 
 
And to that hon. member, I say touché. Perhaps the citizens of 
that constituency will have a chance to correct the error of their 
ways and give me a better, a better office at some point in the 
future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — I would like to tell you a little bit about 
Saskatoon Southeast, Mr. Speaker. This constituency consists 
of three city neighbourhoods, Lakeview, Lakeridge, and 
Brierwood. It also contains most of the car dealerships. It 
surrounds the city on the east side. It extends south to Dundurn 
and includes the White Cap First Nation, as well as the 
Dundurn military base and all of the acreages south of the city. 
 
The challenges that exist in that constituency include highway 
location as they build new bridges and, in particular, Highway 
219 which extends south through White Cap and south to the 
area around Outlook for a recreation area. And of course, 
property tax assessment in that area is something of . . . 
(inaudible) . . . but I will speak more about that later. 
 
The constituency, Mr. Speaker, has some six golf courses, one 
of them being Moon Lake which has 36 holes. It has two 
driving ranges and only five schools. One of my constituents 
pointed out to me that perhaps there is a greater affinity for 
recreation than for procreation in the constituency. The reality 
in fact is that there is a greater need for schools than there is for 
golf courses, but we’ve been more successful at developing golf 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

courses than schools. 
 
One of my roles as MLA for that area will to be to lobby the 
Minister of Education to build schools and develop schools in 
that area. They are long overdue and needed. Mr. Speaker, this 
constituency was previously represented by Pat Lorjé, a 
colourful and unique individual who is no longer here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move on and tell you briefly a 
little bit about myself. I was born and raised in Saskatoon. My 
father was an electrical contractor. He operated his business in 
early days out of the garage behind our house and later out of a 
converted hardware store on 20th Street. 
 
During the time that I was in early public school, the employees 
of that electrical contracting firm were certified by IBEW 
(International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers) who, shortly 
after that, went on strike, not just against my father’s business 
but against the entire industry. 
 
One of my earlier dealings with trade unions was having to 
cross the picket line in front of our house on my way to school. 
There was a lot of jeering and shouting the first morning that I 
went out and my mother watched this through the window. And 
later on in the morning, she went out with warm muffins and 
coffee, served them up to the strikers that were there. And after 
they’d had their fill of muffins and coffee she said, I’ll have 
more of those this afternoon and I’ll have more of those 
tomorrow and each and every day that you’re out there, but you 
leave my kids out of this. 
 
The next morning there was about twice as many picketers and 
the picketers offered us a ride to school and, Mr. Speaker, we 
only had to go three blocks to school, unlike many of my 
colleagues on this side who had to go to school, I think, 10 or 
12 miles each way and it was uphill both ways. So we went a 
very short distance and we were chauffeured by the strikers who 
quickly wanted to get back for my mother’s baking. 
 
I relate this not to tell you about trade unions or how to 
negotiate with trade unions, but rather to tell you a little bit 
about my mother. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my wife, Sandy, and I do not have children of our 
own, but we do have a host of nieces and nephews that we spoil 
and act as surrogate parents for. We enjoy spoiling them and we 
enjoy babysitting. Uncle Don and Auntie Sandy’s is a house 
where there is no bedtimes, you can eat pizza pops for 
breakfast, and enjoy life as you should. 
 
When one of my nephews would say to me, we can’t do that at 
our house, dad says this, we can’t do this, we can’t do that; I 
would usually reply by saying, your dad won’t let you; there 
must be something wrong with your dad; you tell him that I said 
this. 
 
So I was very, very popular with the nephews and nieces, at the 
top of their list for babysitting. But certainly not at the top of 
my brother’s list who had to spend several days afterwards 
trying to straighten out his children when they were returned. 
 
I went to the University of Saskatchewan, attended law school 
there, and during the summer before I started law school, Mr. 

Speaker, I worked on buildings and grounds in the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) campus. 
 
At that time, the university employees were an affiliate of the 
Canadian Labour Congress and were going through the process 
to leave the CLC and join a specific union. They were 
considering joining three different unions, one of them being 
CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees). And I was, 
during that summer, a proud, founding member of CUPE Local 
1975. 
 
We went through an extensive process of selection from those 
unions. We had a secret ballot. We heard representations from 
the . . . And during that process, I developed a great deal of 
respect for the process that took place, for the professionalism 
of the union organizers, and the competence and dedication of 
the unions in that process. 
 
But most of all, I developed a respect for the workers that were 
there. And, Mr. Speaker, those workers wanted exactly the 
same thing and had the same values that I wanted — a fair 
wage, a level playing field, and respect and appreciation for the 
hard work that they did. 
 
I carry that respect today, Mr. Speaker, and I also carry a strong 
and biding respect for the right to bargain collectively and have 
a fair and level playing field for unions. And I will work my 
best to try and ensure that that takes place in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go on and tell you a little bit about my 
candidacy and election in Saskatoon Southeast. I was the first 
Saskatchewan Party candidate to be nominated. My nomination 
took place June 5 of 2002. So I actually had a 17-month, 
gruelling process through the election. 
 
After I was elected, I wanted to decide how to go about 
campaigning and used the same kind of methodology that I 
used when I had ran for the school board before. Don Atchison, 
who is currently the mayor of Saskatoon, had originally ran as a 
city councillor by using a campaigning method where he would 
stand on the street corners and wave vigorously to the traffic. 
So I thought it worked for him there, so I bought a new necktie 
and when out and followed his example and waved in the traffic 
both times when I ran for school board and again this time. 
 
So if you can imagine, 17 months of waving by the side of the 
road. And, Mr. Speaker, if there’s one thing I get out this, I 
want a commitment from all of the members in this House that 
the next election will be held in the summer so I don’t freeze 
my feet off waving early in the morning. It did immeasurable 
damage, Mr. Speaker, to my relationship with my spouse who 
was out there with me. 
 
During that period of time, Mr. Speaker, I knocked on doors in 
the city, on farms, on acreages, and on the reserve. I met with 
business people, health care professionals, teachers, farmers, 
doctors, lawyers, and yes, even an Indian chief. 
 
They all told me the same message and the same thing: they 
wanted jobs, they wanted economic growth, they wanted 
careers, they wanted hope, and they wanted to find a way to 
keep their children here in this province. They wanted to know 
that they would have opportunities for their children to stay in 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

this province. 
 
They did not want to see their children continue to leave. They 
did not want to have to move after their children, so that they 
could visit their children and their grandchildren. We are seeing 
a multi-generational loss of our population as they leave, and 
these are our best and brightest people. These are the ones that 
actually spin the economy, create growth, generate taxes, and 
the ones that make it a great place to stay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I will work hard to hold this 
government accountable to ensure that they will take every step 
possible to bring about economic growth and prosperity. They 
will have to ensure that there is a fair and equitable tax 
structure, and a regulatory system that will protect the 
environment and protect the health and safety of workers 
without becoming a millstone on the back of business. 
 
I look to them to provide fair and adequate trade legislation that 
can be respected by both business and trade unionists alike. Mr. 
Speaker, I will take every step to try and support that type of 
legislation as it passes through the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier I mentioned the burden of property tax. 
That is the single item that I heard the most about was property 
tax, and in particular the education component of property tax. I 
have many constituents paying 3 to $6,000 a year in property 
tax and some as much as $12,000 per year in property tax. 
 
In many homes the cost of property tax exceeds the cost of all 
other utilities combined. People recognize the need for 
education; they’re willing to pay for education. But this, Mr. 
Speaker, is the most regressive way of funding education. This 
tax affects seniors and other homeowners in a very serious and 
profound way. It destroys the incentive to own property. It 
destroys the incentive to build and develop property. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, I do not wish to see the PST 
raised or spread to meals. During the Throne Speech I noticed a 
large number of people here in white suits. These, Mr. Speaker, 
were chefs and restauranteurs here to express their concern that 
PST may be expanded to include restaurant meals. This will 
have dire and serious consequences on the young people who 
work in the hospitality industry and a direct effect on small 
business and families that wish to eat out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other thing that I wish to mention — during 
the election I met with Treaty Commissioner David Arnot. 
After I met with him I did some reading on treaties and did a 
significant amount of studying and talked to a lot of people. I 
was troubled by the lack of education and the lack of 
understanding that people have about treaties. 
 
There was a poll recently that’s . . . that came out that said 
two-thirds of the people in this province do not support the 
treaties. Well I don’t know why the poll question was ever 
phrased: do you support treaties? We can no more do away with 
treaties than we can do away with night following day. The 
treaties are an entrenched part of the constitution of this 

province and this country, and we have to do more work to 
develop understanding between First Nations people and other 
people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — We have to, Mr. Speaker, develop an agenda 
of respect and understanding. We have to ensure that people 
that are not Natives learn about treaties. We have to develop 
and work with First Nations to develop business opportunities 
and partnership. We have to focus on their educational needs 
and requirements — things like SchoolPLUS and other steps that 
we have to take to ensure an adequate and proper education for 
First Nations people. We also need to take great steps to ensure 
that treaties are taught at an early age in schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard the Throne Speech and I was troubled by 
the things that were not in the Throne Speech. I was troubled by 
the fact that there was no plan to grow the economy, no plan to 
retain young people. It was the same rhetoric that were in the 
previous throne speeches for this government. There was no 
plan, no vision, no method of dealing with technology 
innovation. 
 
The ethanol announcement that took place in this province 
happened a few weeks ago in spite of — not because of — any 
actions that were taken by this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been a proud citizen of this 
province all my life. For me this is my home and always will 
be. We have a wonderful province. It is rich in resources and 
economic potential. But the best asset that we have in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, is the citizens. They have an incredible 
warmth and sense of community. The hardships of drought and 
tough times have bonded those people together and they’ve got 
incredible vigour and vibrancy to them that we have to foster, 
develop, and do everything we can. We can’t afford to develop 
another province by shipping those people out. Those people 
are the very backbone of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be calling on this government to do 
everything they can to try and ensure that this takes place in the 
most vigorous possible method. Mr. Speaker, that concludes my 
remarks. 
 
The hon. member from Saskatchewan Rivers and . . . concluded 
his remarks last week by singing a portion of his . . . And I had 
discussions with my wife that perhaps I would, I would want to 
sing Kumbaya and ask my colleagues to join arms with me and 
start a new tradition. But, Mr. Speaker, my wife pointed out to 
me that my singing abilities are on par with my ability to be on 
time for important legislative meetings. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will sit down and wish to advise 
you I will not be supporting the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Coronation 
Park. 
 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to begin my remarks by congratulating all 
of the first-time members that I’ve heard so far, on both the 
government side and now the member for Saskatoon Southeast 
on the opposition side, for their very thoughtful speeches. I 
think it bodes well for the people of this great province of ours 
that there is such clear talent. 
 
I was just so very proud when the hon. member for Regina 
Walsh Acres was delivering her response, moving the Speech 
from the Throne — or seconding it — and then the hon. 
member for Saskatchewan Rivers, who did just such a terrific 
job following up with the seconding. And the good speeches 
just continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my first words are those of congratulations to you 
on your election, or re-election, as Speaker. I think that I know 
you will serve this Legislative Chamber as honourably as you 
have in the past and I look forward to your continued service in 
that capacity. 
 
I want to acknowledge and thank the hon. member for Regina 
Wascana Plains for allowing us to have an election and making 
that such a good pursuit. It gave a choice to all members in the 
Chamber, and it was very welcome, and thank you very much 
to the member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
My next words are those of thanks, this being my first 
opportunity to thank my constituents, the constituents in Regina 
Coronation Park, that north end Regina constituency that is 
bordered by Pasqua Street on the west border, south to the 
Canadian National rail line, and then it goes east all the way to 
Winnipeg Street, follows north on Winnipeg Street to Ring 
Road, and then comes back west all the way to No. 6 Highway, 
or the corner of Albert and 6, and then jogs out so that it 
includes Argyle Park. That’s the simplest way I can describe the 
constituency of Regina north geographically. 
 
But a wonderful constituency it is, Mr. Speaker. I represent a 
working constituency. My constituents are not naive in any 
sense. We acknowledge the past. We live in the presence, and 
we welcome the future. 
 
We know who worked on Regina’s office buildings and 
shopping centres. We know who built them: it’s us. We know 
who works in the offices as professionals, as support staff, and 
as maintenance workers: it’s us. We know who volunteers in all 
manner of great and important and necessary organizations 
throughout Regina, Mr. Speaker, organizations from our 
schools, to Cubs and Guides, church groups, and even to 
SaskTel Pioneers and much more: it’s us. 
 
We know our actions do make a difference. We know our 
values make a solid foundation for today and for the future. 
 
We’ve done some good work, Mr. Speaker, and we look 
forward to continuing that good work into the future. My 
constituents are very proud of Saskatchewan past and its 
present, and as I’ve mentioned, we are very much looking 
forward to the future. And we know where we’ve got to go. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have experienced in Saskatchewan, we’ve 
experienced drought. We’ve experienced floods. We’ve 
experienced grasshoppers and rust, rail-line abandonment, and a 
host of other character-building challenges. And now we know 
about BSE, and we know about a federal equalization formula 
that doesn’t work well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had enough character-building references to 
know where we’ve been, where we are. And not only do we 
know where we want to go — the better Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan that is youth friendly, the Saskatchewan that 
opens up and makes this great province a first choice in 
opportunity for all of our young people — we know much of 
the things that we have to do to make that happen. 
 
But my constituents also have good memories, Mr. Speaker. 
And they remember things like the 1980s when the now Leader 
of the Opposition was a cabinet ministerial assistant serving the 
cabinet of Grant Devine. We know of things in the ’80s like Hi 
R Doors, and Supercart fiasco, Eagle buses of Texas. We know 
about a pulp mill that was given away. We know about a potash 
company that was essentially given away. Many of us 
remember GigaText and JoyTec. 
 
We remember the office of public participation. I am sitting, 
Mr. Speaker . . . or not sitting, I’m standing fairly close to the 
hon. member for North Battleford, and I remember his 
predecessor who coined a phrase that, if you throw a coin in the 
dark and you hear a yelp, you likely hit a dog. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to hear the yelping from the 
members opposite. The office of Public Participation that my 
constituents remember, that they remember all too well, was 
Tory code words for the office of privatization, and they know 
exactly what that’s about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituents don’t want to live in the past. 
They want to remember things from the past so that we don’t 
repeat those mistakes. My constituents live firmly today, and 
they have wonderful expectations for the future. My 
constituents and all of the people of this wonderful province 
know we are just at a turning point. We are just about to 
celebrate Saskatchewan’s 100th birthday, Mr. Speaker, and 
what a wonderful time that will be. One hundred years – 
relatively young, but it’s still a hundred years – and I think of 
all the things that we have built. Our grandparents, our parents, 
and even we’ve had a hand at building some of this, Mr. 
Speaker. How well we’ve built this province. 
 
My constituents have built medicare, where Saskatchewan led 
Canada. Imagine that — little old Saskatchewan. We now have 
4 per cent of the population, roughly, of Canada, and yet we 
were the first province that put together a health care system 
where you could go and see a doctor and not have to pay for it, 
where you could go into the hospital and not have to pay for it. 
That was right here in Saskatchewan. That was one of our 
proudest gifts to all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In education we’ve built well, whether we’re talking from 
kindergarten to grade 12, or whether we’re talking about a 
tremendous SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) instructional system, or if we’re talking about 
the community college system that we’re all so very proud of 



March 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

right throughout the province, or our two great universities. In 
education, Saskatchewan has built very well. We’ve got the 
foundations, and we’re continuing with expansions at both of 
our universities. Every year there’s school updates; there’s 
things being done with infrastructure. And things just continue 
to get better and better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In social programs we’ve built well. Saskatchewan above all 
provinces is notorious and noted for leading in social programs, 
Mr. Speaker. The list is huge. But from daycares, to affordable 
housing, to our national child action plan, our nation-leading, 
right here in Saskatchewan . . . the child action plan which 
started first in Saskatchewan and then expanded to all of 
Canada. And that was our legacy, our gift. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve done much in Saskatchewan in the past, 
leading to a very good present. In highways we’ve built to the 
point where we have more kilometres of highway per capita, 
per person, more kilometres of highway than anywhere else in 
the world. I’m told we’ve got enough roads and highways in 
this province to stretch around the equator of the earth three and 
a half times. That’s a lot of roads and a lot of highway — three 
and a half times around the centre of the earth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear . . . and it’s pothole season soon, soon 
going to be pothole season. Soon we’re going to hear about the 
potholes which come every year in the spring. It happens. We 
have freeze-up in the winter and we have a thaw in the spring, 
and there’s frost boils and there’s pavement that simply breaks 
up and it needs to be repaired. And, Mr. Speaker, the history of 
our Highways department in our province is we fix these roads 
as they need to be fixed. Unfortunately we can’t fix them in a 
heartbeat that we all wish we could. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting again. I hear opposition members 
speaking from their seats about the highways, but what is really 
interesting is that none of them are talking about the great 
highways that we’ve got today, the winter highways where we 
don’t have the potholes. And I’m not telling you there’s no 
potholes in this province but I am going to tell you that I’ve 
travelled the highways extensively this winter and I’m very, 
very pleased with the state of Saskatchewan’s highways. You 
go hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of kilometres without 
seeing a pothole. And I’m very, very pleased about that, very 
pleased about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have built an infrastructure 
very well. We have Crown corporations that deliver amongst 
the lowest utility rates, the best service anywhere in the world. 
 
We have got Crown corporations like SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), which SGI started, amongst other 
things, because farmers could not buy basic fire insurance. The 
private insurance companies of the day refused to sell it. They 
were too far from a fire department was what the argument 
went. Well, Mr. Speaker, we set up SGI so we could have 
things like fire insurance for farmers. Farm pak. They invented, 
led the way by putting together Tenant Pak, that sort of thing. 
 
Today SGI has two major arms. One is the insurance business 
that competes with private insurers, and that’s fine. That’s 

good. It’s nice to have choice. It’s nice to have the jobs at SGI 
here in Saskatchewan, but it’s nice to have choice. We can buy 
from SGI, the Saskatchewan company, our private insurance 
needs, or we can buy from an insurance company based out of 
Saskatchewan, somewhere else. But it’s nice to have that 
choice. 
 
We have the other side of SGI which is the Auto Pak side, the 
public auto insurance side where, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 
amongst the very lowest automobile insurance premium rates in 
the world, and we have amongst the very finest coverage 
available in the world, whether we’re talking coverage for . . . 
(inaudible) . . . or for people. And we’ve got a dispute 
mechanism that helps people through when there is a dispute. 
I’d love to tell you that all of the disputes are settled to 
everyone’s satisfaction but in the real world that just is not 
possible. It’s not possible with any, any insurer in the world. 
But I am very proud of the job that SGI does overall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got SaskTel, the great little telco that can. 
For much of my life I have heard that SaskTel is too small a 
little telephone company, that it shouldn’t survive, it can’t 
survive in the long term. And every year this little telco that 
can’t, not only does, but it seems to thrive. 
 
It’s in Canada’s top 50 companies to work for, is our little 
SaskTel. One of the finest companies in the entire country of 
Canada to work with, for, and at, is SaskTel. SaskTel has got 
some absolutely wonderful leading edge products and they offer 
these up at very, very good prices. And the people of 
Saskatchewan — my constituents, Mr. Speaker, and others — 
respond to it. 
 
When you look at the rate of . . . Even though we have 
long-distance competition and you look at the rate that SaskTel 
has been able to maintain its, its long-distance service . . . The 
last time I heard it was somewhere still above 90 per cent of us 
use SaskTel for our long-distance services, and that speaks very 
well. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we welcome the jobs that SaskTel 
provides. Earlier in my speech I talked a bit about the SaskTel 
Pioneers being a great organization that does some very 
worthwhile and meaningful things. I point out to anyone that 
cares to listen, that the SaskTel Pioneers are there because we 
have SaskTel. And as long as we have SaskTel I predict that the 
SaskTel Pioneers will continue to do much of their wonderful 
work that they do right across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got SaskPower and SaskEnergy, two other 
utility Crowns that deliver terrific service. We’ve not been 
necessarily blessed with the best hydrology in the universe. 
That is, we can’t generate all of the electricity we’d like to from 
water, which is lower cost than coal. But despite that our utility 
rates are very, very competitive. And we enjoy all of the jobs 
and I’m very proud of what our Crowns are doing. I’m proud of 
the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech that we’re debating today, the 
Speech from the Throne, sets out a futuristic plan — a plan that 
is youth friendly; a plan that has a CareerStart program to help 
prepare our young people for jobs right here in Saskatchewan. 
This Throne Speech has a youth recruitment component for in 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2004 

our Crowns and in the broader public service. Young people 
deserve their opportunity to shine. Young people deserve to be 
part of our future here in Saskatchewan. And they deserve to be 
the leaders of that future as quickly as we can pass the baton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne speaks of a green and 
prosperous economy. We know that oil and forestry and 
mining, mining where Saskatchewan enjoys the third highest 
dollar amount of mining of any of the provinces in Canada — 
we’ve moved from number four to number three in the last 
couple of years — we know that those things are going to be 
important. But we also know from this futuristic Speech from 
the Throne that we’re going to be paying attention increasingly 
to above-the-ground resources like solar and wind, biomass, 
biofuels, hydrogen, those sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very proud the day that the speech was 
presented. We had St. Michael’s School from Yorkton in the 
west gallery singing two lovely songs for us, and right next to 
them was students from the Huda School in Regina Coronation 
Park. 
 
And I was so proud of them because I had an opportunity to 
meet with them both before and after. Their questions were 
interesting and great. Their enthusiasm was wonderful. And I so 
much appreciated the students from the Huda School being so 
supportive of the St. Michael’s School before, during, and after 
their song. And it was just such a treat for me to share that 
special day of the Speech from the Throne with the Huda 
School students from my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m getting nicely warmed up and I clearly will be 
supporting the Speech from the Throne. I think this is a 
wonderful document, a wonderful blueprint for the future. 
Because I’m just nicely warmed up but recognizing the time 
drawing later and later, I now would move that we adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

The Assembly adjourned at 16:55. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................39 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................39 
  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................39 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................39 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................39 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................39 
  Wakefield.....................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  Eagles ...........................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  Bakken .........................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  Allchurch .....................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................41 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...............................................................................................................................................................................41 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................41 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................42 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Higgins .........................................................................................................................................................................................42 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................42 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Bakken .........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................43 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Women’s Day 
  Junor ............................................................................................................................................................................................43 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................44 
 Saskatchewan Broadcaster Harry Dekker 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................44 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racism  
  Borgerson ....................................................................................................................................................................................44 
 Fire in Hog Barn 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................44 
 Rural Women’s Month in Saskatchewan 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................45 
 World Water Day 
  Eagles ...........................................................................................................................................................................................45 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Surgical Waiting Lists 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................45 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................45 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................46 
 Termination of Director of Emergency Medicine at Royal University Hospital 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................47 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................47 
 Out-Migration in Saskatchewan 
  Merriman ....................................................................................................................................................................................48 
  Cline .............................................................................................................................................................................................49 
 Support for the Livestock Industry 
  Stewart .........................................................................................................................................................................................49 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................49 
 



 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................50 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Equalization Program in Canada 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................50 
  Cline .............................................................................................................................................................................................54 
  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................56 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................58 
  Van Mulligen ...............................................................................................................................................................................60 
 Recorded Division (Amendment) ..................................................................................................................................................61 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................62 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................68 
 


