















































Hansard: June 14, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 56A  MONDAY, JUNE 14, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1575 
 June 14, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege once 
again to present a petition on behalf of the community of 
Climax and as well Frontier and other surrounding smaller 
communities concerning health care delivery at the community 
of Climax. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have petitions once again signed by constituents 
from the communities of Climax, Frontier, and other smaller 
communities in the area. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with a possible closure or 
downsizing of the Craik Health Centre. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik Health Centre 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Craik. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine that 
are concerned about the beer discount structure. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to reinstate the bulk beer discount 
structure cancelled in the recent provincial budget. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, 
Bienfait, and Torquay. 
 

I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that want to have public hearings on closures and 
layoffs, Saskatchewan health care system, before they come in 
effect. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government 
through the legislative Human Services Committee to hold 
public hearings in each of the communities affected by the 
changes recently announced by the Minister of Health, 
prior to those bed closures, facility closures, and layoffs 
taking place. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Kenaston. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned with the downsizing and closure of public health care 
facilities without public consultation. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government 
through the legislature’s Human Services Committee to 
hold public hearings in each of the communities affected 
by the changes recently announced by the Minister of 
Health, prior to these bed closures, facility closures, and 
layoffs taking place. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, presented on behalf of the good citizens of 
Kenaston. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise 
in the Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
west central Saskatchewan concerned with the reduction and 
loss of health care. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Kerrobert Hospital 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this entire petition is signed by citizens of 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Luseland, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who in the past have 
been concerned about the dust on the gravel highway, although 
I don’t think that’s a problem these last few weeks. However 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and provide dust suppression on the 
gravel portion of Highway 99 between Junction 6 and 
Craven. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Craven and surrounding area. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
constituents concerned about the future of health care in 
southwest Saskatchewan. The prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government 
through the legislature’s Human Services Committee to 
hold public hearings in the communities affected by the 
changes recently announced by the Minister of Health, 
prior to those bed closures, facility closures, and layoffs 
taking place. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of these signatories to this petition are from the 
city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition against the closure of the Border 
Health Centre from a 24-hour facility to an 8-hour facility. Mr. 
Speaker, this has quite an effect in my constituency as I know it 
does from the member from Cypress Hills. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of Val 
Marie. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens that are asking to improve cellular telephone 
coverage in their area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the regions 
encompassed in the constituency of Biggar. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this year I 
was presented with petitions by the Canadian food and 
restaurant association bearing the signatures of 135,000 people, 
and I am pleased to present this petition today. The petition 
states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And I’m pleased to present those today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A new petition concerning the Heartland Health Region, 
sessional paper 206; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being nos. 167, 
174, 182, 198, and 203. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier, the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my honour today to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the House a very important guest, Mr. Speaker, 
who is seated in your gallery. 
 
I’d like to introduce to members of the legislature Mr. Hans 
Schwandt, who is Consul General of Germany in Vancouver. 
With Mr. Schwandt is his wife, Dr. Heidi Schwandt-Boden, and 
they are accompanied for their visit to our province by someone 
well known to us, Dr. Gunter Kocks, who is the honorary 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

consul of Germany in Saskatchewan, and his wife, Ms. Judy 
Kocks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, the Consul General is spending a 
number of days in our province. This morning the Minister of 
Agriculture, I believe, Minister of Industry and Resources, and 
myself, we’ve each had an opportunity to meet with Mr. 
Schwandt to discuss issues of mutual concern — and there are 
many. 
 
I know that while he is here he will be visiting with the 
Lieutenant Governor. He will be visiting with you, Mr. Speaker. 
He will be visiting with the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership, with Tourism Saskatchewan. He will visit here in 
Regina the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and be 
part of the Western Canadian Farm Progress Show and then 
travel to Saskatoon for meetings at the university and with some 
of the biotech firms. 
 
There is much, Mr. Speaker, that we are doing with the great 
nation of Germany, both in terms of trade and tourism, and we 
believe there is much more that we can do. And so I would like 
all members to welcome the Consul General to our Chamber 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, I want to join with the Premier and our government 
colleagues opposite in welcoming Mr. Schwandt here to the 
Legislative Assembly, as well as his wife, Dr. Heidi 
Schwandt-Boden, and Dr. Kocks as well to our Assembly. 
 
And we do note a very busy itinerary as the Premier has pointed 
to, including later on a visit to the university of Saskatoon as 
well as the Farm Progress Show. And so on behalf of members 
on this side of the House, on behalf of the official opposition, 
welcome here and we hope your proceedings are certainly 
worthwhile for both Saskatchewan and Germany. Thank you 
for being here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 
 
And I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Gunter Kocks 
was also the person I worked for at the German consulate here 
in Regina for many years. I certainly enjoyed my employment 
there and learned many, many things. And my experiences there 
have served me well over the years in terms of the work that 
I’ve done. So I thank you and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to members of the legislature I’d like to welcome 22 
students from the town of Kenaston. Grades 6 and 7 have 
journeyed up today to watch the proceedings. With them are 
teachers Melanie Kerpan, Carole Butcher, and also some 
chaperones, Donna Friend, Debbie Sagen, and Norma Yelich. 
 
I welcome you to your legislature here today and I hope that 
you will enjoy the proceedings, and I hope you will also enjoy 
the tour of the building that’s coming up. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is a privilege for me to introduce to you and through you to 
the rest of this legislature a young man who is no stranger to the 
legislature but has returned from a year of studies and from a 
recent trip to Inuvik, and that is Kelsey James Rose, who is up 
in the west gallery. 
 
Kelsey is attending Lester Pearson College and today he is 
accompanied by a friend, Karlis Rokpelnis, who is from Latvia 
and attends a sister college to Lester Pearson College, the 
United World College of the Adriatic. And they both recently 
were on a tour in Inuvik. And I hope that all will join me in 
welcoming them to this legislature. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce 
to you today and through you today to the members of the 
legislature, on behalf of and in conjunction with the member 
from Rosthern-Shellbrook, a group of ladies that many, many of 
us heard over lunchtime, Mr. Speaker, singing in the rotunda. 
 
They are ladies from the communities of Glenbush, Rabbit 
Lake, and Medstead. Their name is Take Note and, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce each of them individually — if 
they’ll just give a little wave as I do that. 
 
They are: the director, Cheryl Janzen; accompanist, Marjorie 
Klassen; Beth Pain, Joanie Barbondy, Jean Pauls, Brenda Hill, 
Peggy Pauls, Naomi Unger, Suzanne Fox, Sharon Harms, and 
Marllene Martens, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my connection 
with this group is through family. The group leader of Cheryl 
Janzen is my sister-in-law. 
 
And just a bit of an aside — a success story — we have a young 
lady in the gallery who is part of the world famous Up With 
People group. Her name is Mrs. Beth Pain and she was part of 
the Take Note group. Mr. Speaker, a good success story for 
Saskatchewan — she is originally from Maryland in the United 
States and married a young man from Rabbit Lake and has 
made her home in Canada. 
 
So we welcome all of you to your legislature, and I want to 
thank you very much for your participation and your great 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

music in the rotunda. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to make a special note and a special welcome to someone 
who is part of the group of Kenaston students that the member 
from Arm River-Watrous introduced just prior to this. Part of 
that group is my wife, Melanie Kerpan, who is a teacher in 
Kenaston. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to ask all members today to really 
be extra kind to me because I’ve been telling her how good an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) I’m becoming and 
I don’t want anybody to spoil that story. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Good afternoon, and I also want to take 
note of the Take Note group choir. As Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, I want to welcome you to the legislator 
as well . . . legislation as well. And I used to hang out around 
Medstead, Glaslyn, and stuff like that; I went to high school 
there. So I want to welcome you too. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the legislature a group of 30 students from Willow Bunch, 
Saskatchewan. They are in my constituency on the far west side 
of the constituency. 
 
And I’d like to welcome them here today, and I’d like to tell the 
members of the legislature what a great place Willow Bunch is. 
It is a great draw for tourism. They have a beautiful golf course 
and they’re the home of the Willow Bunch giant. And so I’d 
invite people, if they have the opportunity this summer, to 
travel to Willow Bunch and to experience what the community 
of Willow Bunch has to offer. 
 
They are accompanied today by their teachers, Randy Sturtz 
and Janine Bouvier — I hope I said that correctly — and 
chaperone, Barb Mondor. And I’d like to welcome you all and 
look forward to meeting with you later. 
 
I’d like all members to help me welcome them to their 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
introduce to you one person who of course most members in 
this Assembly know, is Sarah Mills with CJME radio, who is 

seated in the west gallery. 
 
But as important as Sarah is, it’s actually a group of relatives or 
soon-to-be relatives who are with her today from Wales, who 
are joining this Assembly in the west gallery. I understand that 
visiting her are Herly and Rob Thorris from Wales, and if 
they’d just give a wave — there we go; okay, good, so we all 
know who we’re talking about here. They’re visiting their son, 
Malcolm Craig, who is Sarah’s boyfriend. And of course we’d 
like to welcome them all here to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this legislature, I’d like to 
introduce 19 grade 4 students from Westview School in 
Estevan. They are seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 
they are accompanied by Mrs. Bolen and Mrs. Mainprize, and 
Mr. Johnson is a chaperone. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have visited these students at their school 
and I look forward to visiting with them again shortly. So I ask 
all members to join me in welcoming these students to their 
legislature. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly two very special guests seated in the west gallery. 
These two young women have played a significant role in my 
decision to enter politics, and in fact played a significant role in 
my election, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, they play a significant 
role in my life. They are my daughters, Kirstin Borgerson and 
Erika Borgerson. 
 
They take a very keen interest in politics, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re here of course to observe their father in the Assembly 
but also to observe and see if the members conduct themselves 
as well as I say we do. 
 
So I’d like to ask all the members to welcome my daughters, 
Kirstin and Erika, to the people’s Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

All Nations Healing Hospital Opens 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend I, along 
with the Minister of Health and the member from Meadow 
Lake, had the honour to attend the official opening of the All 
Nations Healing Hospital in Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this facility will serve the entire community. It is a 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

model of a true partnership between the First Nations and 
non-First Nations people in Saskatchewan. The journey was not 
always easy. It was a process that required mutual respect, 
compromise, and consensus building. This was the vision 
shared by all nations; that vision has now come true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 91-year-old elder Agnes Cyr of Pasqua First 
Nation cut the ribbon to officially open the new health care 
facility. It replaces the Fort Qu’Appelle Indian Hospital that 
was built nearly 70 years ago. 
 
The design elements of the new facility accommodate an 
approach to health care that recognizes the relationship between 
mind, spirit, body, and community. All patients, whether First 
Nations or not, will have the opportunity to benefit from all the 
services that are offered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the All Nations Healing Hospital is an example of 
our commitment to ensuring we have a strong network of health 
care facilities across the province. It is also an example of what 
we can achieve when we all work together for the common 
good. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also had 
the pleasure of attending, along with the members opposite, the 
official opening of the All Nations Healing Hospital in Fort 
Qu’Appelle on Saturday. And I must say it was certainly an 
impressive and memorable opening ceremonies. The First 
Nations people had their grand entry and their prayers and I 
found it very interesting and informative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what I found most informative is the process that this new 
hospital travelled down to become reality. It was a hospital that 
was . . . The old hospital was transferred to the tribal councils of 
the area, Mr. Speaker, and as soon as . . . back in 1995. And as 
soon as they took ownership, they embarked on a plan to 
replace the old facility with the new facility that we see there 
today. 
 
And what I found perhaps most interesting is the selection 
process they went through to come up with their new name. The 
holding company and tribal council chiefs felt that the name 
should . . . of Fort Qu’Appelle Indian Hospital should stay with 
the old facility, Mr. Speaker. And so they asked the elders, what 
type of a process should we go through to find a new name for 
our new hospital? And the elder says, seek that information 
from the youth. And so they did. 
 
They contacted your schools and the name of All Nations 
Healing Centre came from the young people, Mr. Speaker, and 
the young people participated in the ribbon cutting ceremony. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is truly a unique facility. And the spirit of 
co-operation and partnership that took place is a template that 
we can apply across this province. And I congratulate all those 
involved with the new hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Gathering Our Artists Symposium 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon 
Centre and I recently had the pleasure of attending the closing 
gala of the first annual Gathering Our Artists Symposium 
hosted by Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the symposium was a social, cultural, 
collaborative forum and it brought together some of Canada’s 
finest Aboriginal artists to share their skills and experiences in 
the performing arts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saturday night gala was a fitting finale. It 
began with drummers and singers and the entry of West Coast 
dancers led by Gordon Tootoosis, and this was followed by a 
who’s who of Aboriginal performers. 
 
Playwright Drew Hayden Taylor read from one of his short 
plays. Tomson Highway at the piano performed a composition 
from one of his plays. One of our Saskatchewan treasures, 
Andrea Menard, sang a song from her Velvet Devil show. And 
Maria Campbell and Tantoo Cardinal performed a reading from 
one of Ms. Campbell’s plays accompanied by the music of John 
and Vicki Arcand, which ended with Tantoo Cardinal and 
Andrea Menard jigging to fiddle music. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a full evening of musicians, poets, actors, 
and playwrights — artists with powerful voices. 
 
It reminds me of a quotation attributed to Louis David Riel: 
 

My people will sleep for one hundred years but when they 
. . . awake, it will be the artists who (bring) . . . their . . . 
(spirits) back. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we offer congratulations to the Saskatchewan 
Native Theatre Company for their vision and determination in 
making this celebration happen, and our thanks for their 
contribution to the arts and to young people in this province. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Inchkeith Celebration  
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend I had the pleasure of joining with a number of local 
people as well as many visitors from across Canada who came 
to dedicate a cairn to mark the location of a former community 
in our province. Mr. Speaker, members from the former 
community of Inchkeith and the school of Golden Ridge 
gathered together to reminisce and to dedicate a cairn and a 
plaque which would remind future generations of the fact that a 
little vibrant community was established in that area a number 
of years ago. 
 
It’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we have seen so many small 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

communities disappear from our horizon. However this plaque 
and this cairn will just be a reminder of the many activities that 
took place. Mr. Speaker, that little community was the hub of 
activity for many years, as was the school which is 3 miles 
away down the road from the former community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event would not have been possible if it 
wasn’t for the women’s, Inchkeith Women’s Institute, formerly 
the Inchkeith women’s homemakers guild, and the Golden 
Ridge community club. Mr. Speaker, the day was a day enjoyed 
by all as we dedicated the cairn, moved to the old school 
building, reminisced, and then gathered for supper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had individuals all the way from Niagara Falls, 
Ontario, and Vancouver Island. So you can see, Mr. Speaker, 
that former residents of that area have moved far and wide in 
the country of Canada, and I want to extend congratulations and 
a special thank you to everyone who worked so diligently and 
so hard to make this such a successful day. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Canadian Rivers Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday was 
Canadian Rivers Day, a day to honour the beauty and joy of our 
rivers, to celebrate our river heritage, and to show our 
appreciation for the natural resource. Mr. Speaker, fresh water 
is essential to life on earth, and I am proud to say that Canada is 
home to more than one-fifth of the world’s water supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, national rivers day encourages all Canadians to 
learn about the heritage, vastness and diversity of Canada’s 
rivers. It’s a grassroot-driven event that provides education and 
action through celebration, and continues the traditions of our 
Aboriginal peoples in showing respect and admiration for our 
environment. 
 
To celebrate our rivers, a variety of events were held across the 
country yesterday, including river cleanups, music festivals, 
canoeing trips, clean water workshops, historical enactments, 
and a campaign to raise $500,000 annually to support and 
enhance community participation in Canadian Rivers Day. Here 
in Saskatchewan I along with many others had the pleasure of 
taking part in the Meewasin Valley Authority’s second annual 
cruise and barbecue as we floated down the South 
Saskatchewan River on board a tour boat called the Saskatoon 
Princess. We all had a great time and learned some interesting 
facts about our own river. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s rivers represent adventure and 
discovery. They have moulded our identity and culture and 
landscape, and have played a critical role in linking us together 
as a country. From fur traders to explorers and settlers, the 
nation’s rivers have provided transportation as well as 
communication routes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing 
Canadian Rivers Day. And I encourage everyone to take part in 

celebrating, commemorating, and preserving both 
Saskatchewan and Canada’s spectacular bodies of water. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Retirement of Dr. John Courtney 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 
like to recognize a political studies professor at the University 
of Saskatchewan that has decided to retire from his very 
successful career in academia. Dr. John Courtney joined the 
University of Saskatchewan faculty in 1965. This is his 39th 
year in the academic world. Dr. Courtney earned his Bachelor 
of Arts in 1958 from the University of Manitoba, his Master’s 
of Business Administration from the University of Western 
Ontario in 1960, and his Master’s and Ph.D. (doctor of 
philosophy) in political studies from Duke University in 1962 
and 1964 respectively. 
 
Dr. Courtney is a renowned expert on the institutions of 
electoral democracy, political parties, and representation. He 
has authored three books and has written dozens of journal 
articles on the Canadian political system and was a member of 
the Federal Electoral Boundaries Commission in 1987. Dr. 
Courtney has also testified before numerous parliamentary 
committees. Dr. Courtney has helped shape the department of 
political studies at the University of Saskatchewan and many 
young students — including the Leader of the Opposition and 
myself — not too, too many years ago. 
 
I know Professor Courtney will be missed by the university, his 
colleagues, and his students. I would like to congratulate him on 
a very successful career and would like all members to wish 
him the best in his retirement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

Recycling Program Provides Milk for Children 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new program 
launched by the Regina Food Bank is providing nutrition for 
children and keeping toxic substances out of the landfills. With 
a small t-h and a capital i-n-k, thINK Food and 
Phones-for-Food launched last week in Regina makes it 
possible for empty ink-jet cartridges and old cellphones to be 
recycled for money that will go directly to putting milk on the 
table for children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest challenges of the food bank is 
being able to purchase milk. Not only does this program 
alleviate hunger and provide nutrition for children, but it’s also 
environmentally friendly fundraising project for food banks. 
Residents can turn in their empty ink cartridges and old 
cellphones to one of the many sites in the city including the 
Regina Food Bank, city hall, SaskEnergy, the Lawson centre, 
and Purolator Courier. The used products are then transported 
to recycling centres in Ottawa and the proceeds are returned to 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

the food bank in the form of rebates. Mr. Speaker, 
approximately six litres of milk can be bought with every 
recycled cartridge or cellphone, and it’s estimated the program 
will raise 50,000 to $100,000 for the food bank. 
 
(14:00) 
 
This program can only be successful because of the people in 
the community who choose to participate. It’s a reflection of the 
co-operative spirit in Saskatchewan and an example of what 
individuals working together can do to enrich the lives of our 
children and foster a greener environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
recognizing the Regina Food Bank and its partners for the 
innovative program and the positive impact it’s having on our 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

SaskTel Investment in Navigata 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister Responsible for SaskTel. In the year 
2001, the NDP (New Democratic Party) government bought a 
Vancouver-based telco called Navigata Inc.. The company has 
operated as a wholly owned subsidiary of SaskTel since 2001 
and has lost money every year. 
 
In 2001 Navigata lost two and a half million dollars. In 2002 
Navigata lost $11 million, and in 2003 Navigata lost an 
additional $11.6 million. Mr. Speaker, how much money does 
the minister expect SaskTel will lose in 2004 on Navigata Inc.? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
hear the opposition member say it’s a good question. In fact, it 
is a good question. Mr. Speaker, that’s rare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say with respect to Navigata, Mr. 
Speaker, the member also correctly identifies the losses. But let 
me say that the investment is, first of all it’s a platform for 
voice over Internet, Mr. Speaker, and it is believed by SaskTel 
that this investment will achieve great things for SaskTel in the 
years to come. 
 
First of all it already saves, on an annual basis, $7 million, Mr. 
Speaker, for the parent company, which is not reflected in those 
numbers that that member identifies here this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel’s 2004 first quarter 
report indicated revenues were up at Navigata for the first 
quarter of this fiscal year, and it also says expenses at Navigata 

were up in the first quarter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP is willing to report that both revenues 
and expenses are up at Navigata in the first quarter of 2004, 
then they probably should be willing to make public how much 
money Navigata will lose in the first quarter of 2004. Will the 
minister confirm that Navigata lost money again in the first 
three months of this year, and will the minister indicate how 
much that loss really was? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In my first 
answer, I also did not indicate that it is anticipated that saving to 
SaskTel as well again, which is not reflected in the question that 
the member asked, is expected to grow to some $10 to $12 
million on an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the expenses grow so too do the revenues. Mr. 
Speaker, again, as SaskTel sees this investment as a very good 
investment because it is the platform for what they believe to be 
the technology of the future which is — it’s the new world, Mr. 
Speaker — it’s the voice over Internet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel I think, if you look at their record of 
investments, contrary to what the members opposite will say, 
are one of the strongest if not the strongest telephone company 
in North America. Coming from a province like Saskatchewan 
that’s something I think we should all be proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if SaskTel has been that 
strong and wants to maintain that position going into the future, 
they’re really going to have to watch the kind of investments 
they get into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s investment in Vancouver-based 
Navigata holdings has really been a disaster to date. Since 2001, 
the NDP has poured $49 million into Navigata. And every year, 
Navigata has lost more money than the year before: a total so 
far, Mr. Speaker, of 21 . . . I’m sorry, $25.1 million of 
taxpayers’ money. That’s in the 28 months between September 
of 2001 and December of 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much money does the NDP government 
expect to lose in Navigata Inc. in the first 6 months of 2004? 
We already asked about the first three months. And how much 
more money is the NDP planning to gamble in its failing 
Vancouver-based telco, Navigata Inc? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thanks again, Mr. Speaker. Again I 
will repeat the answer I gave, Mr. Speaker. That is that first of 
all, in the numbers that the member asks, it has not reflected the 
savings, the annual savings that SaskTel achieves by making 
this investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again also it is a platform we believe — or 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

SaskTel believes, I should say appropriately — for voice over 
Internet, and already they are venturing into that market in those 
areas, Mr. Speaker. This is . . . it is believed by I think any 
telephone company in the world probably, that this is the way 
of the future. 
 
Now as I’ve said, you know, when I come to the legislature, 
again I wouldn’t be surprised to see horses and buggies parked 
back in the members opposite’s stalls, again, Mr. Speaker. But 
we’ve got to move forward in the world. There are chances 
sometimes you have to take, Mr. Speaker. But as I’ve said 
before as well, SaskTel’s record will prove, I think, that the 
majority of the investments they have made have reaped 
substantial benefits for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, page 42 of SaskTel’s 2003 annual 
report makes the following comment on the financial risks 
associated with its money-losing portfolio of business gambles, 
and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

If management subsequently discovers that a particular 
venture within the portfolio is not expected to generate the 
value originally anticipated and will not be profitable 
within three to five years . . . the corporation will explore 
exit strategies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has gambled $49 million of taxpayers’ 
money in its Vancouver-based telco, Navigata Inc.. And 
Navigata has lost every year $25.1 million, and counting, since 
2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the NDP considering an exit strategy for its 
money-losing investment in Vancouver-based Navigata Inc.? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
answer to that question is of course we are not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say as well, you know, that member has I 
think a lot of integrity. The last time he got up and asked 
questions, it was with respect to what he believed, I think — 
and the research was probably not done very well from the 
opposition there, Mr. Speaker — but he believed that the 
overall revenues of the parent company were, I think, projected 
to be some four and a half million dollars. Well in fact he only 
had a bit of the information. It was only based on the hard line, 
and I think it was about $4 million, as I remember. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, you know, that question that was asked 
I think ties very well into the question the member asks today 
— that is that there is huge diversification going on within 
telephone companies. And not very many years ago, the 
majority of the income of SaskTel was derived as a result of 
long distance. It is almost non-existent now, Mr. Speaker. And 
it will be as a result of investments that SaskTel makes through 
Navigata and companies like that where they’ve diversified so 
they can bring to the people of Saskatchewan things like voice 
over Internet, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Minds Eye Pictures 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in 2001 the NDP government 
decided to get into the movie business by buying part of Minds 
Eye Pictures. 
 
In October of 2002, Minds Eye Pictures signed a 10-year 
contract for office and production space at the 
government-owned sound stage in Regina. However, this past 
Friday, the government’s movie company announced it was 
moving out of the government-owned sound stage because the 
rent was too expensive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, how many months behind in the 
rent was Minds Eye Pictures as of last Friday? And how much 
does Minds Eye Pictures owe in back rent to the 
government-owned sound stage? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Investment 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s well-known in the 
media that Minds Eye has experienced financial difficulties. It’s 
also known, Mr. Speaker, that Minds Eye is reorganizing itself 
so that it can continue to contribute positively to the growth of 
the film and video industry in Saskatchewan. And Minds Eye 
has vacated the premises, Mr. Speaker, as part of that 
reorganization of its financial affairs. 
 
We welcome that from the point of view of government, Mr. 
Speaker, in the sense that we want Minds Eye — and I’m sure 
all members want Minds Eye — to be on a proper financial 
footing so that it can continue to employ people in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Minds Eye is part of a 
growing film and video industry in Saskatchewan that employs 
many young people who are trained for this industry, and we 
support its continued reorganization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the people 
of Saskatchewan today have paid a heavy price for the NDP’s 
gamble into the movie business. Mr. Speaker, in 2001 the NDP 
government gambled 4.5 million taxpayers’ dollars to buy part 
of Minds Eye Pictures. And by the end of 2002, the NDP had 
written off $4 million worth of that business gamble as a dead 
loss. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that didn’t stop the NDP from 
dumping another 1.5 million taxpayers’ dollars into Minds Eye 
Pictures just months before the government’s movie company 
filed for protection from its creditors and walked away from 
almost $30 million in outstanding debts in July 2003. 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister, what is the total amount of money 
the NDP government has lost so far on its movie company, 
Minds Eye Pictures? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the policies of this 
government, which have included investment in Minds Eye and 
have also included the film and video tax credit to employ 
young people, have meant that we have a film and video 
industry in this province which is several times bigger than it 
was just a few years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the objectives of this government, and overall it is 
succeeding, Mr. Speaker, is to build the film and video industry 
in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, people tell us, including the 
opposition from time to time, that we need to have policies that 
create attractive employment opportunities for young people in 
our province. Certainly the film and video industry is doing 
this. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition was 
opposed to this government’s involvement in building a sound 
stage here in the city of Regina. But that sound stage, Mr. 
Speaker, has lead to annual production volumes growing by 
leaps and bounds in this province, the current level about $47 
million per year, Mr. Speaker. If we listen to the naysayers in 
the opposition, we’d never have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister’s arguments sound somewhat like the arguments the 
government had regarding the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) debate in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, court records filed last July, when Minds Eye 
Pictures sought protection from creditors, indicate the NDP’s 
movie company, Minds Eye Pictures, owed the Crown 
investment corporation $1.5 million. Those court records, Mr. 
Speaker, also show that Minds Eye Pictures owed 367,000 to 
the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation and another 
525,000 to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation). Mr. Speaker, that’s in addition to the NDP 
government’s loss of 4.5 million, its entire initial investment in 
its movie business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm the NDP government has 
now lost a total of at least 6.9 million taxpayers’ dollars on its 
movie business gamble in Minds Eye Pictures? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it’s well known that Minds 
Eye Pictures has had financial difficulties. It’s well known that 
Minds Eye Pictures is in the process of reorganizing itself. 

And what we’re going to do on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, is continue in a positive way; through the film and 
video tax credit, through investment in the sound stage, and in 
other areas where we can possibly contribute to support the 
growth of the film and video industry in this province. Because 
just as, Mr. Speaker, the minister in charge of SaskTel was 
saying a few moments ago, we have to move with the times and 
we have to recognize that the nature of telecommunications is 
changing. 
 
We also have to recognize, Mr. Speaker, that there are great 
opportunities for film and video production in Saskatchewan. A 
good example of this is the production of Corner Gas in 
Rouleau, Mr. Speaker. And I have to say that if we listen to the 
naysayers over there, Mr. Speaker, we’d never have this kind of 
positive new tech, high-tech development in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has done an excellent 
job of dancing around answering the question about the 
government’s investment of taxpayers’ dollars in Minds Eye 
Pictures and its cost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s movie company, Minds Eye 
Pictures, has already cost taxpayers at least $6.9 million. And, 
Mr. Speaker, court documents filed by last July show that 
Minds Eye Pictures has also walked away — get this — from 
almost $30 million in debts to dozens of other private sector 
businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how much more money has the 
NDP government poured into Minds Eye Pictures in 2004 
through all provincial government departments, agencies, and 
Crown corporations including Investment Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the 
opposition, who are opposed to anything the government does, 
we wouldn’t have a sound stage in this city, we wouldn’t have a 
sound stage in this province, Mr. Speaker. You wouldn’t have a 
forestry centre in the city of Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. And I 
dare say, Mr. Speaker, if we’d listened to them over the years, 
we probably wouldn’t have a telecommunications company in 
this province either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we don’t listen to the naysayers in the 
opposition. What we do in a positive way is to try to work with 
people who are doing their best to build industry and build 
opportunities in this province, Mr. Speaker. And the men and 
women at Minds Eye have restructured; they’re trying to move 
on in a positive way to continue operating, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the members opposite may want to kick them when they’re 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

down, but we’re not going to do that. We’re going to keep 
working with them just as we do the other industries in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Treatment Facilities for Children with Autism 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the weekend 
people throughout this province have learned the plight of the 
Brkich family from the Kenaston area. Greg and Diane Brkich, 
not our Greg Brkich, but Greg and Diane Brkich are leaving 
their jobs, their family, their friends, and their community to 
move to Alberta. 
 
They’re moving to Alberta so that their four-year-old autistic 
son, Gabriel, can get service that he requires. Mr. Speaker, 
Diane Brkich said that the service available here in 
Saskatchewan, and I quote, is “inadequate at best.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that there are six spaces at the 
Kinsmen child centre in Saskatoon specifically for 
pre-school-age children with autism. How many other spaces 
are designated within the province of Saskatchewan for children 
with autism? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Autism and 
other cognitive disabilities are clearly a concern for everybody, 
but especially parents, and also those of us who work within the 
health system. Saskatchewan Health and the regional health 
authorities across the province work to provide services for 
these children, and we work together with the education system. 
And so the children that are age five and under work within the 
health system and then as they move into the school system, 
they receive help there. 
 
There are two programs that are primarily in the city. But there 
are also services that are provided through early childhood 
intervention programs, and these happen in 15 other 
communities across the province. There aren’t a huge number 
of spaces, but we do try to provide the services for people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, according to the Autism 
Society of Canada this is not the first time that families have 
left Saskatchewan for better services elsewhere. In fact some of 
our own MLAs have dealt with families that have had to make 
the same decision to go to Alberta to find better services. 
 
There are currently 700 children with autism in this province. 
That’s an increase of 159 per cent since 1998-99 and yet there is 
only one treatment centre here in Saskatchewan — that is in 
Saskatoon — with only six spaces. That is not nearly adequate 
to deal with the demand. Mr. Speaker, does the minister believe 

that six spaces, only six spaces in Saskatchewan, can deal with 
the demand of 700 children with autism in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that 
children in Saskatoon and Regina have access to the facilities 
here, as well as children from both the northern part of the 
province and the southern part of the province. As well there are 
situations where children who are younger than 5 years of age 
do participate in some of the school-based programs. 
 
We know that we don’t have a sort of a huge provision of this 
service as compared to our neighbour to the west, but we also 
know that we’ve been working very carefully with many people 
to provide services on a consistent basis to children with autism 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, according to the Brkich 
family the autism partnership program in Calgary will pair their 
son with an aid for 40 hours per week both inside and outside 
the home. This program runs year round, giving the family 
access to respite care if it needs it through certain evenings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan the family says they can 
only get 10 hours of therapy per week, and that doesn’t include 
the summer months, Mr. Speaker. It’s not adequate, it’s not 
even close to being adequate. Diane Brkich says, and I quote: 
 

Parents shouldn’t be put in the situation where they feel 
. . . in order to get viable and ongoing and effective 
treatment . . . they (must) . . . move out of this province. 

 
According to the Autism Society of Canada, Saskatchewan is 
only one of two provinces that is not proceeding and developing 
universal, effective treatment programs for children with 
autism. Mr. Speaker, when will this government start improving 
quality and access to Saskatchewan children with autism? 
When are these specific actions going to deal with the issue in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are different ways of 
providing services for autistic children across the country. 
There are, as many of us know, court cases that are presently 
before the Supreme Court of Canada around the services that 
are provided in the province of British Columbia. 
 
We continue to try to provide services on a basis in 
communities right across the province. We have challenges 
getting sufficient number of trained people to provide all of 
these services. But we have to continue to work with the 
Community Resources department, with the Department of 
Education, with local school boards, and with regional health 
authorities to try to provide services across the whole province. 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Health Care Services at Climax 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday this past week, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier stood in his place and voted against 
holding public hearings in places like Herbert, Davidson, and 
Climax, three communities of the province that have been hit 
hard by the NDP’s latest round of health care cuts. 
 
A few minutes later, people from those communities let the 
Premier know exactly what they thought about his actions. A 
rancher from the area west of Frontier told the Premier, and I 
quote: 
 

By your vote today, it has just emphasized how little you 
really do care about what people really think. It’s just 
another knife in the back. 

 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier realize now that his vote on 
Friday was a mistake? Will he reconsider and allow the Human 
Services Committee to hold public hearings in those affected 
communities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 
before, the member from Melfort, the critic from the Sask Party, 
was asked directly, “Is the Sask Party categorically opposed to 
any closures or conversions?” And the member responded: 
 

No, we haven’t said that; we said that we would look at all 
. . . these issues on their merits, that we would look at the 
statistics. If there are incidents and cases where (we can 
clearly) . . . (that) can be clearly (be) identified that the 
facility is not being utilized, that there are no waiting lists, 
indeed that there are significant vacancies of use, then we 
think that those decisions might be the right decisions and 
the community should be involved in understanding that it 
is the right decision. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work with 
communities. There are ideas that will come up that we’ll work 
with the regional health authorities. And we think, Mr. Speaker, 
that the appropriate place for all of these issues is to be dealt 
with in the regional health authorities, as we work and look at 
services for the whole province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, you can’t really blame the people 
of Climax for not trusting this NDP government. They’ve got 
more than a decade of mistrust built up in the reservoir. 
 
But on Friday the minister told them that the health authority 
was still looking at the options so that health services could be 
improved, but by the time the delegation got home on Friday 
afternoon they learned that two lab positions had already had 
their hours cut. Mr. Speaker, this is just another example of the 

NDP saying one thing but actually doing another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the government is still looking for ways to 
maintain or improve services at the Climax Border Health 
Centre, why are they sending notices out telling health care 
workers that their hours have been cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the regional health 
authorities work around making the plans around how these 
services are organized. If services are not being used, they will 
be changed or they will be dealt with in other ways. That’s 
what’s happening right across the province; that’s what happens 
and has happened for many, many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the physician who provides services in that area 
requires lab services at certain times. I think the lab hours are 
going to be based on the times that he requires those services 
and I think that’s entirely appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out to the 
minister and for the members opposite that if there were 
reductions in usage at that health centre, it was because there 
was a deliberate and conscientious effort not to abuse the 
system. 
 
They’ve been asked to look for every efficiency possible. They 
had done that and naturally the numbers are going to fall. But 
now those numbers are being used against the people as a 
justification for reducing service further at that facility. You do 
what you’re asked and you’re penalized for doing so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be a public meeting tonight in the 
community of Climax. They’re expecting hundreds of people to 
come to that town, all concerned about the health services that 
are being cut in that remote part of the province. 
 
And I’m sure that they would love to hear from their Minister 
of Health to explain his actions and those of his regional health 
board. If the minister would like to go to that meeting, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll make this offer. We can travel together so as not to 
compromise the government’s majority in the House. 
 
Will the minister agree to attend the meeting tonight in the town 
of Climax? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve met with the delegation 
from Climax now on two occasions. I’ve told them that I will be 
going down to that community sometime over the next couple 
of months to meet with those people. I have spent some time in 
that community before; I understand some of their concerns 
around the geography. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this community is part of a big issue that’s 
facing the whole of the country. We end up having to look at 
how we spend our resources. In our health budget this year 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

we’ve increased it by $173 million to $2.7 billion. It’s a very 
large amount of the money that we’re spending. On a national 
basis this is one of the issues that’s there on a national basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to be working on a national level, on 
a provincial level, and on the local and community level to 
make sure that all of our health resources are spent in the most 
effective way possible so we can have good health care for all 
of our citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Athabasca on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I ask for leave, Mr. Speaker, leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca is requesting 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me great honour and great pleasure to welcome two 
former constituents of mine in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course I’m speaking of Kirstin and Erika Borgerson who were 
born and raised part of their life in my hometown of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
And I can remember being the mayor, Mr. Speaker, we had 
what we called a community beautification project. We spent 
quite a bit of money and time cleaning up the entire community 
and repairing old docks and fixing up playgrounds and painting 
buildings. And as part of the community beautification project 
Kirstin and Erika come along and helped that project a great 
deal. 
 
And I want to thank their mother for their good looks and to 
also say it’s been a long time since I’ve seen these two very 
impressive ladies. And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to 
join me to welcome some very nice young, aggressive, 
ambitious girls, and to say that I’m very happy to see them once 
again. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 496 to 500 
inclusive. 

The Speaker: — Responses to questions 496 through to 
question no. 500 have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 68 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian Head. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 68, An Act to amend The Assessment Management Agency 
Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts is 
quite a significant piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, it’s quite a 
significant piece of legislation. There are many pages to it — 
18, 20 pages to this Act — and it deals with a lot of issues, a lot 
of issues that will take some time to review and take some time 
to go through. 
 
I think the significant part . . . one of the significant parts of this 
Act is, we’ve heard some concern with the government that it’s 
not going to be pushed through right away and pushed on right 
away. Well it’s interesting that it would be in Bill No. 68 in a 
legislative session of about 80 Bills. I would think that if it was 
so significant and was so time-sensitive that it would have been 
Bill No. 10, 12, 15 or 20, not Bill No. 68. It certainly has taken 
a while to get into the House, and now that it’s here it’s only 
due process that we take our time to make sure that we 
understand it as well as we do, as well as many other people 
that are impacted by this Bill will also understand it. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, any time you start dealing with 
assessment agencies and dealing with property tax . . . there 
certainly has been a lot of discussion around property tax in this 
House over the last couple of months and rightfully so. The 
education portion of property tax has been a major issue and 
still continues to be a major issue. We’ve seen SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) delegates 
here a number of times with their concerns over it. 
 
The member opposite says they’ve only been here twice. Well I 
know that SARM has been here many more times than twice. 
They had a public rally twice. They came in mass twice, but 
they have been here talking to government and opposition 
many, many more times on the absolute necessity to deal with 
the education of property tax because it is just . . . it’s an unfair 
tax. It’s devastating rural Saskatchewan, quite frankly, where 
commodity prices are dropping. And the one thing you continue 
to see going up is the issue of property tax. So it’s a significant 
part of it. 
 
In this Bill it talks about assessment in Saskatchewan over the 
past decades have not gone well for either property owners or 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

local governments because what has happened over the last 15 
to 20 years is government continues to become more and more 
reliant on property tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard one person speak about the issue of 
property tax and the reliance of property tax in our province, 
and the issue around assessment and how important assessment 
is now compared to 20 and 30 years ago. Assessment’s always 
been important in our province. But what happens is when you 
start tacking so much burden, having to raise so much revenue 
from property tax that if assessment is out a little bit, if 
assessment is skewed on a particular piece of property, by the 
time you get the assessment assessed and figured out, by the 
time you tack on all the tax on top, the foundation, if it’s a little 
bit off, a little bit skewed, really causes some major problems 
when that final tax bill comes out. 
 
They were talking about assessment really as a foundation of a 
building and if the assessment isn’t done right, the foundation 
isn’t done right, it can’t support the load on top of it. And that’s 
certainly what I’ve heard is that even though now, assessment 
. . . we’re working harder to have a more accurate assessment 
system. The problem has become not necessarily the assessment 
system as much as the amount of tax heaped on top of that. And 
the taxes got greater and greater and greater — or if you use the 
analogy of a building, getting higher and higher and higher on a 
small foundation. 
 
And that’s where the problem, it’s sometimes . . . Maybe there 
are some issues around assessment and the inaccuracy of it, but 
the bigger issue is the reliance on property tax which is 
generated from assessment. That’s where the problem is, the 
reliance on property tax, which certainly goes back to what we 
discussed last week and the week before and the week before. 
And the Premier acknowledges it. 
 
And as I said one other speech, that I’m sure every member on 
that side of the House that did any door knocking in the last 
campaign would realize that property tax was an issue. It was 
an issue we heard over and over again. We hear it in rural 
Saskatchewan. We hear it in our urban centres that we 
represent. And I know the members opposite would have heard 
it in their urban centres and the odd rural MLA that they have 
there, that property tax is a huge issue. We talked about it in our 
election campaign. The Liberals talked about it in their election 
campaign, and most definitely, the NDP talked about it in their 
election campaign. 
 
And if we go back over the last six months to a year and we 
listen to what the NDP had to say about property tax in the last 
campaign, you’d find that they would say there was words such 
as the status quo. This was quoted by the Premier at SARM 
many times. The status quo is not on. I repeat, the status quo is 
not on. And it was said a number of times — the status quo is 
not on. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the status quo is on. They haven’t addressed 
the issue of the burden of property tax, the education of 
property tax. In this year’s budget, they’re diverting to talk 
about amalgamation, and that’s the most important issue 
because they cannot deal with the issue of property tax. 
 
If they came out and said — you know what? — our cupboard 

is absolutely bare, we’ve blown it on different investments here 
and there and wherever, we don’t have enough money to deal 
with it, we can’t deal with it, that would be one thing. But what 
they’ve come out and they’ve said is that, oh yes, we’re going 
to deal with it but just give us a little more time. We’re going to 
force amalgamation of school divisions. We’re going to do that 
to address the equity issue, to address better education. 
 
But it doesn’t address the issue that we all heard on the 
doorsteps. It doesn’t address the issue that was talked on, over 
and over again, on the doorstep . . . is the burden of property 
tax. 
 
Now the government says . . . and I can hear the Minister of 
Education chirp from his seat: we’re with you, we’re with you. 
Yes, we better amalgamate. We better force amalgamation. We 
better do all of that. But what he doesn’t say and that he won’t 
be with me on, is when I say they haven’t kept their election 
promise, not one bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They promised to address the property tax issue. The status quo 
was not on, and the status quo is on. The Premier stood up 
during the election campaign and said that we are able to 
receive the Boughen report within our fiscal situation. But now, 
Mr. Speaker, if they were honest, if they were able to express 
the fact that they do not have the money to receive the Boughen 
report, that would be one thing. But they’re not saying that. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance is sitting there with a kind of a 
funny look on his face, but he knows they don’t have the money 
to address the issues of education portion of property tax. And, 
Mr. Speaker, if he does . . . and he’s kind of shaking his head. I 
wish he would stand. Oh, he is standing. I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve been listening with great interest to the member to see if in 
any way he might be able to relate this to the legislation that we 
are purportedly discussing, and I don’t see any attempt or any 
ability on his part, to in fact tie it to the legislation. So I think 
there’s a question here of relevance of his remarks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his intervention. 
Would the member like to make a comment on the point of 
order? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I feel the member was talking 
about assessment of land which does have to do with the Bill 
and how property taxes are affected, and so therefore I feel that 
he was relating to the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Once again, on an item of 
this nature, members should be cautioned not to stray too far 
from the principle of the Bill. I find that it’s difficult to speak 
about assessment without speaking about taxation. I accept that, 
but let’s not go too far on this. 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Mr. McMorris: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is really interesting that the Minister of Finance could not find 
the relevancy between the issue of property tax and assessment, 
which this Bill deals with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Bill deals with assessment and changing the way that 
SARM . . . In order to change their assessor, SARM now needs 
the agreement of the board of educations. It deals with 
assessment, and it deals with the very issue that this House has 
been dealing with for the last two months, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s an absolute shame that the Minister of Finance cannot find 
the relevancy between that, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, because 
it deals directly, directly with the issue of education portion of 
property tax, which of course we know that the minister does 
not want to hear about, does not want to hear anything about 
because they’ve been failing miserably to address it over the 
last three and four months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are many, many quotes regarding 
the property tax and the issue of assessing property tax and the 
issue of assessment that this Bill deals with. And every time we 
start dealing with assessment, it just automatically takes us back 
to the issue that the government has failed on so miserably. So 
when he brings up a point of order, it’ll be a point of order 
because it hurts . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask that the member 
stick with the text of the Bill and allow the Speaker to deal with 
points of order. Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think, Mr. Speaker, some of the other 
issues in this Bill that really give concern, not only to many 
people in this province but to SARM for sure and SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) I think to a 
certain extent, is that it proposes changes to increase the number 
of individuals sitting on the SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) board from nine to eleven. 
 
Now increasing the number of people sitting on the SAMA 
board isn’t necessarily the issue. What becomes the issue is that 
they’re appointed by government. They’re increasing the 
number of people sitting on the SAMA board to a greater 
amount — by two, increasing it by two — but those 
appointments are by government. In other words, they’ll 
hand-pick the people they want to sit on the SAMA board and 
direct it and kind of push it in the direction that government 
feels, as opposed to what may be best for the assessment of the 
province as a whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So of course there are concerns, and I know we’ve heard often 
from delegates at SARM. And I mean certainly after this past 
week, this past week, that there are concerns with SARM on 
many issues that this government is dealing with and this is just 
one more of them, Mr. Speaker. They realize that the 
government is trying to get more control over the issue of the 
assessment by placing two more people on the SAMA board. 
 
It also deals with . . . There’s again more uncertainty regarding 
allowing private assessors by local governments since proposed 
changes will make it mandatory for affected boards of 
education to give their approval before changing can actually 
proceed. In other words, the RMs (rural municipality) and local 
municipal governments are going to have to deal with the 

boards of education, which isn’t a problem. But before, if they 
wanted to change their assessor from a government assessor to 
a private assessor, that didn’t have to be given the approval of a 
local school board, which now that does. So there are some 
concerns. 
 
And as a matter of fact, I would like to talk to some of the 
school boards and see what their concerns are as well because 
certainly they would have some concerns on that as well. 
 
Overall significant changes will correspond . . . with 
corresponding impact on a number of stakeholders — school 
boards, local governments, and property owners. Further 
consultation is definitely needed on this Bill. 
 
I think, as I said on the outset of my remarks, is that if the Bill 
was as time-sensitive as what we hear the government feels it 
is, I wish it had been Bill No. 5 or 10 or 15, and so we could 
have dealt with all the concerns with other groups. Right now I 
find that there are many, many organizations — whether it’s 
SARM, whether it’s local community groups trying to save 
their long-term care beds or hospitals, whether it’s school 
boards — all of these groups are feeling that there has been no 
consultation from this government whatsoever. 
 
We tried to pass a private members’ Bill on Friday saying 
government needs to get out and consult with the local 
communities before hospital closures or long-term care beds 
would be closed. They refused that. 
 
I’ve been talking to a number of school boards throughout the 
province now that the government is forcing amalgamation on 
them, saying this is the way it’s going to be. And if you talk to 
those school boards, every one of them would say, we want to 
have some input in that process as opposed to the minister 
having a map drawn up in his office by three people that he’s 
appointed, because quite frankly, school boards, the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association, prior to their 
announcement, prior to the minister’s announcement on the 
Boughen Commission, said we want to have input. 
 
Now the minister opposite is saying, don’t listen to the School 
Boards Association. And that’s exactly what has been their 
response is they don’t want to listen to the School Boards 
Association. They don’t want to listen to the local board that 
has gone through two or three amalgamations. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they don’t want to consult with anybody right now. 
They don’t want to consult with SARM because this piece of 
legislation impacts them directly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this juncture, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that debate on second reading of Bill No. 68 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

(14:45) 
 

Bill No. 59 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 59 — The 
Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to rise today and talk to Bill No. 59, The 
Ambulance Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, looking at the notes when the minister brought the 
Bill in, the second reading Bill, and one of his statements in the 
Bill was these changes were brought in to show ambulance 
service providers that they will be and continue to be an integral 
part of our health care system. And, Mr. Speaker, we know, we 
know that there is some concerns that are out in the area about 
that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister also stated that this Bill repeals 
redundant and obsolete sections of The Ambulance Act and 
aligns new reporting requirements. Well, Mr. Speaker, that in 
itself is a bit of a worry because it’s hard to tell what the 
underlying motives are to this Bill. At first blush it would 
appear that the housekeeping changes . . . that it is 
predominantly housekeeping changes to reflect the regional 
health authorities. But it’s what we didn’t hear from the 
minister that has an awful lot of people concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very obvious that ambulance service is a very 
key component to our health care services, and specifically in 
rural Saskatchewan. We’ve got private operators in some very 
remote parts of the province that have experienced over the last 
few years increasing pressures from this government as to how 
they operate and putting rules in place that almost make it 
impossible to operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can relate in one of the communities that 
contacted me, they have an ambulance bought by the 
community, it is operated by the community, it is of no cost that 
I know of to the Health department. And yet the government, 
this NDP government, comes in with rules and says, I’m sorry, 
you can’t operate your ambulance. And, Mr. Speaker, this just 
doesn’t make sense. 
 
And I had an experience like that of my own and I would relate 
it, and then I would ask the people of this province what is in 
their best interest . . . have an ambulance which is a box-type 
ambulance, with two qualified individuals, qualified to the 
capabilities of part-time ambulance operators and EMS people. 
And I experienced a situation such as that where the rules come 
down, and the rules say that, I’m sorry, we have set this set of 
rules that you cannot operate your ambulance; you cannot 
operate your ambulance unless you comply totally and 100 per 
cent with the rules that I, being the NDP government, have 
directed. 
 
So you know how you get around that, Mr. Speaker? And this is 
the sad part, this is the very, very sad part. I can get a van, and I 

can put a mattress in the back of a van, and I can get somebody 
that’s had some first aid service, and we can go out and legally 
bring a person into town — in the back of a van, with a mattress 
on the floor, with somebody that’s had some first aid 
knowledge. 
 
Now can anybody tell me what would provide the best service 
to an individual that’s injured out in a rural area, whether it’s 
out on a ranch working cattle . . . would it be a box ambulance 
with qualified people that don’t meet the NDP’s new rules, or 
legally do it in the back of a van on a mattress with somebody 
like myself that’s first aid qualified? 
 
Now I think everybody has to sit back and think about what 
would be the best service for the people of this province, and 
that’s something, Mr. Speaker, that really needs to be looked at 
when we start looking at changes to this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s an awful lot that this Bill does not talk 
about. It doesn’t really talk about, will amendments disrupt 
services and put Saskatchewan people at risk. And that’s what I 
was referring to, Mr. Speaker. That’s the kind of thing where 
we put rules down, when we operate from the centre, and don’t 
take into consideration what’s really happening out at the 
extremities of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question that needs to be answered: will 
some private operators simply pack up and leave, as so many 
other businesses have, when they become tired of this 
government’s increasing demands? And that is a fear, that is a 
fear not only from the private ambulance operators, Mr. 
Speaker, that is a fear from the people. That is a fear from the 
people of the rural areas that they are going to lose ambulance 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to put into the record some letters, 
some correspondence, that not only I have received, but I know 
the minister has received and the Premier has received. But did 
this change them toward the Bill? I think not. And I think this is 
why it needs to be put on record, so the people of this province 
understand the concerns of not only the private ambulance 
operators, but also the concerns of the people that are out in the 
rural parts of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . and I’m going to do a fair bit of reading from 
some of these letters because they say it as it is felt by them. 
Here is a letter from an ambulance operator in my constituency. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the letter says, and it’s actually referring to 
sections 10 and 18 of The Ambulance Act, and it says, 
 

As a private ambulance operator, I wish to express my 
strong opposition to these proposed changes. It is my 
understanding that if the aforementioned sections (which 
is 10 and 18) are deleted, the Regional Health Authority 
would have the ability to cancel a contract with a given 
E.M.S. provider without just cause and that the E.M.S. 
provider would become an affiliate of the R.H.A. Further, 
it would appear that the reasons behind the proposed 
changes would be to limit the control that a private 
operator has over the business that they (now) own and 
operate. 

 
And I want to pause there for a minute, Mr. Speaker, before I 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

continue with this letter. Because here is another example of an 
NDP socialist government that wants to tinker with a private 
operation. This particular ambulance operation is running great. 
It’s running efficient. It’s effective. And now the government 
wants to get involved with it. Go figure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the author goes on, the author goes on to say: 
 

I fully realize and agree that there must be strict guidelines 
in health care, (which they abide by) and any private 
E.M.S. operator must provide a service to the community 
they (will) serve with the utmost of care and competency. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this ambulance service does exactly that. 
 

Since 1981, our service has accomplished this and has 
been a progressive organization offering trustworthy, 
caring and courteous transport of clients in need. The 
business is a family operation which is dear to us and is 
operated in a manner which is fiscally responsible. 

 
Here we go again. Fiscally responsible ambulance business and 
the government wants to get involved with it and somehow or 
other tinker with it and take over it. 
 

It is, of course, of great concern that the Regional Health 
Authority may potentially have the power to designate or 
withhold funds and dictate staffing and equipment needs, 
as it has done with health centres and hospitals in our area. 
Also, if the proposed changes are realized, the privately 
owned E.M.S. services under the R.H.A.’s jurisdiction 
would be forced to operate without a contract, and without 
any reassurance or confidence that the business they own 
along with the hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of 
equipment will be needed tomorrow. 

 
It goes without saying that after 23 years of operation, I 
am very aware of what my staffing and equipment needs 
are. I care deeply about my business and (my) employees 
. . . (I) have seen time and again, the quality of service 
decline when a business is operated by administrators who 
are far removed from the operation itself, and have no 
personal interest in its well being. 
 
It is with these things in mind that I ask for clarification of 
the proposed changes to The Ambulance Act. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this letter is one that’s signed by a private 
ambulance operator in my constituency and I know, and I know 
she has a pile of concerns — a pile of concerns. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this goes on throughout, throughout my constituency. 
And I really would like again to put into the record so some of 
the members opposite realize what effect this is having in the 
rural areas. Whether they care or not, they should be aware of 
what the changes are going to do to affect the people out in the 
areas. And I relate back to what I said earlier about, what are 
the alternatives? If the ambulance services are going to be 
pilfered away, what is going to happen? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult to relate stories to have 
somebody that’s an urbanite to know what goes on in rural 
Saskatchewan, but I do have another one that relates to what 
you have if you don’t have an ambulance available. 

I mean, we talk about health care. And we talk every day about 
health care, and how health care has been affected in this 
province and getting worse in the rural areas as we just 
witnessed by this last go-round of cuts. 
 
There’s a fellow that I know very . . . knew very well in my 
constituency that had a heart attack. There’s no time for an 
ambulance where we live. That relates back to accessibility of 
health care, universality and accessibility, and how does one get 
to a facility. 
 
And so what happened in this particular case, he was put in the 
back seat of a car. It wasn’t even the luxury of the van with a 
mattress in the back seat. And they got to about 5 miles from 
the hospital and he said to the driver, I’m not going to make it. 
And he didn’t. 
 
Now we talk about no ambulance care there, and it’s going to 
get worse if this Bill goes through. And we talk about 
accessibility to health care. 
 
Well there’s somebody . . . Who knows if he would’ve made it 
if he would’ve had accessibility to health care a little bit closer? 
Would’ve he? We don’t know that. But we do know that he 
didn’t have the accessibility that is that some people quote 
within an hour, and we also do know that he didn’t make it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read parts of another letter from the 
municipality of Stonehenge, and this is from the administrator 
of the municipality. And I’ll just read parts of the letter, but it 
talks about the: 
 

. . . privately owned ambulance service has provided 
exemplary service to our area residents for over 20 years. 
They provide this service cost efficiently and the staff is 
well qualified. Requiring them to become affiliated and 
giving the control to the regional health authority will only 
cause inefficiencies in the overall operations. We can 
foresee increased staffing at the administration level in the 
regional health authority, a decline in the standard of 
service which we have become accustomed to, and the end 
result is additional cost to the health care system. We 
believe this money could be better used elsewhere. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that particular author says it’s going to cost 
the health care system more money. 
 
Well when we talk about the ambulance service in the total 
health care system and as we’ve heard from the Premier on 
various other topics, as the previous speaker talked about, the 
status quo is not on. And how many times have we heard the 
Premier say, the status quo is not on? But in fact if the status 
quo is not on to help people, the Premier turns it aside — such 
as the taxes, such as SAMA. The status quo is not on. 
 
But now we come to ambulance service and, although the 
Premier hasn’t directly said the status quo is not on, what he’s 
doing is acting like the status quo is not on. In other words, the 
status quo was pretty good in the ambulance service out there, 
but he is going to stand up and say the status quo is not on, so 
we’re going to make it worse. 
 
And that’s the same as our rural hospitals. He may stand and 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

say the status quo is not on, so we’re going to close rural 
hospitals. And this is what’s kind of maddening. The ambulance 
services can and will be cut which the status quo, as I 
mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the status quo for the ambulance 
service is not on according to the NDP government because it’s 
working well now and we want to change it and tinker with it. 
So therefore the status quo is not on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a whole pile of letters here that I know the 
minister has received. I don’t know if he’s responded to them. 
But I know, Mr. Speaker, also there is an awful lot of speakers 
that would really like to speak to this Bill, so at this time I 
would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River that debate on Bill No. 59 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 
(15:00) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — Committee of Finance. The first item before the 
committee is the consideration of estimates for Department of 
Executive Council, vote no. 10 found on page 59 of the 
Estimates book. And I would recognize the Premier to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Joining me today are three officials from Executive Council. At 
my left, Mr. Dan Perrins, who is the deputy minister; to my left 
and just behind, Barbara MacLean, who is the director of senior 
management services; and directly behind me, Ms. Bonita 
Cairns, who is the director of administration and information 
services. 
 
The Chair: — Administration (EX01). I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to certainly 
welcome the Premier and the Premier’s officials for the 
estimates of Executive Council and the question-and-answer 
session that we’re going to have — and no doubt in exchange of 
. . . hopefully an exchange of ideas and a debate. 
 
By way of housekeeping, I would point out last year I believe 

the Committee of Finance began reviewing vote 10 Executive 
Council on 25 June. And the very first question from my 
predecessor, the current member for Rosetown, was specifically 
. . . and I’m just going to quote it here, so that we can have it on 
the record again. 
 
The Premier asked for . . . well, the Premier asked for some . . . 
the leader of the opposition of the day asked for some basic 
information from the Premier in terms of who works for 
Executive Council, the officials that work for Executive 
Council, and as the former leader characterized it, some 
requests for some housekeeping information. The Premier 
indicated that day that that information was not available 
immediately but undertook to get that to the member. 
 
And our records . . . And I’ve consulted with the former leader 
of the opposition, our records are such that that information 
never did come. And I wonder if the Premier will clarify now 
that that information will be provided to members of the 
committee for ’03-’04 before we’re concluded deliberating 
here. And the page of Hansard, so they can get the details of 
what was asked for, was 1931, June 25, 2003. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it was our understanding that 
the information was sent. We’ll double-check it. If it’s not, we 
will certainly provide it. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you Mr. Premier, Mr. Chair. And I would 
make the same request for ’04. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d like to talk for . . . spend some time 
deliberating on the equalization question and ask the Premier 
some specific questions about that. The Premier will know that 
my first full day in this new job, I sent a letter to the Premier 
indicating that the opposition supported the government’s 
position that the equalization formula as it’s currently 
constituted represents an unfairness, if you will, for our 
province in the clawback that happens with respect to our 
resource revenue certainly isn’t acceptable. And we indicated to 
the Premier we would support him in that. 
 
In fact, when the Minister of Finance needed to go to Ottawa to 
make that case to a Senate committee, my colleague, the deputy 
leader for the opposition and the member for Canora-Pelly, 
accompanied him. And certainly that remains the position of the 
Saskatchewan Party and the opposition today. 
 
Having said that I have some specific questions. Specifically, 
prior to the media reports that we heard earlier this year and 
prior to the report being released by Professor Courchene, I 
would like to know from the Premier when he first spoke out 
about this issue or members of his government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, this has been a consistent 
theme of our government for some many, many years. Very 
specifically I’d have to check calendars and dates. But I well 
recall, during my term as Premier, meeting with then the federal 
Finance minister, John Manley, accompanied by then Finance 
minister, now the current Minister of Industry and Resources, as 
we made a very significant presentation to that minister of 
Finance federal about equalization, about the unfairness of its 
application to Saskatchewan, particularly on that case on the 
mining tax credit. 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

What we are very grateful for, Mr. Chair, in this province, is the 
work of Professor Tom Courchene, who will be recognized 
across Canada as one of almost a handful of Canadians, who 
can claim significant expertise on the equalization formula, on 
its history, and on its application. 
 
Professor Courchene’s work — done independently if I may 
say, Mr. Chair, he did rely on some statistical information 
provided by our Department of Finance, but his study was 
self-initiated and done independently, and presents a very third 
party, independent review of equalization as how it affects 
Saskatchewan. It is that work that has given to our province a 
very, very solid platform on which to make a very strong case. 
The same case that we’ve made for years, but with Professor 
Courchene’s work, we have a third party independent platform 
that gives so much more strength to our case. 
 
And we, if I may say, Mr. Chair, have pursued this in years 
past; are pursuing it, as you know, with vigour now, and will 
continue to pursue this until we reach, what we believe, is an 
equitable and fair equalization formula for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, Mr. Chair. I don’t 
remember the Government of Saskatchewan, I don’t remember 
the current Premier talking about this issue prior to earlier this 
year, prior to Professor Courchene’s analysis of the current 
flaws. But perhaps the Premier can comment or answer as to 
when exactly the latest, the last, the latest five-year agreement 
with the federal government was signed continuing the 
equalization formula in its current form, and were the flaws in 
the formula discussed at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I will be very pleased to 
provide to the Leader of the Opposition the exact dates and 
times of the last signing of equalization. We know it’s now 
coming up for renewal again. And in that round of negotiations, 
yes, Saskatchewan was raising some of the very same issues. 
 
And if the Leader of the Opposition does not remember, I’m 
sure we could share with him the press surrounding the debate 
that I and the former minister of Finance had with John Manley. 
There was some pretty wide public coverage of that debate and 
we can easily provide dates and specific times if that’s of some 
value to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
I think what’s of more value, is us speaking with one voice on 
the matter of equalization to effect some change. We have an 
ideal opportunity, Mr. Chair. We are now in the midst of a 
federal election and this is the ideal opportunity for us, with one 
voice — not with demur, but with one voice — to fight for a 
fair equalization formula for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, Mr. Chair. The truth of 
the matter is, the questions that I’ve just asked we’ve asked 
before in this session. We asked a written question some time 
ago asking for the dates of occasions when government or 
Finance official have raised specific issues with the federal 
government with respect to equalization. The question was not 
answered. And I guess the point today is, I think we’d like to 
know that. 
 
It doesn’t change the fact at all that we can support the Premier, 

that I can support the Premier, that members of this side of the 
House can support members of that side of the House, as we 
have done in travel and in going to different hearings on the 
issue. But the government can still be held to an account for 
how forcefully and how consistently it has made this case. 
 
We just came through a provincial election not long ago when 
issues of import to the province are obviously discussed, 
commitments are made by either party. And since the election 
this has been the refrain that we have heard over and over and 
over again from the government when it comes to being unable 
to fulfill its promises that it made in the campaign or when it’s 
highlighting the challenges that it faces. This is all we hear 
about. Certainly we hear about it now more than we ever have 
in the past, notwithstanding an isolated incident with the former 
minister Manley of the Liberal government. 
 
So the question again: we asked a written question in the 
Assembly for this information — doesn’t change our support 
for the Premier’s position but it goes to accountability —and 
we’d like the Premier to answer those questions at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, we’re very happy . . . 
We will provide, if he wants, the dates of the meetings between 
officials. We can provide the dates of meetings between 
officials. I can provide him the date at the Bessborough Hotel in 
Saskatoon where the former minister of Finance and I sat down. 
 
Mr. Chair, since the standard was changed in 1982 from the 
ten-province standard to the five-province standard it has been a 
consistent theme of governments of Saskatchewan to protest the 
effect on this province of moving from the ten-province 
standard to the five-province standard. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition wants to know what we’ve 
been doing. We’ll give him a solid record of working with the 
Finance officials. We’ve taken the point of view that some of 
the best work can be done through officials and it’s been done. 
When we went very public with the former minister of Finance 
it was in the news broadcasts, it was in the newspapers. I don’t 
know if the Leader of the Opposition didn’t see them. 
 
We have had a consistent theme as government. I can ask the 
question of the Leader of the Opposition: when did we hear 
from the Saskatchewan Party any concern about equalization? 
When have we heard that concern? In fact what concerns me 
now is that I hear the Leader of the Opposition going off to 
chamber of commerce banquets and so on trying to downplay 
this issue. 
 
Mr. Chair, this is no time for division. What we need is a 
consistent voice from Saskatchewan with support, if I may say, 
from the opposition for once on this file. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Premier, Mr. Chairman. 
Here’s what we tell the chambers of commerce, and here’s what 
we tell people that we have a chance to speak to, and people 
that I have a chance to speak to. We say first and foremost that 
we support the Premier and his government in their efforts to 
get the funding formula changed, we say that. We indicate to 
those people that we sent a letter to the Premier, that I sent a 
letter to the Premier on the first day on this new job and 
indicated that very same thing. 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

But we are quick to add, I’m quick to add at those 
opportunities, as I was in the letter, that the equalization 
formula as it exists today, as unfair as it is, ought not to be an 
excuse by this government for continuing to rack up increasing 
debt for the province or deficits. 
 
The equalization formula has been this way for some number of 
years. The Premier’s predecessor, Mr. Romanow, the current 
Finance minister’s predecessor twice removed I guess, were 
able to balance the budget of the province of Saskatchewan 
without having to . . . without a change in the equalization 
formula. And so we said quite fairly, don’t use it as an excuse. 
 
We also said — we also said — and we’ve said to the chambers 
of commerce that the government of the day ought not to spend 
taxpayers’ dollars on a print ad, a print ad if you can believe it, 
Mr. Chairman, highlighting the need for the federal government 
to change its position. 
 
Here it is, Mr. Chairman of committees. It says, tell us again. 
And the cost . . . This by the way was printed in The 
StarPhoenix and the Leader-Post. Tell us again, it says, and it 
outlines the case for a change in the equalization formula. Cost 
to the taxpayers — $75,000. 
 
And the Premier’s right. The Premier referenced the fact that 
we would advocate picking up the phone and calling officials, 
or maybe driving . . . Here’s a radical idea. How about drive 
around Wascana Lake and meet with the Finance minister and 
make the case. 
 
We said we wouldn’t support wasting taxpayers’ dollars on this 
ad because this ad is not about changing the equalization 
formula. This ad — this ad — is about excuses by this Premier 
and this government who are continually breaking election 
promises, and they need to find excuses. They need to find 
excuses. 
 
So they print this ad out, not for Mr. Goodale or for Mr. Martin 
to see because let’s face it, the market for this advertising 
campaign is a market of two people. How many businesses in 
the province of Saskatchewan would spend $75,000 on a print 
advertising campaign to reach two customers? Apparently this 
government. So that is the point. 
 
And one final point I’ll make to the Premier on this issue so 
he’s completely clear on what we’ve been saying to chambers 
of commerce, to frankly fairly well-attended meetings of 
chambers of commerce and fairly well-attended leader’s dinners 
— here’s what we, here’s the other thing that we’ve been 
saying. Yes, Mr. Premier, we’ve been saying, go down to 
Ottawa and lobby for a funding formula change and we’ll send 
the Finance critic with the Finance minister. We’ll do what 
we’re asked to do by this government to try to make a case. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But, but say something more than just, give us more assistance. 
That’s what we’ve said to the Premier. Don’t just go down to 
Ottawa and ask for more assistance for us as a have-not 
province, but articulate a vision for this province so that one 
day we will be a have province and that we can give more to the 
country than we ever need to ask in return, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And I guess that’s the difference. You know, and 
in all fairness, the Premier has used the equalization issue as an 
excuse. I mean his ministers talk about it all the time. When the 
Minister of the Environment was asked about, in a scrum, he 
was asked, well what do you think the people will be thinking 
about when they sit around their campfires about all the fee 
increases and the new wiener roast tax, you know what he said, 
Mr. Chairman? He said, well I think they’ll be thinking about 
how unfair the equalization formula is. 
 
They do use it as an excuse. But, Mr. Chairman, to the Premier, 
to the Premier: why didn’t he then say, why didn’t he say in the 
campaign, here’s what I promise, here are my commitments to 
you on property tax, on health care, on, on, on say the PST 
(provincial sales tax) — here are my promises, but I may not be 
able to keep them, depending on the equalization formula? Why 
didn’t he then say that five, six months ago during the 
campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
came to his new responsibilities promising a new and a 
different opposition. That is obviously not the case even in 
these early moments of discussion in Committee of Finance. 
Because what this Leader of Opposition wants to do is to take 
an issue which is of extreme significance to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and if I may say, to our economic future and our 
part in this great nation, he wants to take this very significant 
issue and just in a moment turn it into just a partisan political 
discussion — the same thing we’ve heard all session ad 
nauseam. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition in this little attack begins by 
saying that this government should not have invested in public 
education, public information through newspaper ads. Well the 
fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, had this government not raised 
this significant matter of equalization and raised it with the 
people of Saskatchewan through a mechanism by which the 
people can understand the issue — not through a mechanism 
which asks for some phone-in response or some clip-out coupon 
but through information to the people of Saskatchewan — if 
this government had not led that attack, do you think, Mr. 
Chair, or do the citizens of this province think that we would 
have achieved what we have already achieved, which is a $120 
million down payment on monies owing to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Do you think, Mr. Chair, that equalization 
would even be a mention in this federal election campaign? Do 
you think without this effort we would see the discussion that’s 
happening in the federal election campaign? Do you think we 
would have merited $120 million if we had stood silent? I think 
not. 
 
But the Leader of the Opposition wants to criticize that. The 
Leader of the Opposition asks what contacts have been made. 
What have we been doing? He said I could drive around 
Wascana Lake and meet the Minister of Finance. Well I’ve 
driven around Wascana Lake. I’ve met the Minister of Finance. 
I’ve met other ministers of the federal government. I’ve met the 
Prime Minister of Canada specifically on this issue at 24 
Sussex. 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

I ask the Leader of the Opposition, whom has he met with? 
Who has he talked to? Has he talked to his federal leader, 
Stephen Harper? Has he done that? Who has the Leader of the 
Opposition talked to? 
 
Now in fact, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition, in this 
legislature, earlier in the session said — when we were 
preparing to celebrate the deepening of Wascana Lake — the 
Leader of the Opposition said that he would be there with me to 
speak to Mr. Goodale, the Minister of Finance of Ottawa. Was 
he there to speak with me with the Minister of Finance of 
Ottawa? No, he was not. He may have been in the crowd, but he 
didn’t bother to come forward and do what he committed to do 
in the House. 
 
So when we want to talk about meeting with federal people, I 
ask the Leader of the Opposition to stand up and give us a little 
report today, if he is so committed, to whom has he written? 
Whom has he met with in the federal government? Who has he 
talked to about this issue? Let him answer that. Then, Mr. 
Chair, then, Mr. Chair, he would say in his remarks today that 
we have not been giving to the country because of equalization. 
 
Well it’s clear, Mr. Chair, that the opposition members have not 
yet understood the flow of equalization. Provinces do not 
contribute to equalization. Equalization is a federal program by 
which the national government shares from its general base of 
revenues to provinces. Provinces do not contribute to 
equalization. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Chair, when the Leader of the Opposition 
suggests that Saskatchewan has not contributed to the nation, I 
am appalled; I am appalled. This province contributes way 
above its weight — economically, socially, and politically — to 
the nation of Canada. I am appalled to hear the Leader of the 
Opposition suggesting that Saskatchewan does not contribute 
overall to the nation. We are doing that, Mr. Chair. 
 
I share his argument that our goal, our goal as a province is not 
to be receiving equalization, and therefore to be described as a 
have province. A fair equalization program, a equitable 
equalization formula, will in fact make it possible, easier for 
this province to move out of equalization. And if the Leader of 
the Opposition doesn’t understand that, he ought to read, he 
ought to read Professor Courchene’s paper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well I want to explore this a little bit because the 
Premier’s talked about something that he talked about to the 
Regina Chamber of Commerce not long ago. It was covered in 
the paper, and I was incredulous when I read it, Mr. Chairman, 
because . . . and I think, I think this is where he, the Premier, 
was going at the end of the last answer. 
 
Here is the Premier’s plan, and correct me if I’m wrong — I 
know he will — but it seems to me that here’s the Premier’s 
plan for us to become a have province. His plan for us to 
become a have province is to get the equalization formula 
changed. That’s it. That’s it. 
 
Well that’s what he said to the Regina Chamber of Commerce. 
It’s not based on growing the economy, it’s based on keeping 

more of what we have already. It’s based on keeping more of 
our oil and gas revenue. And the Saskatchewan Party agrees 
with him that we should keep more than what we’re allowed to 
keep under the current formula, under the current structure. We 
believe that to be true. 
 
But that is a change to the equalization formula in and of itself 
and should have nothing to do with the government’s plan to 
become a have province. That should be built on a foundation 
of a growing economy — not keeping more of existing oil and 
gas revenue, but more oil and gas activity. Not keeping more of 
any resources in terms of mining, but more activity, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
And if that’s not the case, if that’s not the case, then the Premier 
— then the Premier should stand and answer. Because this is 
what I heard when he, this is what I read in the Regina Chamber 
of Commerce. It’s this circular argument. In fact I heard folks 
on a talk show talking about the same thing. This circular 
argument of the Premier; we need to change the funding 
formula because it doesn’t treat us, it doesn’t treat us as fairly as 
it treats other have-not provinces. 
 
Oh well, what about a plan to become a have province? Well if 
we could just change the equalization formula, then we’d 
become a have province. How about growing the province’s 
economy, Mr. Chairman? 
 
And so that is what we would, and so that’s what we would ask 
the Premier to elaborate on just now, his last comments there 
and what he told the Regina Chamber of Commerce. What 
exactly is his plan? What does it involve to become . . . for 
Saskatchewan to become a have province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
invites me to talk about an economic future for Saskatchewan, 
because it is building that economic future that will ensure the 
future of our communities, of our province, of our young 
people, of our health care system. Now let me speak then just 
briefly — just briefly — about this government’s work to build 
a strong, green, and prosperous economy now in spite of, if I 
may say, in spite of the naysayers across the way. 
 
Let’s have a look at some of the most recent evidence. Let’s 
have a look at some of the most recent evidence about what’s 
happening in the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, fair enough, argues we need to 
see new and expanded development in our resource sector, oil 
and gas. What are the facts, Mr. Chair; what are the facts? Well 
the facts are today we are seeing record levels of oil and gas 
exploration and activity in this province — record levels, Mr. 
Chair. Yes, that is contributing to a growing economy. 
 
We believe that contributing to a growing economy means 
building on our forestry resource. What have we seen? In just 
the past few years, $1 billion of new investment in the forestry; 
$1 billion of private sector new investment in the forestry, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
We believe there is strength in agriculture, Mr. Chair. We 
believe that. In spite of the years of drought, which has 
handicapped many of our farm families, in spite of the closed 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

borders, we believe there is tremendous future in the land, in 
agriculture. And we have seen the diversification of 
Saskatchewan agriculture. Just in the last several years we have 
doubled the number of food processing operations in our 
province. We’ve seen all the work and innovation in 
biotechnologies. We’ve seen the diversification right on the 
family farm. And we’ve seen a significant growth in the 
livestock industry in this province. 
 
Mr. Chair, we believe in building on the resources of 
Saskatchewan in mining — in mining, Mr. Chair. And so we’ve 
seen now record levels in our mining industry. We’re on the 
verge of opening a significant new development in the uranium 
industry. We may well be on the verge of making Saskatchewan 
one of the diamond-producing capitals of the world, Mr. Chair. 
We are seeing, as a result of changes in royalty structure with 
the potash industry, expansion, specifically at the Rocanville 
mine. And we’re working with the mining industry. You can 
read the reviews of the mining industry now saying 
Saskatchewan is a very competitive place to invest for mining. 
 
We’ve believed in building our economy through making 
Saskatchewan more competitive. And now, you can review the 
work of KPMG which will tell you Saskatchewan communities 
are the most or among the most competitive communities in 
which to do business in North America. 
 
Mr. Chair, we are seeing a new flow of immigrants coming into 
this province. We are seeing . . . I met yesterday, at the Moose 
Jaw air show, a young couple who have recently immigrated 
from Alberta to take up ranching just south of Moose Jaw. 
We’re seeing the Alberta ranchers coming into this province 
because it’s a good place to invest and do business. 
 
We’re seeing the, we’re seeing the work of the innovation and 
high technologies at our universities with Innovation Place in 
Saskatoon. We’ll soon see the commissioning of the largest 
scientific project in Canada with the Canadian Light Source 
synchrotron. We see the work happening here at the Research 
Park in Regina, in petroleum research, greenhouse gas research. 
We see the innovation agenda bringing economic activity. 
 
We see, Mr. Chair, this week, we see the tourism industry 
flourishing in our province, flourishing in our province because 
we have a province that welcomes people and a province with 
much to share to the tourist. 
 
I met this morning, as we indicated earlier, with the Consul 
General of Germany in Vancouver. Do you know, Mr. Chair, in 
the year 2002, 6,000 German tourists came to Saskatchewan — 
6,000 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I guess the member 
of Wood River doesn’t want 6,000 German tourists. 
 
Mr. Chair, we are building the economy. Now can a change in 
equalization forward that? Well if the Leader of the Opposition 
doesn’t understand how our prospects could be forwarded with 
fair and equitable equalization, I invite him to call the Premier 
of Alberta because he could explain it to him. I invite him to 
call premiers in Atlantic Canada who could explain it to him. 
 
Mr. Chair, when we are losing from our own resource revenues 
more than $1 for every dollar we collect, that’s one less dollar 
for us to invest in infrastructure that provides for economy, to 

invest in social programming to build good quality communities 
that provides for economy, to invest in post-secondary 
education and research that provides for economy, and, Mr. 
Chair, to invest in competitive regimes by which we can attract 
economy. 
 
We’ve seen the explosion of oil and gas exploration in this 
province, I submit, because we made some significant change to 
the royalty and the taxation regime in that regard. Those dollars 
that are ours, that are now being clawed back by Ottawa, in the 
hands of the people of Saskatchewan can be invested in creating 
even a more robust economy, a more robust economy that will 
soon have us beyond the equalization threshold and proudly 
being a have province in the nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Premier’s plan 
for the province that he highlighted, does he have a population 
growth target and if so, could he share that with members of the 
committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, you’ll know that the 
Saskatchewan Party went all over the province during the 
election saying they could grow the population of 
Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 years. And then they 
introduced a plan which said we’re going to do that; you know 
how we’re going to do it? Well we’re just going to cut all the 
taxes and that should do the trick; oh yes, we forgot, yes, and 
we’re going to get out of competition with the private sector — 
which is a code for privatization; we should have a little 
discussion about that this afternoon — oh, and one other 
ingredient, we’re going to eliminate the laws that protect 
working people. That’s the plan. They said that would get you 
100,000 people. 
 
Mr. Chair, we’re not in the game of playing the political games 
of trying to put on whether it’s going to be 100,000 in 10 years 
or 200 or 50,000. We’re in the project of building a strong 
platform and a strong economy through some of the areas I’ve 
talked about — through immigration, through working with our 
First Nations people, our Aboriginal peoples who will 
contribute to this economy perhaps more than any others with 
their young people now coming forward. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Chair, we’ve put in place a solid plan to build a 
Saskatchewan economy, and we want I may say, in contrast to 
those opposite, we want the benefits of that new economy to 
flow to all of the people of Saskatchewan, not just to a few but 
to all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition wants to start talking about 
equalization. I asked him a little earlier, how many meetings 
has he had with federal officials? Has he written to the federal 
officials? Has he written to the Prime Minister? Has he written 
to the three leaders of the federal party or the four major 
leaders? What, Mr. Chair, tangible activity has the Leader of the 
Opposition done on behalf of Saskatchewan people to fight for 
a fair equalization formula? Perhaps he would like to report that 
to the House this afternoon. 
 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, does the Premier have a 
population target? It doesn’t have to be a number, a gross 
number. Does he have a target at all for the province in terms of 
growth? The national average is about 1 per cent. Does he have 
a target below that, above that? Does he have any target at all to 
get our population growing and expand our tax base in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, our target is to build a 
green and a prosperous economy to provide good quality public 
services for the people of Saskatchewan, to utilize the tools 
which are ours including the Crown sector, and to make this an 
appealing province and prospect for our young people. Those 
are the targets we set: substantive targets, not political targets, 
Mr. Chair, but substantive targets. 
 
To help meet those targets, Mr. Chair, equalization is an 
important component. Again I ask the Leader of the Opposition; 
he complains about the government. He complains about 
everything we do in terms of equalization or, for that matter, in 
any other regard. Then, Mr. Chair, what has he been doing? If 
he doesn’t particularly like what we’re doing on the 
equalization file, what has he been doing? What has he been 
doing other than signing one letter to me — one of the rare 
times he ever sends me a letter — one letter and making a 
couple of speeches? 
 
Mr. Chair, what has the Leader of the Opposition party been 
doing? What has the Saskatchewan Party been doing? Who has 
he met with? Who has he lobbied? Let him answer this 
question: has he even lobbied his own federal leader, Stephen 
Harper? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well . . . 
 
The Chair: — Sorry, order. Members, we are here to discuss 
the estimates of Exec Council, and I know that that traditionally 
is fairly boisterous. But I would just advise members to treat all 
members as honourable. And I’d like to be able to hear the 
people that have the floor. And there seems to be some private 
conversations between members on either side, and I would ask 
them to take it behind the bar. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well first of all I did 
not realize that the Premier wants to receive more letters from 
me. If I would’ve realized that, I would’ve maybe sent him 
some more. I fact, Mr. Chairman, I’m kind of composing one 
right now that I might send over, and it might probably go 
something like: dear Mr. Premier, have some targets to get our 
population growing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — It might go on to say we have been at the same 
population since 1929. That’s long before we knew of the oil 
and gas riches of this province that the Premier highlights. 
That’s long before anybody found any potash or uranium, now 
a third of the world’s supply. It’s long before we knew anything 
of diamonds or of the immeasurable potential of our forestry 
industry, and yet since that date our population has remained 

stagnant. 
 
Well why is that important? Because I’m not sure the Premier 
or the NDP of this province seem to understand why that’s 
important. You see, the more people you have, the more people 
that we have in Saskatchewan, the more taxpayers we’re going 
to have. And the more taxpayers we’re going to have, the more 
resources that we’re going to have for governments so that 
when — God forbid — something like BSE hits, the 
government has a resource base to go to, to be able to stand 
shoulder to shoulder with producers. So that we don’t have to 
have the longest waiting list for health care in all of the 
Dominion of Canada — that’s why you want more population. 
So that we don’t have to fund education off of land, Mr. 
Chairman, so we can fund it off of a population base and 
students. That’s why you want to have it. 
 
And I would sum that letter up with this. I would say: Mr. 
Premier, I ask you again, please, please highlight for the people 
of this province what target you have, what plans you have to 
get our population past the point where it has been since 1929. 
And if you have, if you have no such plans, maybe state that 
too. Maybe you don’t think population is a big deal; maybe it’s 
not a measure of anything if you’re the Premier of this 
province, the Leader of the NDP. And if that’s the case, we 
need to know that too so we can make a switch. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, let me ask this question. 
The Saskatchewan Party went about the province before the 
November election saying they had a plan to, I think they used 
the word, grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 people. Well is that 
the plan today? Is that the plan today? Because days after the 
election, they wiped the plan off the Web page; they just wiped 
it off. Is it still their plan? And I ask the Leader of the 
Opposition, is it still his plan? Well it must be. 
 
He was saying this to chambers of commerce, that his plan for 
the economy is threefold. You cut the taxes unsustainably, you 
cut the taxes unsustainably. You privatize the Crowns, and you 
renovate the labour legislation in Saskatchewan. That’s the plan 
outlined by the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is we have put in place a significant 
plan to see the Saskatchewan economy build. And I can tell 
you, Mr. Chair, you can listen to the voices over there. You can 
listen; the people of Saskatchewan can listen to that negativity 
over there. But I tend to listen to people like Standard & Poor, 
Standard & Poor of New York City, one of the most significant 
bond rating agencies in the world. One of the most significant 
bond rating agencies in the world has looked at the budgetary 
work of this government, has looked at the economy of 
Saskatchewan today, has looked at the potential of our economy 
under the leadership of this government, and what did they 
conclude, Mr. Chair? They conclude this province merits a 
credit rating upgrade. 
 
Now that’s the assessment of Standard & Poor about the 
budgetary measures of this government, the economic planning 
of the people of Saskatchewan, and the great potential of 
Saskatchewan. Our targets, Mr. Chair, our targets are to . . . 
 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

The Chair: — Order. Members, I know that there are many 
members who want to participate in that, but if there are some 
private conversations that are being yelled back and forth on 
both side of the House, I would ask those members to take the 
conversation behind the bar. I recognize the Premier, if he 
wants to finish his answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Chair, this institution of world 
reputation looks at Saskatchewan, looks at the fiscal 
management of this government, looks at the prospects and says 
this province merits a credit rating upgrade. 
 
Now why doesn’t the Leader of the Opposition follow his own 
words for once and give credit where credit is due? This credit 
is due to the people of Saskatchewan. This credit is due to good 
fiscal management here, and this credit is due to an economic 
game plan that’s working. 
 
Now I’ll tell you about an economic game plan that’s working, 
Mr. Chair. I’ll tell you about an economic game plan that’s 
working. When the Leader of the Opposition was going to the 
school of government here in this building in the 1980s, we 
were losing people in this province at a rate unheard of — 
unheard of — in this province’s history. That’s what was 
happening. While he was at school in government here, they 
were bankrupting the province. It has taken us, Mr. Chair, from 
1986 until last week — from 1986 until last week — to so 
manage the fiscal affairs of this province and to so build its 
economy. It’s taken us that long to get AA credit ratings across 
the board in the United States of America. That’s what we’ve 
had to fight against. Never mind these past few years of drought 
and BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) and unfair 
international subsidies; never mind that. 
 
We’ve built an economy that has diversified, that has earned for 
the people of Saskatchewan from Standard & Poor’s of New 
York City, a credit rating upgrade. And where’s the real proof, 
where is the real proof about the success of the economic 
planning and the work that’s going on in this province? Well it 
came in April and it came in May, when more Saskatchewan 
people are going to work in the months of April and May this 
year than in any other April or May in the history of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the Premier’s right. We’ve 
committed to give credit where credit is due. And I’m going to 
get back to population growth in a moment. With respect to 
Standard & Poor and with respect to a credit rating, we will 
give credit where credit is due. The credit of course is due Mr. 
Romanow and Ms. MacKinnon who happened to inherit the 
fiscal situation that they inherited from the government of the 
1980s. 
 
Since then, Mr. Chairman of committees, since then this 
Premier has been busy reversing the work that they’ve done. 
This Premier has been piling on more debt to the province’s 
taxpayers — over a billion and a half more debt, thanks to that 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, and a current cadre of Finance ministers. 
The truth of the matter is that this particular Premier is sort of a 
back-to-the-1970s, tax-and-spend social democrat. He’s racked 
up deficit after deficit. He’s increased the debt. And now he’s 

got the temerity to stand in his place in the House and claim 
credit for the work of his predecessor, Mr. Chairman. That’s 
what he’s doing. 
 
Here’s the question, here’s the question to the Premier. During 
the election campaign, I heard local NDP candidates in 
southwest Saskatchewan say things like, in terms of the 
population, say things like 800, 900,000 people — that’s just 
about the right size for Saskatchewan. They were mocking our 
goal to get our province’s population growing. 
 
By the way, the goal was based on the national average. It’s one 
per cent growth a year. And I think that that is a laudable goal 
and one that we should be setting in Saskatchewan, to meet the 
national average in population growth. 
 
But I remember hearing local NDP candidates saying that we 
didn’t need to get the population growing, that 8 or 900 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well we heard it. In fact we heard 
the member for Regina Wascana say the same thing. And we 
heard the member for Saskatchewan Rivers say we don’t need 
to get our province growing. He was mocking that. 
 
I would like to get the Premier on the record: does he believe, 
does he believe we need to substantively expand our population 
and grow our population? Does he believe that, yes or no? Does 
he think Saskatchewan’s population must grow if we are to 
sustain the quality of life that we want to sustain in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think you 
would find a soul in Saskatchewan who would disagree with the 
notion we would like to see and want to see and are working to 
see population growth. The question is, the question is how to 
achieve that growth. 
 
Do you achieve the growth with the kind of economic and 
social policies that the member from Swift Current is so 
familiar with, the kind of right-wing social and economic 
policies? Is that how you build in this province? Or do you do it 
with a plan that works with Saskatchewan people? 
 
Now he started this most recent question with a tribute — and I 
share the tribute — to both Roy Romanow and Janice 
MacKinnon during their years in office. I share that tribute with 
one Mr. Ed Tchorzewski as he served in the ministry of Finance 
in this province. I share that tribute with the now Minister of 
Industry and Resources when he shared the Finance portfolio. 
And I share it with the current Minister of Finance. 
 
But let me tell the Leader of the Opposition, let me tell the 
Leader of the Opposition when Standard & Poor do their credit 
ratings, they do it on current events. They do it on current 
affairs. They do it on current budgeting. And they are very 
specific in their report in looking at the work that this province 
has done in the last three years to manage its finances through a 
very, very difficult period of time. And they give us a credit 
upgrading. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, you can believe the member from Swift 
Current. You can believe the Saskatchewan Party, SP, or you 
can believe Standard & Poor of New York. And I’ll believe 
Standard & Poor of New York 10 times out of 10, Mr. Chair. 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Of course, Mr. Chair, of course we want to see new population. 
We want to, Mr. Chair, take full advantage of the young people 
of Saskatchewan today. We want to give our young people 
opportunity, first opportunity in our province. We want to take 
full advantage of our Aboriginal young people in this province. 
We want to provide the educational opportunities. We want to 
provide the employment opportunities. 
 
But, Mr. Chair, we’re reaching out. We’re reaching out not just 
through economic opportunity, but we’re reaching out for the 
first time in Saskatchewan’s history, I venture to say, since the 
days of the homestead. We are reaching out through the process 
of immigration to other parts of Canada. I’ve talked about 
Albertans who are moving to Saskatchewan . . . to reach out 
through immigration to the continent, to reach out through 
immigration to the world — Central America, South America, 
Asia, the Pacific, Europe, Britain — to draw people, to draw 
people to this province. 
 
Yes to see population increase, yes to see stronger communities, 
yes to see a more vibrant economy, and yes to see a more 
vibrant future for all people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well the Premier should be doing more than 
giving tribute to those departed members like Mr. Romanow 
and Ms. MacKinnon. He desperately needs them on his front 
bench. Arguably the province does, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. 
Chairman, because clearly since this Premier has taken over, 
since he’s taken over . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It’s the 
Provincial Auditor’s numbers, not mine. 
 
The people viewing these proceedings or the people that will 
read this in Hansard one day will know that the Provincial 
Auditor or the province of Saskatchewan clearly said to 
anybody that was interested, this Premier inherited about a half 
billion dollar surplus on a summary financial statement for Mr. 
Romanow — that’s what he inherited. And a few short years 
later, what did he turn it into? A half billion dollar roughly 
deficit, a billion and a half more in debt — these truly are your 
tax-and-spend social democrats, Mr. Chairman. And it’s 
unfortunate. 
 
And I would say this to the Premier: if he does believe — and 
it’s a half-hearted belief I would submit, based on his answers 
so far — if he does believe that our long-term hope in 
Saskatchewan is a greater population base, a greater tax base, he 
ought to share that with his members. 
 
He ought to share that with the member from Regina Wascana, 
who mocked, mocked the population targets that we had set, in 
a local paper — I think in the Arm River-Watrous constituency 
— openly mocked them, said Saskatchewan ought not to aspire 
to population growth; it wasn’t even possible. One per cent, the 
national average, she said, it wasn’t possible. 
 
That particular member at the back there, the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers, what did he say? The Premier says, oh 
they do believe the province has to grow. And here’s what the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers said in his Throne Speech 

intervention: 
 

What I hear instead (he’s talking about us) is grow, grow, 
grow. Grow this province; grow the population; grow 
industry; grow the economy. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
meaningless mantra. 

 
That’s what the member from Saskatchewan Rivers had to say. 
So the Premier ought to come clean and let the people of the 
province know which is it. Now that he’s being asked direct 
questions, he’s in favour of a growth agenda and in favour of 
population growth, but his members, his members don’t agree. 
 
And while he’s on his feet, he can answer a specific question. 
You know the Premier has written to all the party leaders in 
Saskatchewan . . . I beg your pardon, in Canada, that are 
currently obviously engaged in the federal election campaign — 
I shouldn’t say all of them; I presume Mr. Layton, Mr. Harper, 
and Mr. Martin — on the issue of equalization. 
 
And I believe I know that he has received a response now back 
from Mr. Harper, and maybe he’s received responses back from 
the other leaders. Maybe he’s received a response back from 
Mr. Martin or Mr. Layton. I wonder could he highlight for 
members of the committee what response he has received from 
each of the federal leaders on this issue of changes to the 
equalization formula. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With permission to introduce guests. 
 
The Chair: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t be 
happier than to introduce my good friend and former MLA for 
the Lloydminster area, Violet Stanger, and friend. I apologize; I 
don’t know your friend’s name. Certainly this is a very astute 
politician who continues to provide advice and observations 
from time to time. And we’re so busy in the House, Mr. 
Speaker, this is one of the only ways we can get to see each 
other. So we appreciate Vi coming down to the legislature today 
to watch the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it is certainly of interest to 
members on this side of the House, and I’m sure to the people 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

of Saskatchewan, the glowing reviews that the Leader of the 
Opposition gives to those who deserve glowing reviews — that 
being Roy Romanow, and Janice MacKinnon, and others who 
have served in government benches. But, Mr. Chair, when those 
members — when Mr. Romanow was sitting at this bench and 
Ms. McKinnon was sitting in the seat of the finance — I mean 
these same people suggested they were the worst plagues to 
ever appear on Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh 
yes, oh yes. 
 
And now you see he wants to . . . this leader wants to quote 
members. Well the member from Kindersley, as I speak, is 
flying out of his seat, waving his arms. Well it’s the member 
from Kindersley who now takes a view that Premier Douglas 
was the worst thing that was ever vested on the people of 
Saskatchewan. Now he nods and he says it’s true. Well these 
folks, you see, will pick and choose for their own political 
convenience. 
 
But the record, the record, Mr. Chair — forget the political 
convenience of the Saskatchewan Party — the record is as 
follows: when we assumed government in 1991 — I was proud 
to be part of that government — when we assumed government 
in 1991, the percentage of debt to the GDP (gross domestic 
product) of Saskatchewan was 61.7 — 61.7. 
 
That was clearly the result of the economic and social policies 
of the Saskatchewan Party, then known as the Conservatives, in 
our province. That was directly a result of the policies, the 
right-wing policies being advanced over there in the 1980s; the 
same policies which are being advanced today. We ended up 
with a debt to GDP ratio of 61.7 per cent — arguably the worst 
in Canada. 
 
Today as a result of the fiscal prudence and management of the 
Romanow years and now the most recent years, our debt to 
GDP is down to 33.7 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thirty-three point seven. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now that, Mr. Chair, may not be 
recognized by the member from Swift Current because I’m not 
sure what school of economics he attended. But I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Chair, it is recognized a year ago by Moody’s of New York 
City — Moody’s of New York City, who a year ago gave us a 
credit upgrade. It is recognized this year by Standard & Poor’s 
of New York City, who this year, on the basis of this budget 
and this economic performance, gave the people of 
Saskatchewan a credit upgrade. 
 
Now they can, they can make all the political partisan speeches 
they want. It didn’t work in the fall because, you see, the people 
of Saskatchewan see right through it. They come in here and 
they say, one day, they say one day . . . well I’ll tell you they’re 
racking up the debt. They’re spending too much, the spend 
socialist, the spend social democrats. That’s just what he said. 
 
But isn’t it interesting, Mr. Chair, that on a daily basis member 
after member after member over there stands up and says, spend 

more. Spend more. You name it, you name it, they say spend 
more. Just today I heard it again. They want us to spend more in 
health care. They want us to spend more in education. They 
want us to spend more in highways. They want us to spend 
more in the economy. They want up to spend on every front, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
But when we do invest in the priority areas, then they stand up 
— as the Leader of the Opposition just did — and said, you’re 
spending too much. Now the leader . . . the member from — 
where is it — Kindersley, Kindersley says we should not invest 
in film and video in this province. 
 
Well I invite the member of Kindersley to just take a little tour, 
today if he could, down to the sound stage here in 
Saskatchewan, down to the sound stage and see the filming of 
the lead hit series in Canada, Corner Gas, being done right here 
in Saskatchewan, right here in Regina and right out in Rouleau. 
 
Let him go down and look at the investment. Look at the young 
people at work. Look at the $45 million of activity, and then tell 
the people of Saskatchewan we shouldn’t have anything to do 
with the film and video industry. We shouldn’t be investing. 
Mr. Chair, this opposition can’t have it all ways. 
 
They say over and over again, spend, spend, spend, spend. Then 
they say, you’re spending too much. Then they say, you should 
cut all the taxes. Then they say, you should balance the budget. 
Well we saw them at work in the 1980s. We know what it did to 
the province of Saskatchewan; we ended up with a debt to the 
GDP of 61.7. 
 
Again, Mr. Chair, I say I’ll take the word of Moody’s and 
Standard & Poor’s 10 times over 10 of the word of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Premier has any 
thoughts on the question — what have the federal leadership 
candidates responded to in terms of the equalization formula? 
And of those responses he has received, which one is best for 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I understand that I received, 
late on Friday afternoon, a response from one of the federal 
leaders. I am told this morning that the other responses are 
likely to arrive today. 
 
I plan, as soon as I have each of the federal responses, to 
identify and make them very public simultaneously. I think out 
of some sense of fairness to the major political parties in 
Canada, in the middle of the election, I want to make them all 
public. And I understand they should be in our hands by the end 
of this day. I am pleased that the federal leaders are responding 
at the invitation of my letter. 
 
I would again ask the Leader of the Opposition has he, as 
Leader of the Opposition, written to the federal parties? Has he 
met with any of the federal officials or federal elected people? 
What is it that he’s been busy doing to support the people of 
Saskatchewan for a fair equalization? 
 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — My understanding of the response which is 
posted to their Web site of at least the Conservative Party of 
candidate . . . or the Conservative Party of Canada is basically 
in agreement with the Government of Saskatchewan on every 
point, including returning to a 10-province standard that 
excludes non-renewable resource revenues from the 
equalization formula. 
 
I also understand Mr. Layton said similar things when he was 
here, one or . . . He’s been here on a couple of occasions 
already, I think. And obviously, we know what the Liberal 
position is. 
 
So again, I’d ask the Premier, I mean, that’s certain public 
domain information. He would know what is . . . or could have 
access to these positions. Does he have a view as to which is 
certainly better for Saskatchewan in terms of . . . Well, and let’s 
be specific. There’s really only two political parties in the 
country right now that have a chance to form the national 
government. 
 
We in the Saskatchewan Party know that we have members of 
our party that are supporting and some are candidates for the 
federal Liberal Party. We have supporters and candidates 
running for the federal Conservative Party. 
 
But certainly, of the two, on the issue of equalization, there are 
some differences. Those are the two parties that have a chance 
to form . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Members, I have to be able to hear 
the member who has the floor, so I would ask hon. members to 
please keep the discussion at a little lower level. I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Of the two national parties now who have 
commented on equalization that have a chance at forming the 
national government, which one does the Premier believe would 
be more friendly, more positive for the province of 
Saskatchewan — as it relates to the equalization issue, which 
seems to be an issue of underlying importance that runs across 
his government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well let me say this, Mr. Chair. Of 
course I think prime minister Layton would provide the best 
deal for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I am aware, I am aware of the 
public pronouncements that have been made very specifically 
by Mr. Harper, as Leader of the Conservative Party, where he 
has talked about the 10-province standard, excluding natural 
resources. 
 
We have had very recently, Mr. Jack Layton, the Leader of the 
New Democratic Party, in the province talking about a fair deal 
for equalization. 
 
I have not received at this . . . coming into the House, I had not 
received from Mr. Martin, the Leader of the Liberal Party, 

precise response to my letter. 
 
I want to be fair. I mean I want to be able to disclose these 
simultaneously. And I’ll want to judge the letters. I’ve written 
for specific information. Yes I know what we’re saying publicly 
but I want to know what the leaders will say very specifically to 
the letter. 
 
We will be very supportive of those positions. A 10-province 
standard would be good for Saskatchewan. It may not be the 
only answer that’s good for Saskatchewan . . . that would be 
good for Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve said, since the beginning of the most recent discussion 
after the Courchene paper, that at a minimum Saskatchewan 
needs restoration of those monies which have been 
inappropriately clawed back when the equalization clawback 
has been more than a dollar per dollar, and an accord or a pact 
or an arrangement with the federal government under 
equalization that would provide for the people of Saskatchewan 
and our resources the same kinds of protections that are being 
offered to Atlantic Canada. A 10-province standard would be 
good. Accord may meet our needs. 
 
Clearly we want some retroactivity in terms of monies being 
owed. I’m wanting to hear from the leaders in a concrete way, 
by letter, that we can compare and then let the people of 
Saskatchewan see the responses. And I would say let the people 
of Saskatchewan decide as we go the polls at the end of June. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, Mr. Chair. And we look 
forward to the Premier’s comments when he’s received the 
letters from all of the national parties. 
 
And on the subject of the federal election, there’s been some 
other discussion by the Premier’s cousins . . . he likes the word 
cousins. Well the Premier has cousins of his own in Ottawa. 
And they’re proposing some very specific things that I think he 
should be on the record here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They are proposing an inheritance tax on the property and the 
savings of seniors who have built up . . . through a lot of hard 
work and through a number of years, they’ve built up their 
savings. I wonder, has the Premier highlighted clearly for his 
federal counterpart how this is not positive and not 
well-received in the province of Saskatchewan? I wonder if 
he’d comment on that. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m a little surprised at the 
direction the opposition leader wants us to take in this House. It 
seems to me there are many, many, many provincial issues, 
many issues that I believe the Leader of the Opposition would 
want to question government. To engage in a debate here about 
federal election policies strikes me as a bit odd. 
 
You will know the position of this government when it comes 
to taxation when you see the budgets that we produce. When 
you see the policy choices we make, you know the position of 
this government. And I repeat, it is the choices that we’ve made 
in this province that have now earned us a credit rating upgrade 
from Standard & Poor just last week. 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well I think it is 
important. There is a federal election going on right now. And 
here’s an opportunity for the people of the province to hear 
from their Premier on pronouncements that are being made by 
his party — the party that he’s a proud member of, a party that 
he has very publicly supported as they’ve come through town. 
As Mr. Layton has come through town this Premier of this 
province has been there, shoulder to shoulder with him. 
 
This is a leader, a federal leader who advocates no change to the 
gun registry, for example. I think that issue is important in the 
province of Saskatchewan. This is the leader who is calling for 
an inheritance tax. I think that’s important to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. This is a leader — his leader, his 
leader — that’s also proposing some changes to the Canada 
pension fund to fund some sort of home renovation fund. Mr. 
Speaker, a headline in a recent article was, “NDP used CPP 
money to finance home improvements.” I think that has some 
people concerned and with questions, people here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It happens to be we’re two weeks away from a federal election. 
Here’s a chance for the people of the province to hear their 
Premier stand up and say, you know, this is my party — but 
they’re dead wrong on the gun control, they are dead wrong on 
an inheritance tax, or on potentially undermining the Canada 
pension fund to implement some sort of home renovation 
program. 
 
And I just want to give him a chance, on the record here in 
Premier’s estimates, to do that on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, again I am surprised, 
when we have this opportunity to discuss the decisions made 
and being implemented by the Government of Saskatchewan, 
that the Leader of the Opposition wants to divert into some 
conversation about federal electoral policies. 
 
Now I’ll discuss federal policies when they have an important 
effect on the province of Saskatchewan. It’s right that we 
should be discussing equalization. But if he wants to start 
commenting on every party platform in the current federal 
election . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well perhaps he’d like 
to comment on the Conservative Party’s platform. How would 
he like to comment on this discussion we hear about a coalition 
Bloc-Conservative government in Ottawa? How would he like 
to comment on that? 
 
Mr. Chair, we are here to do the business of the people of 
Saskatchewan. We have some very significant, very significant 
issues to discuss here. I’m not going to engage in a federal 
campaign in this House. I think we should get down to the 
business of discussing matters of the province and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the Premier doesn’t want to 
talk about those issues because he’s embarrassed, or at least I 
hope he is. I hope he’s embarrassed about what his federal 
counterparts are proposing for this country and what the impact 
that would be on this province of Saskatchewan. That’s why he 

doesn’t want to talk about these issues and so we will move on, 
Mr. Chairman. We’re going to move on to some issues. 
 
We’re going to move on specifically to a litany, a sad and 
unfortunately long litany of promises that were made in the 
election campaign by this Premier, and promises that were 
broken. Because everywhere I go — and I have had a chance to 
travel all over the province here in the last three or four months 
— everywhere I go, people are asking the same question with 
the same tone of disappointment. 
 
And that’s what . . . It’s not a tone of anger even. If it was 
anger, then the government should even be more worried than 
they probably are already. It’s a tone of disappointment that you 
hear in Saskatchewan. Because I think a lot of people, as they 
followed the last campaign, I think that there was a level of trust 
that they had. And even though polls consistently showed that 
the people of the province wanted to change, they wanted 
change, people were concerned about a number of issues. And 
so because they arguably trusted the Premier, they may have 
held their nose and voted against change, in fact, voted for the 
Premier. 
 
And for those who don’t know the Premier very well — and I 
guess I’d be among those, Mr. Chairman — it has been 
disappointment. Because I think people’s initial impressions — 
and you know maybe they are the true impressions; I don’t 
know — are quite agreeable. The initial impressions are one 
that people had, of trust. 
 
What has been so disappointing for the people of the province 
and disappointing for us . . . And I remember when we were 
debating in the legislature — the Premier and I, early on in a 
question period — and the Premier got up and as if it was some 
sort of moment of victory, he noted the tone of disappointment 
on this side of the House. There was no victory in the 
disappointment the people of the province feel because, Mr. 
Chairman, it is born out of the fact that someone that many of 
them trusted, someone that many of them, you know, marked 
their X by, in a very . . . obviously an important moment in 
anyone’s life when they do, when they cast their ballot in an 
election, has systematically broken promises that were made in 
the campaign. 
 
So I want to ask the Premier that. I want to ask the Premier how 
soon after it was after the provincial election on November 5 
had he decided to break his promise to continue to cut taxes. 
We obviously saw a PST increase in the last budget. How soon 
after the election did he decide that he would break his promise 
to the people to continue to cut taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m very, very proud to have 
in my hand the platform document that we took to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I tell you, days after the election we didn’t wipe 
our platform document out of existence; no, not like the 
Saskatchewan Party did. No, I’m very proud of this document. 
 
This document, this platform will guide this government, not 
just for six months or eight months; this document will guide 
this government for four years, for the four-year mandate, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
And I remind you and I remind members and I remind the 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

people of Saskatchewan, we have a four-year mandate. We set a 
platform for a four-year mandate. Have we accomplished all 
that is within this platform in six or eight months? No, we have 
not; no, we have not. But we have accomplished a great deal of 
what is in this platform. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition will engage in the kind of 
attack that we’ve heard here today and heard it throughout the 
session, with very little reference to fact, very little reference to 
fact and absolutely no reference to what he or what they would 
do differently. Not a hint of that. 
 
Now that can lead you to only one conclusion or perhaps two. 
One, they don’t know what they would do; or two, they don’t 
want to share what they would do, because when they did in the 
campaign, the people of Saskatchewan rejected it — in fact, 
rejected it in greater numbers than they did in the previous 
election. So you saw the popular vote of the New Democratic 
Party grow in the last general election. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is this, Mr. Chair, when you assume 
the benches of government you no longer have the kind of 
opposition luxury that exists over there, where you can spend 
everywhere, and cut taxes, and balance the budget. When we 
have choices to make, we make what we believe are the most 
responsible choices. This year we completed the most 
significant, the most significant renovation of personal income 
tax in this province’s history. We set out a long-term plan; 
we’ve put that plan in place. 
 
This year we needed to find for the provision of health care in 
this province some 173 million new dollars, just for health care 
alone. That represents, Mr. Chair, 173 new dollars for every 
person in our province — just new dollars — to bring our total 
budget to 2.7 billion. To do that, Mr. Chair, we raised the 
provincial sales tax. We raised the provincial sales tax which 
will provide for the treasury of Saskatchewan and for health 
care in the neighbourhood of 130 or $132 million. Therefore we 
had to find even other sources of revenue to fund health care. 
 
What did we say to the people of Saskatchewan in the election? 
We said that health care is our number one public health . . . 
public policy, social policy priority. We have made the 
decisions to give that commitment reality. 
 
Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition, I’m sure, will have a 
litany. I’d like him to do two things: show us some facts instead 
of just rhetoric, and tell us just once, just tell us just once what 
would he do differently. 
 
You see, Mr. Chair, at the beginning of this session the Leader 
of the Opposition and the members over there said they would 
bring this government down in a moment’s notice. At their 
earliest opportunity, they would bring this government down. 
Now that says to me they must therefore be prepared to govern. 
If they are prepared to govern, then it’s time they started telling 
the people of Saskatchewan how they would govern. 
 
And if they don’t think that $173 million is enough money for 
health, then please would the Leader of the Opposition stand up 
today and tell us just how much money should we spend in 
health. And if we’re not spending enough in post-secondary 
education, please tell us what the number should be. If we’re 

not spending enough in Highways or in programs to support our 
farm families, or if we’re not cutting enough tax in some area, 
I’d like him to stand up today and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan something specific. Let’s just try and move on a 
bit from all the rhetoric that we hear, from the histrionics, and 
let’s have a debate. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you for that very special answer. I 
mean, it doesn’t really come close to the question, frankly, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
The Premier said in his campaign platform, the one he waved 
around and said he was so very, very proud of, he said . . . And 
let me just make this point to the Premier. The election platform 
of the Saskatchewan Party is widely available. The policies of 
the party are there. 
 
And we also went to the people with a great and detailed 
platform of exactly what we would do and, for good or for ill, 
the people of the province — who are never wrong in these 
matters — chose his government. They asked him to be the 
Premier. Not by much, mind you, but they did. They gave him a 
majority government and they asked him to implement his plan. 
That’s what they asked, or by their voting on election day they 
were saying, we believe what you have to say, we are 
comfortable with what you have to say by a slim majority. We 
ask you to implement it. In this platform, Mr. Chairman, his 
promise to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, he says 
that he will continue to cut taxes. This budget increased taxes, 
increased all manner of services, and increased the PST by 1 per 
cent. 
 
I’m asking him now to tell the people of the province . . . They 
have a right to know because he asked them to vote for him on 
November 5, many of them did . . . Now they have a right to 
know, when did you know that you couldn’t keep this promise? 
 
Did you know before November 5? Did you know before you 
made the promise? Did you know after you made the promise? 
Certainly you would think it would have been before because 
they were in control. They had the access to the finances of the 
province. 
 
Just answer the question. When did he know that his promise 
made in the platform wasn’t worth the paper it was written on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, again I remind the member 
opposite, the members of the House, and the citizens who may 
be listening, that when we lay out a platform, we don’t lay it out 
for six months. We lay it out for four years. 
 
Have we achieved everything in this platform? No, we have 
not. We will achieve, over our mandate, the platform we’ve laid 
out for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition, he should know — he’s 
spent some time in government — but perhaps he’s forgotten 
that each and every budget year, governments must seriously 
consider the state of the economy; governments must seriously 
consider the demands of programming for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We must consider available revenues, and you 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

must make choices. 
 
I repeat, I repeat, Mr. Chair, that in this budget year, as we sat 
down post the election, it was very clear to us that if we were 
going to maintain the quality of health care service in this 
province that the people deserve and demand, it was going to 
take significant new resources — if we were going to maintain 
our investments in the highways and roads infrastructure, if we 
were going to continue to add new resources to K to 12 
(kindergarten to grade 12) education. 
 
Now we could have, as some governments have done very 
recently, instituted a large health care premium on the people of 
Saskatchewan. We could have done that. Or as some other 
governments have done in this country, we could have 
legislated wage rollbacks to those who are providing health care 
to our . . . (inaudible) . . . We could have done that. We chose, 
in a difficult budget set of choices, to raise the provincial sales 
tax. 
 
Now if the Leader of the Opposition does not like a raise of the 
provincial sales tax — of which every dollar is going to health 
care — if the Leader of the Opposition does not like that, then 
would he please stand and once responsibly tell us what we 
should have done. Does he recommend that we should have 
installed a health care premium? Does he recommend that we 
should roll back the wages of health care providers? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Would he just once . . . If he doesn’t think $173 million is 
enough new money for health care, then let him stand up and 
tell us how much should it be — 180, 200 million, 250? Please, 
give us an answer. 
 
You see, Mr. Chair, the circumstance here is that this Leader of 
the Opposition and that opposition say they will bring the 
government down at a moment’s notice — at a moment’s 
notice. Well then, what are the plans they would have? How 
would they budget? What would they do? Because it’s a 
deafening silence except for the chitter-chatter that comes from 
the back bench over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is why the Premier’s 
conduct over the last number of months, and the conduct of this 
NDP government, is so disappointing to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, that answer that we just heard. 
 
This Premier was the Premier prior to the election. They were 
in government. This Premier can’t now stand up and claim well, 
we didn’t know about all of the stuff . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Hon. Members, I have been 
listening to some of the extracurricular comments that have 
been thrown across the floor and they’re getting dangerously 
close to being unparliamentary. So I’d caution . . . I would ask 
the members to exercise caution in their extra comments over 
the floor. 
 
I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is why people in the 
province are very disappointed because, I think, they thought 
that even though they wanted change, they gave their trust to 
the Premier and his party. And what they’ve got since then is a 
lot of broken promises. 
 
And what really, I think, what really frustrates people is that 
this isn’t a former opposition leader coming to be the Premier 
and legitimately saying well, he opened the books and we didn’t 
realize how bad things were. This isn’t even that. And by the 
way, I think voters are getting increasingly frustrated with that, 
as we witness what’s happening in Ontario. 
 
But I think what’s frustrating is that . . . And the member for 
Regina Qu’Appelle, the Minister of Agriculture, is chirping 
from his seat. He too — he too sat in the government caucus 
prior to the election. They knew the financial situation of 
Saskatchewan. They knew that. 
 
And still, they made promises to cut taxes. Not over the life of 
their government. There was clear meaning behind the words, 
or at least people took those words from the Premier at face 
value; that those promises were current; that they could depend 
on those promises in the short and the near term; that what the 
Premier said in the campaign, he would do. And that’s why 
there is a great deal of disappointment. 
 
And the member from Qu’Appelle is the one that’s chirping. 
You know, they campaigned hard, to give them full marks, give 
this party full marks for how they campaigned. That particular 
member campaigned very hard, to the point, to the point where 
he would go to seniors in his own riding who had a Sask Party 
lawn sign, if you can imagine, Mr. Chairman, and tell them that 
they should take that sign down because the Saskatchewan 
Party would take away their health care, Mr. Chairman. That’s 
what he said . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well he says now 
that’s not what he said, Mr. Chairman. He says that’s not what 
he said. That’s what the couple said. So now he’s accusing them 
of not telling the truth. Eventually they put that sign back up. 
They took his sign down and put it back up. That’s the kind of 
campaign the Premier ran. 
 
Fair enough, fair enough; he was successful. But then it is 
incumbent on the Premier to tell the people of the province at 
what point did he know he couldn’t keep the promises that he 
was making; at what point did he know that instead of, as he 
says here in his platform, instead of more nurses and health 
professionals, he would be cutting those positions. He 
discovered that at some point. 
 
I would say, suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, he knew that prior 
to the election of November 5, and that’s what we’d like him to 
tell us today. He can, he can turn over a new leaf; he can be 
straight with the people of the province of Saskatchewan on this 
issue and tell them that he knew the fiscal situation of the 
province and he knew his own priorities and he didn’t intend to 
keep his promise on health care professionals or continuing to 
cut taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, you see the flights of political 
rhetoric that arise from the member of Swift Current, with no 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

fact. In fact, he and other members — and we will discuss this 
later this day — how he and other members will stand in this 
House and say virtually anything about anyone, and we are 
going to discuss this before this is over. Now, no facts, no facts. 
Now we’re going to, we’re going just review, we’re going to 
just review some of the facts, Mr. Chair. We’re going to review 
just some of the facts. 
 
I have here a chart that talks about taxes on a two-income 
family of four in the province of Saskatchewan earning about 
$50,000. Now in 1993 that family was paying in tax in 
Saskatchewan, between provincial income, sales, and gasoline 
tax, that family in 1993 was paying $5,246 in provincial taxes 
alone, provincial taxes along. That, that now, Mr. Chair, has 
been on a very, very, very steady decline so that last year that 
same family . . . Well let me just, just hold. Mr. Chair, we’ll go 
back to, let’s just talk about the year 2001. That family then was 
paying not $5,246, but in 2001 was paying $3,972. In 2002, 
$3,789; in 2003, $3,613; and in 2004, 3,644. An increase in this 
budget year, fair enough, of $31 — of $31 on average. From a 
height of 5,246 in 1993 now to 3,644. Now that’s about $1,600 
in tax benefit. 
 
I say, Mr. Chair, that’s not a bad tax record — not a bad tax 
record. And, Mr. Chair, as we have to wrestle through these 
past three years of some very difficult times, very difficult 
times, with drought, BSE, and so on, that we are able to provide 
this consistent level of tax relief and at the same time provide 
the quality public services in health care, education, highways, 
and in the economy, and meet the needs as best we can of 
producers in the livestock industry, well I say, Mr. Chair, that’s 
not such a bad record. 
 
But you know what I say or what the Leader of the Opposition 
says maybe isn’t all that important. I’ll tell you what’s 
important. What’s important is what a Standard & Poor bond 
rating agency says; what’s important is what the people of 
Saskatchewan say. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan said in the fall, we’ve seen 
your record, we know that you will follow through on your 
commitments as you have. And, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, 
that will be the practice, we have a four-year mandate, a 
four-year platform in front of us. And, Mr. Chair, when we’re 
coming to the polls next time in about four years, don’t worry 
we’ll debate it again with the people of Saskatchewan, and my 
guess is they will again look at the right-wing policies over 
there and say those policies are not right for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in all of that maybe there’s 
a ray of hope, maybe there’s a light at the end of the rhetorical 
tunnel that the Premier’s in. And maybe it’s this. Maybe the 
Premier seems to be saying that well, people understood in the 
campaign that we didn’t really mean that we’d keep our 
promises, we potentially would keep them maybe over a 
four-year term of government over some long horizon. 
 
And the Premier now says, oh by the way, anybody who didn’t 
believe that, that is what we meant. Anybody who didn’t 
believe that . . . Anyone who made the mistake of taking me, 

taking us at our word, anyone who did that, it’s not really what 
we meant now. What we meant was over the four-year term. 
 
Okay, fair enough. So the question to the Premier is this. He’s 
increased the PST in his last budget by a point. He’s saying now 
that he’ll keep his promise for lower taxes in Saskatchewan 
over the term of his government. Would he please highlight for 
the Assembly when people can expect him to then reduce the 
PST by 1 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in each and every year of 
this mandate we will deliver in this legislature a budget. A 
budget that will be balanced. A budget that will earn the kind of 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you see, Mr. Chair, when 
Standard & Poor says the budget of Saskatchewan is balanced, 
when the Moody investment house says that the budget of the 
province is balanced through good fiscal management, the 
Saskatchewan Party says well it is not balanced. Well again, 
Mr. Chair, whose word will you take and for what purpose? 
 
Mr. Chair, in each and every year this government will provide 
to this legislature a budget; a budget that will make the 
appropriate choices based on the circumstances as we deal with 
them each and every year. Mr. Chair, we’ve laid out a four-year 
plan. We’ve laid out a plan that maintains balance in the budget. 
We’ve laid out a plan that will maintain our good credit rating. 
We’re never again going to put ourselves in the position that 
that group put this province in in the 1980s — never again, Mr. 
Chair. Never again. 
 
But you know what the Leader of the Opposition of course will 
not want to talk about much today are the many commitments 
in this platform document that have already, already been 
reached. He won’t want to talk about that. 
 
He won’t want to talk about our commitment to provide new 
revenue-sharing dollars for our municipalities — done in this 
budget. He won’t want to talk about our commitment to 
creating jobs in this province, when you see the kind of record 
employment levels coming in April and May; he won’t want to 
talk about that. He won’t want to talk about the commitments 
that we’re investing in — for instance, the green economy of 
wind power. He won’t want to talk about the green teams being 
put into place. 
 
He won’t want to talk about very much the new investments 
we’re putting into health care, into CT (computerized 
tomography) scanners, just as we committed; into bursaries for 
health care providers, just as we committed; into a new MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging), new diagnostic equipment, just 
as we committed. He doesn’t want to talk about the institution 
now of our surgical waiting list, our wait list target times. He 
won’t want to talk about that — all committed in this platform 
document. 
 
He won’t want to talk about the CarreerStart program, which 
we committed to in this platform. He won’t want to talk about 
that because we’re instituting it. He won’t want to talk about 
those things which are being completed — no, no. 
 
And I’ll tell you what else he won’t want to talk about. He 
doesn’t want to talk about their policy. He sure doesn’t want to 
talk about their policy. Nothing to say about their policy. He 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

said, well we’re going to make one up next February sometime; 
in the meantime, just trust me. 
 
He says, we’re going to stretch, we’re going to be a new 
opposition. Mr. Speaker — Mr. Chair, sorry — Mr. Chair, we 
have not seen anything new in this opposition. In fact, I think 
we see a weaker opposition today than we had when the 
member from Rosetown was leading over there. Absolutely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chairman, the question was 
pretty simple again to the Premier. We asked him when it is 
he’s going to keep his promise. In the campaign he promised 
lower taxes for Saskatchewan families; he increased the PST by 
a point. The Premier says, well I didn’t . . . he explains his 
broken promise by saying, well I meant over the term of the 
government. So will the Premier just commit today that he’s 
going to reduce that PST that he increased by that point, at least 
just to get us to where we were? Will he do that over the first 
term? Is that what he’s saying, and if so, when? Will he answer 
that question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, one day, one day they 
say, one day they say, the most significant thing you need to do 
is to lower the taxes on the property. That’s the thing they say. 
That was yesterday’s version, I guess. Today’s version is now 
we should commit to lowering the PST. What will they have us 
commit to next week? Lowering corporate taxes, I suppose. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, that’s not how it works on the government 
benches. It works in opposition; on any given day you can get 
up and have a new idea and call for something new or call for 
new spending. Doesn’t work that way in government, Mr. 
Chair. You have to make decisions; you have to make decisions 
on a four-year plan. You have to build that plan. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, again I submit the record of this government, 
as validated now by Moody’s of New York City, Standard & 
Poor’s of New York City, the record of this government in 
fiscal management stands against any record of any government 
in Canada. We are the government, we are the people, we are 
the province who are getting credit rating upgrades, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, what the people of the province 
want, what the people of Saskatchewan want is for this Premier, 
in terms of keeping commitments, is simply to keep his. He 
made them in the election campaign. 
 
And now the Premier kind of skates around all . . . It’s why 
there is this amazing sentiment of absolute disappointment in 
this Premier. Because I think even those who thought his 
government to be incompetent when they looked at SPUDCO 
and when they looked at all of these losses that they were 
incurring, when they looked at the fact that this Premier was 
turning, this Premier was turning balanced budgets under Mr. 
Romanow into huge deficits, into added debt, they looked at the 
Premier and thought, I’m not sure this Premier is confident, but 
there was a trust that they had there. 
 
And if the Premier wonders why that’s going away, if he’s 

wondering why that trust seems to be going away as he travels 
the province, he ought to, he ought to simply listen to his 
answers. He ought to listen to his answers. He promised to cut 
taxes. In, I think, in January of this year — this year, Mr. 
Chairman — he was asked by CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) did he have a mandate to increase the PST. His 
answer was one word: no. That’s what he said. That’s what he 
said in January. His answer was no. In his campaign 
specifically — specifically now — in his platform, page 14, the 
Premier says . . . this is what the Premier says under the 
category of “Index tax credits and brackets to keep pace with 
inflation.” 
 
(16:30) 
 
Here’s another example. This is not a top-of-mind example. 
People are more concerned about long-term care beds — 
rightfully so — or an increase in the PST. But you know what? 
In terms of equivalency, it’s still a promise. It’s black and white 
commitment by the Premier. That’s the kind of commitment we 
want to talk to him about today, and we want him to ask 
questions in that Executive Council estimates. Here’s what he 
said. 
 

We’ve worked hard to ensure Saskatchewan has Canada’s 
fairest provincial tax system. Now we need to ensure . . . 
(the) inflation can’t allow unfairness to creep back in. 
 
As of January 1, 2004, provincial tax credits and . . . three 
income tax brackets will be indexed . . . 

 
I don’t know, I don’t know where the Premier comes from, but 
where I come from people would take that to mean, will be 
indexed, Mr. Chairman, because that’s what it says: 
 

. . . ensuring Saskatchewan’s tax reductions keep up with 
inflation. 

 
What happened in this budget? What happened in this budget 
that the Premier personally approved? He approved the fact that 
the reductions would not be, would not be adjusted for bracket 
. . . for inflation, Mr. Chairman. He specifically broke that 
promise. So again, if it’s the Premier’s contention — and it’s a 
painful one for the people of the province — but if it’s his 
contention that, well I’m going to keep this promise over the 
term of my government, I want him to stand up and say that 
specifically about this issue and give the taxpayers a timeline. 
Not even a specific date, but a ballpark even. He made the 
promise. When will it be kept? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in terms of the indexing of 
the income tax benefit in this budget, if the Leader of the 
Opposition would care to . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Members, I have been warning the House 
quite regularly on comments — personalized comments — and 
they’re now degenerating into what I would classify as personal 
insults. And I don’t want to take them . . . Order. I don’t want to 
take the next step of singling members out and asking them to 
withdraw and apologize to the House. But to warn members, I 
will do that on the next step. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. If the Leader of 
the Opposition would give some study to the budget, he would 
know and would admit in this House that in fact the indexation 
is in place for the year 2004 for the budget. What he would also 
recognize is that indexation is in place for budgets in the future. 
 
The only difference this year — because we believe, Mr. Chair, 
this is a responsible decision for us to make — is that each and 
every year the level of that indexation will be set by 
government of the day. Whether it’s this government or their 
government, that level of indexation will be set — that, Mr. 
Chair, to achieve what we think are the responsible choices that 
often need to be made, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now again, I plead with the Leader of the Opposition to stand 
once today in this debate and offer an alternative, offer an 
alternative. He doesn’t like an increase to the PST. He doesn’t 
like increases to any other fee or charge or service. He wants us 
to spend and spend and spend on program after program after 
program, or his members stand up and do, and I assume he 
supports his members. 
 
So would we hear today from the leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party, if in government what choices would they make? How 
much would they spend on health care? How much would they 
spend on highways? Which tax would they raise or cut? Could 
we hear at least one specific? Or is it truly the case they have a 
policy they do not want to share with the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Yes, there’s the sound of one hand clapping, Mr. 
Chairman, because, because, because the Premier . . . I mean I 
just read it from the platform; that promise couldn’t be more 
specific. It doesn’t say, over life of our government. There are 
no wiggle words like that in there. There are none. It’s why it’s 
actions like we have witnessed on that issue, where the 
government would flip-flop, the government . . . the Premier 
himself would personally authorize the breaking of a specific 
promise like that. It’s why the Premier himself would have said 
back on May 31, ’91: 
 

Mr. Speaker, when you have betrayed the trust of those 
who have elected you, I argue, Mr. Speaker, you have no 
mandate. You have no mandate left. 

 
And that’s what the Premier of this province said back in 1991. 
Back in 1989, Mr. Speaker, here’s what I said — and I’ll read it 
into the record again: 
 

When a political party goes to the people before an 
election and says one thing (and says one thing), and then 
having won the election, after the election turns and does 
just the opposite, Mr. Speaker, (it) . . . makes a sham (out) 
of parliamentary democracy. 
 

The Premier, the Premier was absolutely right when he said that 
as the member for Moose Jaw back on July 25, 1989. But he 
seems to have forgotten all of that. He seems to have forgotten 
what he said at the end of May in 1991 because we could go 
down the list — and we have throughout the session — of all of 
the broken promises, that is a specific one. And we may get a 
chance to return to them. But again you hear no answer from 
the Premier. 

And the Premier ought not to be surprised then if the people of 
the province simply don’t believe things that his party’s going 
to say into the future, that he will say into the future, because 
the track record, the track record is clear. The track record is say 
whatever you need to say in a campaign, say whatever you need 
to say about your own platform, and say whatever you need to 
say about your opponents. Just get elected. 
 
That’s the philosophy that that Premier follows over there. And 
I guess that’s fair enough. That’s his business. He can follow 
that. I happen to think, Mr. Chairman, though that while it 
apparently worked on November 5, I’m not sure it’s going to 
work again. I think the people of the province have seen that 
movie. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Throne Speech, the Premier’s Throne 
Speech had some interesting and I would say positive elements 
in it that I’d like to explore a little bit about, because we frankly 
haven’t seen the specifics on them. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chairman of committees, on page 9 of 
the printed Throne Speech that I have, I’m going to quote here. 
It says . . . It’s a section on health care and it says: 
 

To achieve this . . . 
 

In other words . . . Well I’ll read the whole paragraph. 
 

Guided by the Saskatchewan Action Plan on Health, we 
will continue to do more for health care. (This is the 
government’s Throne Speech.) The public expects that our 
health resources meet the most pressing needs of the 
people. To achieve this, our government will assess how 
health dollars are used with a view to ensuring the 
resources are used more effectively for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 

When I heard the Lieutenant Governor read those words, I 
thought to myself well, that sounds a lot like a value-for-money 
exercise — a value-for-money audit. 
 
Members of that party openly mocked when we proposed that 
as an alternative in the ’99 campaign and since. In fact I can 
remember the then leader of the government, the premier who 
was a very effective debater, shout across at us the fact that this 
was nothing but a Texas-style audit. I think that’s what Mr. 
Romanow used to call it. Fair enough. But this reference in the 
Throne Speech sounds a little bit like that. 
 
So the question is this: what does this reference in the Throne 
Speech mean? Is the Premier committed to something — by the 
way, that we would support — an exercise to determine that the 
massive resources that we are committing to health care in this 
province are being used most effectively, are getting to the front 
line in the best possible way and not getting lost along the way 
in other attendant issues in the health care system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, before moving on to 
discussion of the Throne Speech and commitments around 
health care and the Throne Speech, the member from Swift 
Current gave us quite a little speech about comments that I may 
have made in the late 1980s and as late as 1991. 
 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

Well he well knows, he well knows what provoked those 
comments at that time. Those comments were made about a 
government of which he was an employee, when he was 
attending the school of governance in this building at that time. 
And we had reached 1991. And that government of that party 
opposite had gone five years — five years, Mr. Chair — 
without calling an election, abusing the right of power, Mr. 
Chair. You bet I’d make some of those comments. You bet. 
 
Now you see, he wants us to conveniently forget that. He wants 
us to very conveniently forget the record of that philosophy and 
some of those very members in government in this province. He 
wants us to forget what these folks did to constituents of theirs 
when they came to this House elected as Conservatives, as 
Liberals, committed to their parties, committed to their 
constituents. 
 
And what did they do, Mr. Chair? I tell you, that group of men 
and women were so ashamed of their history in government, so 
ashamed of their party name, they got themselves together 
down here in a downtown restaurant in Regina, and they just 
changed the name. And they assumed that would let people 
forget. 
 
Did they go to their constituents? Did they go to their people? 
Did they go to their people and seek by-election? Did they go to 
their people and seek the authorization of their citizens to do 
that? No, no, no, no. No, they didn’t want to do that. They just 
wanted power, Mr. Chair. They just wanted power. And it’s 
been that quest for power that has driven this group of men and 
women ever since that night in that downtown Regina 
restaurant. 
 
And do you want to talk about a quest for power? They will do, 
they will say anything. They will attack individuals in this 
legislature. They can’t debate policy because they’re afraid to 
divulge the policies they have. We got a glimpse of it in the 
election, and the people said no. We’re not interested in your 
policies of privatization. We’re not interested in your policies of 
attacking working people. We’re not interested in your policies 
of unsustainable tax cuts that would put us right back in the 
soup of deficit and debt. We’re not interested in those policies. 
 
They don’t want to talk about their policies. They don’t want to 
talk about their history. They haven’t got a leader that they can 
ever point to. They attack Mr. Douglas. They attack or praise 
Mr. Romanow, given the day. They haven’t got a leader they 
can point to. And they cannot discuss policy. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what it is, Mr. Leader of the Opposition. You 
asked what it is. It’s an exposure exactly of the kind of folks we 
have sitting in opposition today, led by a man who said he 
would change opposition. Led by a man who would stretch the 
opposition; they would be a more responsible opposition. Well, 
Mr. Chair, I tell you, a responsible opposition, a responsible 
opposition would have a leader who would once stand in the 
legislature just once and say what he would do if he occupied 
the office of Premier, if he occupied the benches of government. 
Would he give us just one suggestion? 
 
No, he won’t tell us how much they would spend on health 
care. He won’t tell us how much they would spend on 
highways. He won’t tell us how much they would spend on 

education. He just says spend more, more, more, more. Then he 
says, but you’ve got to cut the property taxes one day. Comes in 
the next day and says, well you’ve got to reduce the sales taxes. 
He goes about to the people saying, well we’ve got to cut all the 
corporate taxes and the resource revenue fees and charges. You 
see, Mr. Chair, well I guess he has the luxury. They can do that. 
It hasn’t got them to government thus far, and I’m not sure it 
ever, ever will. 
 
Now he wants to debate health care. It’s very helpful that he 
might want to debate health care today. Yes, we’ve talked about 
in our Throne Speech the need of working with the providers of 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan, working with . . . 
you can talk about the various providers — be it nurses, doctors 
— those who work in our facilities. We’re going to work with 
administration. We’re going to work with our health regions. 
We’re going to work with a very strong Department of Health, 
one of the strongest in the country, Mr. Chair, to look at how 
our health care dollars can maximize the health care benefit for 
people. 
 
Now he wants to characterize that as a value-for-money audit. I 
understand he was out in front of the press just the end of last 
week promoting this notion of the value-for-money audit. It’s 
the one health care idea that they have, and they borrowed that 
from the former leader of the Liberal Party. It was the former 
leader of the Liberal Party that brought to the attention of, sort 
of the value-for-money audit. 
 
We’re not just interested, Mr. Chair, we’re not just interested in 
going out and checking value for money. We’re not going out 
just to check value for money because there is more to health 
care than just value for money. We want to see our health care 
dollars. We want to see them most effectively used. 
 
But I want the Leader of the Opposition to say very clearly . . . 
is what he’s supporting is simply applying value-for-money 
audit to health care? Because there’s more to health care, 
there’s more to health care than just finding the cheapest . . . the 
service that you can get. If that’s what he’s promoting, that we 
should do value for money, just go out and find the cheapest, 
bring in a bunch of auditors, not health care providers . . . He 
says bring in a third-party system and check this all out, try to 
find the cheapest way to do it. If that’s what he’s promoting, 
we’re not interested in that. 
 
We’re interested, Mr. Chair, in working with the health care 
providers of Saskatchewan, with our own strong Department of 
Health, with our regional health authorities, with providers, and 
with Saskatchewan people to ensure that we’re getting the best 
value for our health care dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Chair, you 
know, the irony of course in a 12-minute answer about how we 
don’t want to talk about anything substantive is that it was in an 
answer to what I think is a substantive question. 
 
This, I said, is a positive notion that we find in this Premier’s 
Throne Speech. So if he could just relax and calm down, maybe 
we can have a discussion about this. 
 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Is this sort of just a general statement that the 
Department of Health will . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. I appreciate, members, that the heckles 
are no longer personal, but I would like to be able to hear what 
the member who has the floor has to say. I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, so, you know, I guess what we’re 
asking the Premier is pretty clear. He’s got a specific reference 
to this in his Throne Speech: 
 

. . . our government will assess how health dollars are used 
with a view to ensuring the resources are used most 
effectively for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 

 
Well, and that does frankly sound like the notion of a 
value-for-money audit, something that we did, we have talked 
about in the past. And this is where the Premier I think makes a 
bit of a mistake, because the Premier equates value only with 
money. Maybe a value-for-money audit, Mr. Chairman, may be 
the priority in that kind of an audit. The one, the review that 
we’ve talked about in this province, what is necessary, is about 
front-line patient care. Maybe that is the issue that we’re trying 
to get to the bottom of when we talk about that kind of a review. 
Frankly that’s at least the inference here in the Throne Speech. 
 
So I want to find out a little bit more about what the Premier 
has in mind here. Because maybe it’s something that we can get 
behind, something that we can support. 
 
Specifically here’s the question. I mean the Premier said, well 
it’s . . . you know, we’re going to kind of talk about it with 
health care workers and we’re going to raise it with regions and 
our department officials will talk about this and stuff. You 
know, we want to know what specifically he’s talking about. Is 
there a formal process? Is there someone tasked in his 
government within the Department of Health or within 
Executive Council to manage this process? Is there a terms of 
reference for it? Does it need a budget? Is it a formal review? Is 
there a start date? Is there an end date? Do they have some 
objectives in mind? Is it a substantive and constructive review 
that we would like to know more about and perhaps be able to 
support, Mr. Chairman? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, maybe we are finding 
some area of agreement. It will want to be not the kind of 
review that is going to be conducted by some third party 
auditing firm. It needs to be the kind of review that will involve, 
it will involve the administration of health care, the Department 
of Health, the regional health authorities, but beyond the 
administration, to involve the people who are providing health 
care. We want to challenge all of those who are involved in 
providing health care to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now when I read the transcript of the Leader of the 
Opposition’s comments to the press on this issue, I get the 
feeling he’s recommending a third party — a third party. If he 
has a suggestion about, in his view, who would be a good third 

party for us to engage, this could become a . . . this might 
become a constructive discussion. 
 
So I would invite the Leader of the Opposition — obviously 
he’s suggesting this to the press — perhaps he could suggest the 
third party that he would recommend to conduct the kind of 
audit that perhaps both of us are talking about. Because we are 
both I believe talking about front-line patient care, front-line 
care for clients of the system, perhaps long-term care clients in 
rural Saskatchewan, or acute clients in our tertiary care centres. 
 
What we’re not interested in, and if this is the position of the 
Saskatchewan Party, then we’re not interested in hauling in a 
bunch of auditors — whether they come from Texas or 
Montreal — to do just straight money audit on the health care 
system. Because, Mr. Chair, you could do that and I suppose 
there would be cost savings to be found, but I’m not sure we 
would achieve the same level or better patient care as a result of 
it. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well we do agree. Then we absolutely agree. And 
you know to whatever our resources could assist in in terms of 
determining a third party that could achieve that kind of a 
review, we would be happy to help. 
 
I would suggest probably that the Department of Health with all 
of its resources, or any of the other departments of the 
government that the Premier has at his disposal, may have more 
resources to find a firm that will focus, that will focus on patient 
care, or perhaps an organization here within the country, 
perhaps those that are interested in health care in Canada. 
 
And I guess that begs another question then. I’m assuming then 
that we now have the Premier telling us in the Assembly and 
telling the people of the province that that’s what he means by 
this on page 9 of the Throne Speech, that he does mean a 
third-party review that’s intended to find out if we are indeed 
utilizing our resources with the greatest amount of efficacy as is 
possible in terms of front-line patient care. 
 
So if that’s what he is saying then by this statement, the 
question is why wouldn’t there be . . . Why wouldn’t we want 
to do this first before we close any facilities for which there is a 
waiting list? Why wouldn’t we want to find out the information 
that that kind of exercise could garner before we go ahead and 
either close facilities or beds for which there are waiting lists? 
These aren’t in most cases, in almost every case, not empty 
beds that are sitting in a corner of a room in some hospital in 
Saskatchewan. They’re beds that are occupied. 
 
Does the Premier then agree, if that’s what he means on page 9 
of the Throne Speech, that we ought to do this first and then 
look at what needs to be done in the system with respect to 
facilities or beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we obviously are not starting 
from ground zero. We had some years ago one of the most 
thorough reviews of the delivery of health care in Saskatchewan 
that I believe has ever been conducted in this province, under 
the leadership of Ken Fyke and the Fyke Commission, and there 
was a great deal of public discussion, a great deal of public 
input. We had, we had Mr. Fyke here in the Legislative 
Chamber. 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

As a result of that work, we developed the action plan for 
Saskatchewan health. Now health is never and will never be a 
static, a static program. We are always needing to make 
decisions and always need to be looking to the future for 
change. That will always be the case. In terms of decision 
making now, you cannot simply freeze-frame the system. It 
changes on a daily basis. And decisions have to be made on a 
daily, monthly, and annual basis when it comes to budgeting. 
 
As we look forward, we believe there may well be opportunities 
to maximize, to make better use, to improve the utilization of 
the vast number of health care dollars that are in the system. 
Now we are not persuaded that the best way to do that is, as the 
Leader of the Opposition just suggested, we should go and seek 
a firm, a company, a group to come and do that. 
 
A more effective tool we believe, are utilizing some of the 
resources that we now have in place. One of those resources, 
Mr. Chair, in place now in Saskatchewan — and for that matter, 
pioneering in Saskatchewan — is the presence and the 
establishment of a quality health council, who are looking at 
some of these very issues. We lobbied hard, worked hard, and 
we now see on a national level, a national quality health 
council. These bodies have some resources and they are doing 
some of this work. We want to, we want to ensure that we’re in 
. . . that we’re well synchronized here. It’s not our view that we 
reach out to some firm and come into the province to review 
our system. We believe we have the resources here. 
 
Those resources — some of which are in the Department of 
Health, some will be in regional health authorities, some will be 
in the capacity of the professional medical associations, some 
may well be in the capacity of health care workers and their 
trade unions — that’s where we need to go, perhaps first of all 
to the people who deliver because they have the hands-on, 
first-hand experience. We believe there can be some savings or 
more appropriately, some better utilization of the health care 
dollars. When we talk about this in the Throne Speech, that’s 
what we mean and that’s the direction we’re going to go. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, 
what I don’t hear . . . What I hear in that then is that basically 
the health care system is going to review the health care system. 
And I don’t understand how we’re going to achieve any of the, 
what I think we — for a while in this discussion — thought 
were mutually agreeable goals, if that’s the case. 
 
I also respectfully disagree that before that kind of work is 
done, you should be rationalizing the system even more than 
what you have done already as the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to get to a couple of other . . . more health care ideas for 
the Premier, issues that we’ve talked about. I’ll be talking as 
well in terms of the Throne Speech perhaps when we come 
back, about some other issues in the Throne Speech that I want 
to explore a little bit that I thought I welcomed their inclusion in 
the Throne Speech. 
 
There was a reference to uranium development, clean coal 
technology, FASD (fetal alcohol spectrum disorder). And we’ll 
get to some of that. 
 

Two specific proposals on health care now though, Mr. 
Premier, I’d like to suggest. And we have made them during the 
session. 
 
You know, what’s frustrating I guess is that when opposition 
ask questions in the Legislative Assembly, certainly there are 
going to be more questions than there are, from this side of the 
House, than there are answers. That’s the sort of the nature of 
question period. We didn’t win the election and the government 
won and so we’re going to ask questions and hopefully we get 
answers. But of course, we also provide them as well. 
 
In particular with respect to the out-of-province review 
committee, we have — and not knowing the ins and outs of the 
committee — we don’t certainly know all of the nuances, all of 
the details. But what we are familiar with in a very real way, on 
this side of the House, is the output of this committee, what we 
have seen come out of this committee in terms of anecdotal 
cases that frankly seem to be too great to just be anomalies. 
 
And we’ve just been through a case where this was 
demonstrated. Clearly I don’t think it worked very well on 
behalf of a family. Doctors truly didn’t seem to know, 
understand how the system worked. They didn’t seem to know 
that they should be taking up the fight for patients and patients 
didn’t know if they should be . . . or families of patients didn’t 
know if they should be fighting the government or taking the 
matter up with the government. So clearly, there are problems. 
 
So I ask the Premier again the question we’ve asked the 
Minister of Health a number of times, will he agree, will he 
commit to reviewing that out-of-province referral system to 
ensure that the health care community understands how it works 
and that that information can be communicated to patients who 
need it? That’s number one. 
 
Number two, we’ve talked about a health care commissioner in 
our health care plan for the province. There are certain agencies 
in the province — chief among them, the Canadian Cancer 
Society — who would narrow the definition of that officer to be 
basically an ombudsman for cancer patients. Either way, we 
think there’s a lot of merit in pursuing that. 
 
We’ve also seen case after case come forward in this 
Legislative Assembly of people who just simply didn’t know 
where to turn. These are people diagnosed with cancer, Mr. 
Chairman. People who, every day they wait, they must . . . it 
must just literally be torture because of the nature of cancer. 
 
And so the Cancer Society talks about a cancer ombudsman; we 
talk about a health care commissioner so on those two issues, 
Mr. Chairman, I ask the Premier to comment. Will he commit 
his government to reviewing the out-of-province review system, 
number one. Number two, will he also commit to a health care 
commissioner or at the very least a cancer ombudsman to help 
patients through this situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, if I may just say, I see some 
neighbours and friends of mine have come into the gallery. 
These are students, I believe, from Princess Alex School. Their 
MLA I think will want to stand and perhaps give an 
introduction. And I’m mindful of the clock. Can we break to do 
the introduction and then perhaps I can give a quick response? 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

The Chair: — There’s been request leave to introduce guests. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well it’s a pleasure here to have the kids 
here from Princess Alex School. There are 30 of them and their 
teacher with them today is Mrs. Fofonoff. Now I don’t see her. 
Is she there? There’s a big clock in the way. 
 
I would have to say, I’ve actually taught with Mrs. Fofonoff and 
it’s a great privilege to have you folks come and visit the 
legislature. You’ll see the Premier defending our budget and 
our Throne Speech today. 
 
And welcome, and I ask all members here to give you a great 
welcome to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mindful of the 
hour, let me say in terms of out-of-province referrals and 
coverage, I recall when I had the opportunity to serve as 
Minister of Health, it was my view then and it remains my view 
that those decisions must be made by the medical professionals 
— must be made by the medical professionals. And I don’t 
believe any member of this House would argue differently. 
When it comes to the actual referral process, those decisions 
must be made not by we who are elected but by the medical 
professionals. 
 
And that said, Mr. Speaker, I asked for and I’ve received from 
the Department of Health — given some of the discussions 
we’ve had in this legislature over the last several days — I 
asked for and received from the Department of Health just how 
many people are referred out of Saskatchewan for treatment. 
 
And last year, April 1, 2003 to March 31, 2004 there was a total 
of 394 people who received approval for out-of-province 
treatment . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, out-of-country . . . 
no, out-of-province and out-of-country. So the process is 
working, 394. Three hundred and ninety four, so the process is 
working for many, many of our citizens. 
 
Now I believe what we learned from the incident, the concern 
that was raised here in the legislature, is that ongoing review of 
these process and ongoing review of the communications is 
essential. So yes, it is our commitment; in fact, that 
commitment is already underway. Where there is an ongoing 

review of this process . . . and if I may say, this review has 
already resulted, I’m told by the Minister of Health, in a change 
— no change that the medical professionals should be making 
the decisions, but a change in the communication of those 
decisions, so that there can be a communication both to the 
medical professional who will be working with the patient or 
the family, and with the individual and the family themselves. 
 
We understand, one, how significant some of the out-of-country 
treatment, out-of-province treatment can be. We understand it’s 
a significant cost the families in many cases could not bear by 
themselves. Therefore we understand the significance to the 
family; we understand the significance of the treatment. The 
Minister of Health tells me that, as a result of recent review that 
in fact the communication policies have changed. And I can 
have the minister provide the Leader of the Opposition a more 
definitive statement of the change in the policy. 
 
In terms of whether it be a cancer ombudsperson, or someone 
who works with cancer patients or other patients, we have put 
in place across the province a network of what we’ve described 
as the quality care coordinators. As we go forward, as we go 
forward, if they are not sufficient to provide the kind of 
information that we think patients need, then we will work with 
our health regions, we’d work with the cancer foundation to 
look at other options. 
 
I will not be definitive today without I think more conversation 
with both — whether it be the cancer foundation or with our 
health regions. My commitment is that we will continue to 
ongoingly review both health care practices, processes, and in 
many cases it’s an ongoing review of simple communications. 
 
The Chair: — It being past 5 p.m., the committee stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1576 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1576 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1576 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1576 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1576 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1576 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1576 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1577 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1577 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1577 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1577 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1577 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1578 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1578 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1578 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1578 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1578 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1586 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1598 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1610 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 All Nations Healing Hospital Opens 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1578 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1579 
 Gathering Our Artists Symposium 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1579 
 Inchkeith Celebration 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1579 
 Canadian Rivers Day 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1580 
 Retirement of Dr. John Courtney 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1580 
 Recycling Program Provides Milk for Children 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1580 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskTel Investment in Navigata 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1581 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1581 
 Minds Eye Pictures 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1582 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1582 
 Treatment Facilities for Children with Autism 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1584 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1584 
 Health Care Services at Climax 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1585 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1585 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1586 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1586 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 68 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1586 
  Van Mulligen (point of order)................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Harpauer (point of order) ......................................................................................................................................................1587 
 Bill No. 59 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1589 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




