















































Hansard: May 04, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 31A  TUESDAY, MAY 4, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 893 
 May 4, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of my constituents who are concerned about 
their nursing home. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Red Deer Nursing 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Porcupine 
Plain. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Herbert Nursing Home. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Herbert Nursing 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Morse, Herbert, and Rush Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the downsizing or possible 
closure of Mainprize Manor & Health Centre in Midale. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Mainprize Manor & 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Midale and 
Halbrite. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of southwest Saskatchewan 
that are extremely concerned about the potential loss of 
long-term care beds and/or health services. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of McCord, 
Lafleche, and Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to closures or possible reductions of 
services at Davidson and Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Davidson and Imperial 
health centres be maintained at the current level of service 
at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, doctor 
services available, as well as lab, public health, home care, 
and long-term services available to users from the 
Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Davidson and Martensville. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents who are opposed to the possible reduction of 
health care services in Wilkie. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie health centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Rockhaven, Phippen, Wilkie, 
Scott, and Landis. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan very concerned with the potential health 
closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Kerrobert Hospital 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 
from Kerrobert, Tramping Lake, and Lloydminster. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received: 
 

New petitions concerning the Radville Marian Health 
Centre; 

 
A petition concerning the Red Deer Nursing Home; and 

 
A petition concerning centralization of government 
services in rural communities; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 48, 128, 145, 146, and 158. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 36 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: has the land system fee schedule been 
updated for this fiscal year 2004-2005 and if so, will the 
minister please table the updated version of this fee 
schedule? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet, second question. I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 36 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: for fiscal year 2004 through 2005 has the 
lapse procedure review as indicated by the acting registrar, 
Catherine Benning, in her correspondence been 
completed? And if so, will the minister please table the 
results of this review? Thank you. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 36 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: with regard to the special supplement 
entitled, Opportunity Saskatchewan, which appeared in the 

May 4, 2004 edition of The Globe and Mail, how much 
did the Government of Saskatchewan spend in exchange 
for the inclusion of the supplement? In which regulation 
editions of The Globe and Mail did the supplement 
appear? And how many of the articles which appeared 
were placed for free? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the House 
someone who has joined us on the floor of the legislature — a 
constituent of mine, but I would say a supporter of the 
Premier’s. Dean Findlay is his name. He is a long-time resident 
of the community of Swift Current where he has been involved 
in many endeavours, including insurance sales for a time and 
certainly various aspects of community involvement. 
 
And Dean is a friend and although I know where his political 
allegiance lie, Mr. Speaker, though, so I am pleased to see today 
that it looks like he may have crossed the floor and he’s sitting 
with us. But I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 
Dean Findlay to his Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, through you and to all members of the House I want to 
introduce 27 grade 8 students from my constituency, from 
Greystone Heights School. They are grade 8 students visiting 
the legislature and they’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Michelle Pantel and Dave Eimen. And they’re also 
accompanied, Mr. Speaker, by two chaperones, Martha 
Hollinger and Val Yuzik. And I’d like to ask all members to 
warmly welcome them to the legislature. 
 
We hope you have a very good tour of the Assembly, that you 
enjoy watching question period, and I’m looking forward to 
meeting with you later on this afternoon. So please help me 
welcome all of these students and their teachers and chaperones. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to ask members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming, 
in your gallery, Pamela Lavoie and Patricia Gill. They’re here 
today to observe the proceedings in their Assembly, and I 
would ask all members to please welcome them warmly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to all members of the legislature 32 grade 4 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

students from Prince Albert. They’ve come from the school 
right close to my home, W.J. Berezowsky School. I’ve said this 
I think before to schoolchildren when they’ve been here — it’s 
where all three of my children started in their kindergarten. And 
that’s many, many years ago though, they’re . . . they’ve all 
grown up now. 
 
But I want to ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
these students, along with Wasyl Rybalka, their teacher, and 
Karen Jaseniuk, who is also here with them. And I’m sure 
they’ve got some chaperones around as well. And I look 
forward to meeting them for drinks and photos after question 
period. So all members, would you join me in welcoming these 
folks from P.A. (Prince Albert). 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, a young 
man from Moose Jaw who is in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
He is here at the legislative library doing research and is 
occupied as a student at the University of Regina in his studies 
in geology. I’d ask all hon. members to show welcome to Chad 
Leugner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve just been handed a note, actually. I’m not sure where this 
individual is, but I would like to introduce the brother of one of 
my staff from the Thunderchild First Nation. Gerald Okanee 
works in my office and I understand that his brother, Willard 
Okanee, is joining us here today. And I’m told he’s in the 
gallery, so would you please join me in welcoming Willard here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Minds Eye Pictures Wins Genie Awards 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we as a group tended 
to wallow in the dirt. And today I would like to perhaps muddy 
the waters a little bit more by doing something that this side of 
the House has not done before, and that’s to say something 
positive about Minds Eye productions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to lessen or diminish the criticism 
that this side of the House has made over the financial issues 
regarding Minds Eye, but I would like to recognize, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the creative individuals who are responsible 
for winning two Genie Awards with a film that was produced 
by Minds Eye production. The film was called Falling Angels 
and it won two Genies: one for the best original song written by 
Ken Whiteley — the song was called “Tell Me” — and the 

other Genie was for art direction, and it was given to Rob Gray 
and Christina Kuhnigk. 
 
And while the members may disagree on government 
involvement in businesses, we certainly want to be able to do 
the appropriate thing and recognize the creative talents that 
produce this kind of thing. I would like to ask all members to 
rise and to support that and acknowledge the creative . . . 
creativity of those people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year too many 
people die and thousands more are injured or become ill in 
workplace . . . in their workplaces. While we cannot undo their 
suffering and grief cause by workplace illness, injury, or death, 
we can try to focus everyone’s attention on the importance of 
preventing injury and illness in the workplace. 
 
This is the goal of the North American Occupational Health and 
Safety Week or NAOSH (North American Occupational Safety 
and Health). May 2 to May 8 is the eighth annual NAOSH week 
in the United States, Mexico, and Canada. Mr. Speaker, this 
week reminds everyone — employers, workers, and the public 
— of the critical importance of workplace safety. 
 
I am pleased to report to you that Regina hosted the national 
launch of NAOSH Week today with a luncheon at the 
Queensbury Centre in the Exhibition Park. Speakers at this 
launch were Steven Nicholson and Michael Lovett, both of 
whom were seriously injured in work-related accidents, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This year’s NAOSH theme, Build a Safe Beginning, is very 
appropriate, because young and first time workers are at greater 
risk of being injured on the job. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, 
Michael is speaking at high schools today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week reminds us all of the critical importance 
of workplace safety. Safety is everyone’s business, Mr. 
Speaker, because everyone pays the price where there is a 
breakdown. 
 
I invite all hon. members to recognize NAOSH week by 
supporting the efforts to reduce illness, accidents, and death in 
our workplaces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Vaccine and Infectious Diseases Organization 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday’s 
editorial in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix said it all. It told us why 
this province is continuing to suffer under this NDP 
government. It told us why more and more young people are 
leaving Saskatchewan for other jurisdictions, and it told us why 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

the NDP’s mixed up, misplaced priorities have resulted in a 
visionless future for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it told us all of this in one headline, “Starving 
VIDO stupid politics.” In this age of bioterrorism, threats, and 
the increasing risk of infectious diseases like SARS (severe 
acute respiratory syndrome), BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy), and West Nile, the University of 
Saskatchewan’s Vaccine And Infectious Diseases Organization, 
a 30-year research facility, has become a well-respected and 
productive entity and contributed much to the local and the 
provincial economies. So says The StarPhoenix. 
 
(13:45) 
 
But what worries the head of VIDO more than a possibility of a 
global outbreak, is the fact that he may not be able to meet 
payroll and might even be forced to fold on short notice because 
of severe underfunding and cutbacks, thanks in large part to this 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government. In fact the article 
says this facility has literally “been relegated to a 
hand-to-mouth existence over the past five years.” 
 
Let’s just tally up some of the NDP . . . some of the costs of the 
NDP so-called priorities over that period: $28 million lost in 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Corporation); $14 million in a Georgia dot-com; and most 
recently 1 million taxpayers’ dollars lost on an ethanol plant 
that never was. 
 
As the editorial goes on to say and the opposition has been 
saying for years: 
 

. . . what . . . (has become) painfully evident from this case 

. . . is (that) the government’s economic development 
focus remains . . . short-term and, too . . . “old-economy” 
orientated. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Prince Albert YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — On a much more positive note, Mr. 
Speaker, on April 30 the Prince Albert YWCA (Young 
Women’s Christian Association) Women of Distinction Awards 
celebrated and recognized eight women whose contributions 
have enriched our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work that women do is vital to our families 
and our society but it’s often work that goes unnoticed or is 
undervalued. This year’s recipients have displayed a sustained 
and significant commitment to our province and have made our 
society a better place to live and work. 
 
The recipients are, Sonya Jahn, in the category of community 
enhancement; for cultural enrichment, Ingrid Mateen. In the 
category of recreation, sport, and active living, Jana Marie 
Stieb; for business, professional, and entrepreneurship, 

Micheline Fedorko. In the arts category, Marjorie Bodnarchuk. 
The Lifetime Achievement Award went to Luba Crawford from 
Candle Lake. The Young Woman in Volunteerism recipient is 
Nicole Hovdebo and the Young Woman of Distinction/Roberta 
Bondar Scholarship was awarded to Kathryn Kuchapski. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the proceeds from this year’s banquet will 
go toward the YWCA residence for women and children 
program. I’m sure my colleagues will join me in commending 
the Prince Albert YWCA for the important services it provides 
for women and in congratulating this year’s Women of 
Distinction recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Mental Health Week in Canada 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday marked 
the beginning of the 53rd annual Mental Health Week in 
Canada, and the theme of this year’s week is Making 
Connections. Good mental health is essential to everyone’s 
well-being. It is a sign of a healthy society. Mental health 
affects every aspect of our daily lives. Our sense of personal 
well-being has a major impact on our physical health and 
interaction with others. 
 
There’s also a link between physical and mental health. It is 
reported that 25 per cent of people with serious physical health 
conditions will develop a major depressive disorder along with 
their condition. And these other health conditions include 
diabetes, heart attack, cancer, and strokes. 
 
One in five Canadians, almost 6 million people, are directly 
affected by mental health issues. And this national awareness 
week provides Canadians with many opportunities to find out 
more about the importance of mental health and how to achieve 
it in our daily lives. 
 
A major component of Mental Health Week 2004 is a 
month-long art exhibit of works created by talented Canadian 
artists affected by mental illness. This unique exhibit, entitled 
Mindscapes: Visual Art and Mental Illness, held last year for 
the first time is taking place at the National Gallery of Canada 
in Ottawa during the month of May. 
 
Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. And I hope all members 
acknowledge this special week and join me in applauding those 
dealing with this condition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

International Youth Week 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, May 1 to May 7 is International 
Youth Week, a time for us to recognize and celebrate the 
contributions that young people make to their neighbours and 
their communities, a time to help build the future for our young 
people, to provide them with opportunities to express 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

themselves and to showcase their abilities, talents, and ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all this week there will be a variety of 
youth-oriented events going on in the city of Regina. There will 
be forums and presentations covering a number of different 
topics, from youth justice to thinking globally and acting 
locally, where young people can listen, learn, and share ideas 
with others. 
 
Youth Voice, The Exchange, and The Rainbow Youth Centre 
will all be hosting competitions where kids can showcase their 
talents in hip hop, breakdancing, and rap. Registration and 
kickoff of the Spring Basketball League will take place at Scott 
Collegiate and feature a skills camp, with the University of 
Regina Cougars available to instruct and assist. The Boys and 
Girls Clubs of Regina and Street Culture Project are sponsoring 
a graffiti wall, and there will be an evening of hand clay 
building at the Pasqua Neighbourhood Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the activities going on this 
week in Regina. I want to recognize the many contributions that 
young people make to the life of this city. And I thank the many 
groups, community groups, that have sponsored activities to 
ensure that International Youth Week is a tremendous success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last Mountain . . . 
pardon me, Arm River-Watrous. 
 

Watrous Girls Win High Honours 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise in 
the House today to talk about two remarkable young ladies 
from Watrous. Jocelyn Kratchmer and Michelle Hagel have 
been honoured for their recent achievements in the sporting 
world. 
 
Jocelyn is a proud member of the Perdue Prairie Wild girls 
hockey team. This team recently won the provincial girls 
Midget B hockey championship held in Biggar. She and her 
team went undefeated throughout the playoffs. The combined 
effort . . . Jocelyn also played for Saskatchewan First Zone 5 
team that won the Saskatchewan Hockey Association, 
Saskatchewan First Female zone tournament in Regina. 
 
Michelle Hagel recently returned home from the Junior Pan Am 
Games in Puerto Rico where she captured the bronze medal for 
Canada in judo in the 52 to 57 kg (kilogram) weight class. 
Michelle successfully fought larger opponents from Brazil, 
Ecuador, Puerto Rico, and the United States. 
 
The 15-year-old youth had trained hard in judo, but had never 
imagined she would make the Canadian national team. Michelle 
has been training in competitions for some time now under 
coach Ralph Ibanez of the Saskatoon Judo Club and also 
training under provincial judo coach, Tim Fedorlazarenko, in 
Prince Albert. 
 
I would ask that the members join me, congratulating Jocelyn 
Kratchmer and Michelle Hagel for their remarkable sporting 
achievements. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Softwood Lumber Tariffs 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Premier of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, last Thursday a NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement) panel ruled that there is no basis for US (United 
States) tariffs on Canadian softwood lumber. This was a great 
victory for the Canadian lumber industry and for our own 
softwood lumber industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Both Canadian and US officials say they will soon be resuming 
talks to end softwood lumber tariffs. Canadian International 
Trade Minister Jim Peterson plans to meet with his provincial 
counterparts within the next couple of weeks to discuss 
Canada’s position in these important negotiations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point to the Premier today is that we are 
encouraging him to send a minister to this important meeting 
and we’re offering the Saskatchewan Party’s co-operation to 
make sure that that gets done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier be sending the minister 
responsible to represent Saskatchewan at this important forestry 
meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am confident with all 
members of this House, we welcomed the news out of the 
United States. 
 
I had an opportunity about a week ago to speak to the Prime 
Minister of Canada as he headed off to meet with the President 
of the United States. And on the list of agenda items that 
Saskatchewan proposed be discussed was the matter of 
softwood lumber, along with the matters, of course, of BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy), live swine, and those 
trade in our natural resources which are so crucial to the people 
and the province of Saskatchewan and of Canada. 
 
In upcoming meetings, Mr. Speaker, I will want to know some 
of the detail of that meeting, what is intended to be 
accomplished at that meeting. If it will serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, we will ensure that we are represented there and 
may welcome . . . indeed, may welcome an offer from the 
opposition to attend as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when there was some word 
that the federal Canadian minister was interested in meetings 
with provincial counterparts, the Saskatchewan Party did do a 
little bit of research. We don’t have all those details, but we 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

have some of them. We know, Mr. Speaker, that . . . we’ve been 
advised at least, that the meeting has been tentatively scheduled 
for May 17 in Ottawa. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be 
important for the Premier’s office to be aware of that, to be 
aware of these other details. 
 
And, most importantly on this issue, when there is a real hope, a 
real hope that the Canadian softwood lumber industry will be 
relieved from the burden of unfair US tariffs, Mr. Speaker, 
when there is that opportunity, that Saskatchewan should be 
there. Our softwood lumber industry needs that kind of 
leadership from its government and, frankly, from the 
opposition. 
 
And so, one more time, we’d just ask the Premier to commit 
that a minister will be attending this meeting to the extent it is 
dealing with these . . . with the tariffs and the potential that they 
soon may end on our lumber industry here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think as most members 
will recognize, the Minister of Industry and Resources today is 
in North Dakota — Minot, North Dakota — along with a 
member of the opposition, attending an extremely important 
energy conference which we could be present for. 
 
I want to remind all members that ministers of this government 
have been at the softwood lumber table from day one, that this 
province has been represented in Washington to ensure that 
Saskatchewan interests have been represented in Washington. I 
am more than confident that the Minister of Industry will have 
the detail about this, about this opportunity. 
 
And I repeat if it is, if it is possible and we can enjoy the 
support of the opposition in this, we’ll be at that table. Because 
we’ve been working from day one and we’re very pleased to 
see the progress that is being made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Complaint Regarding Treatment of Patient 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last February 
Helen Petreny of Regina became ill and was diagnosed with 
pneumonia. She was given antibiotics but her condition 
worsened. She was finally admitted to hospital April 2, 2003, 
but no treatment plan was put in place to treat her condition. 
After being in hospital almost a month, a biopsy was done on 
April 30, 2003. The family got the results on May 5 indicating 
lung cancer, and Mrs. Petreny passed away the following day. 
 
Mrs. Petreny’s family believes that she was not properly 
diagnosed, nor was her deteriorating condition treated in an 
appropriate and timely manner. So her two daughters, Pamela 
Lavoie and Patricia Gill, wrote to the Minister of Health on 
June 3, 2003 requesting an investigation. The minister replied 
July 2, 2003, assuring the family that he would indeed 

investigate through the health authority and let them know the 
outcome. 
 
To date, nine months later, the family is still waiting for that 
response. The minister said he would look into the matter. Yet 
if he has, he has not contacted the family. When can this family 
expect a reply? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think all members of the 
legislature express condolences to the family of the individual 
involved. These particular matters that raise issues about some 
of the staff and some of the physicians involved are normally 
referred to the College of Physicians and Surgeons. I am not 
aware of all of the circumstances around this particular case, 
and I will look at that. But the normal course would be that they 
would be referred to the College for an appropriate 
investigation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this session the Saskatchewan 
Party has raised a number of individual health care cases. On 
these occasions, the Minister of Health has repeatedly asked us 
to contact his office directly, and I quote: 
 

I encourage the members opposite to raise these cases with 
the appropriate authorities or with my office so we can 
deal with them there.  

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Pamela Lavoie and Patricia Gill did just 
that. They followed the exact steps the minister asked them to 
take. They even contacted the quality care coordinator for their 
health district. 
 
In the minister’s letter dated July 2, 2003 he writes, and I quote: 
 

. . . officials with the Regina Qu’Appelle Regional Health 
Authority have been asked to look into your concerns, and 
once their review is complete (d), a response will be sent 
to you.  

 
Mr. Speaker, how long does it take the get a response? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I have indicated, the 
particular file . . . I do not have the information with me today. 
As the member opposite knows, I have often encouraged him to 
give me some of that question before we show up here, then I 
can provide the information here. I will do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remind the members opposite that this is a complex system 
that we run in this province. It includes 4,500,000 doctor 
contacts in a year with patients in this province. If some of these 
go awry or there are some problems, we have procedures and 
whole organizations whose job it is to make sure that those 
things are dealt with. 
 
We’ll continue to work hard to deal with all of these particular 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

issues. And on this particular one, I will go and see what has 
caused the problem. But practically, Mr. Speaker, we are going 
to make sure we have good health care for all of our people in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister had this 
information for the last nine months. He doesn’t need me to 
bring it to his attention before question period. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps asking people to bring these 
matters to his attention. In a letter to the minister, Patricia . . . 
Pamela Lavoie writes, quote: 
 

I am both saddened and angry to the extent that my mother 
suffered in our search for adequate health care . . . Is this 
. . . (inaudible) . . . a reasonable expectation of what the 
average Saskatchewan resident might encounter when 
accessing health care today?  

 
First the family wanted timely treatment for their mother and 
then they asked questions from the minister after their mother 
passed away. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, they got neither. This 
family deserves answers. It deserves answers in a timely way. 
In fact, they deserved them a long time ago. The minister has let 
this family down. He didn’t keep his word to them when he 
promised them he would get back to them. Will he respond to 
this family today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as indicated previously, I 
will be looking into this particular matter. 
 
But what I would remind the member opposite and all of his 
colleagues is that we will continue to look at and deal with the 
problems that they raise. And we will continue to do that. I also, 
though, encourage them to provide information to my office 
and not be in a situation where they’ll, in effect, grandstand 
about some of these particular operations because, Mr. Speaker, 
we have to work with the 30,000-plus employees that work in 
the health care system. And that is a very large challenge, in and 
of itself. 
 
But I appreciate, Mr. Speaker, we are always going to be 
making sure that we respond to the individuals and the families 
involved in the best way and the most caring way possible. 
That’s our solution in this province, and we are going to 
continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Pamela Lavoie and Patricia 
Gill are wondering why it takes almost a year in order for a 

review of a patient’s case from this minister’s office to be 
addressed. They want answers for two reasons, Mr. Speaker: 
number one, to bring closure to their mother’s passing; and 
number two, to prevent similar events from happening to other 
families. They are concerned that other people may have died or 
suffered because care was not administered in a timely fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the investigation the minister promised to this 
family will not only have answers for them, it should also shed 
light on the issues that are raised by their mother’s death so that 
other families will not be subjected to the same concern. And 
the best the minister can do is make lame excuses why he hasn’t 
responded to them for nine full months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to meeting with this 
family after question period and provide them with answers as 
to why he hasn’t contacted them for nine months? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, if I heard correctly what the 
member opposite said, when he read the letter that I don’t have 
in front of me, he said that this matter was referred to the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority where they would be 
investigating this and getting back to the family. 
 
Now what I will do is find out whether the response was 
forwarded or not or whether there’s some challenge there. But 
what I remind the member opposite is that we have many, many 
capable people, caring people who work within this health care 
system, and their job is to provide the best care possible for 
each and every individual who requires that care in the system. 
 
But we know that there are going to be mistakes. Our 
colleagues in Alberta just recently did a survey and they had a 
concern that about 14 per cent of their patients ended up with 
some kind of an error within the hospital system. And they are 
tackling the issue of how you deal with that. 
 
In Saskatchewan, we have a Health Quality Council. One of 
their roles is to look at the broader issues and try to deal with 
some of these concerns. We are concerned about it; we’re doing 
something about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Amalgamating School Divisions 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Learning admitted yesterday that he’ll soon be 
announcing that they’ll be forcing amalgamation of school 
divisions. It begs the question why. 
 
Why does the NDP have to step in and interfere with this 
process which is already happening without the government? 
Over the past number of years, voluntary amalgamation has 
been taking place. In fact, the number of school divisions has 
gone from 119 to 82. That’s a decrease of over 30 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, what . . . why will the government step in and start 
forcing amalgamation, when school divisions have been doing 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

this on their own over the last number of years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
recognize the fact that over the last decade there has been a 30 
per cent reduction in the number of school divisions. I think all 
of those people who are familiar with the system will know that 
the course of voluntary amalgamations has largely run its 
course. 
 
What we are now at a point of needing to do is to set new 
parameters and new guidelines to allow divisions to come 
together and to achieve organizational efficiencies through 
greater size. That’s certainly one of the recommendations in the 
Boughen report. I know the members opposite talk about it all 
the time and it’s one of the things I’m sure that they would 
support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, four years ago the minister 
then, Jim Melenchuk, set a target for reducing the number of 
school divisions by 25 per cent. Since that time the number has 
been reduced by nearly 20 per cent, and the Saskatchewan 
school board association is currently working on amalgamations 
that would reduce the number of school boards by another 10 to 
15. In other words, Mr. Speaker, school boards have met the 
minister’s requirements of 25 per cent over the last 4 years. 
 
Why is the minister now stepping in and forcing amalgamations 
when school divisions have done it on their own time frame 
with the partners they wanted to in the time frame the 
government had asked them to do? Why would the government 
step in now and force amalgamation when school divisions are 
still working on amalgamations? It’s not a finished deal yet; 
they’re working on them. Why are you going to force it now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, as I have identified, the 
course of voluntary amalgamation, the option that we had 
pursued with the school boards towards voluntary 
amalgamation, has largely run its course. It has largely run its 
course; there are very, very few divisions currently in 
amalgamation discussions. 
 
If we are going to get this system to a point of sustainability; if 
we are going to be able to come to an assessment per student 
that is relatively uniform across this province — not the 25 
times the wealth in some divisions that there is in others — if 
we are going this back into line; if we’re going to make the 
system sustainable so that as new money’s put into it, it is 
headed into the classroom, so we deal with the phenomena of 
the 18 . . . zero grant boards, we need to deal with restructuring, 
and that means dealing with amalgamation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is absolutely 
wrong. Amalgamation is not at its end, they’re still working on 
it and there will still be further amalgamations as we continue 
on. 
 
I believe that this is nothing more than a diversionary tactic by 
the NDP. A diversionary tactic because the Premier had 
promised lower property taxes and he’s broken that promise. So 
what they decided to do is let’s change the subject completely. 
Let’s talk and start picking a fight with school boards regarding 
forced amalgamation so the Premier doesn’t have to stand up 
and say once again that we can’t do anything about lowering 
property tax even though that’s what he promised in his 
leadership campaign, and that’s what he promised in the last 
provincial election, Mr. Speaker. This is nothing more than a 
diversionary tactic. 
 
School divisions on their own through amalgamation are 
finding efficiencies but they’re doing it on their own time 
frame. Why does the Premier have to step in now, and the 
Minister of Learning step in now, and try and divert people’s 
attention from his lack of ability to keep promises and force it 
over on to school board amalgamations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It may serve to interest members in 
some of the facts. I appreciate the rhetoric of the member 
opposite, but in fact let me read to you what it was that the 
Premier and this party promised. We said: 
 

Quality . . . (education) public education requires a sound 
funding base. The challenge is to raise those funds in a fair 
(and) balanced way. We want to ensure we do that while 
making Saskatchewan property taxes as fair as possible. 
 
That’s why . . . (the) independent commission is assessing 
. . . (the) complex issue. 
 
. . . (We) know that Saskatchewan can’t afford (the) 
extreme, reckless tax cuts. Our past reviews have brought 
balance and fairness to personal (income) and business 
taxes. (And) we’ll do the same for property taxes. 

 
A core piece of this is restructuring to ensure we have relative 
uniformity in the assessment per student, so that we deal with 
the zero grant boards, so we make sure that every board gets 
government funding so that we can make sure that the students 
in this province have the best possible services in the fairest 
way. That’s what we promised, that’s what we’ll deliver. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s review what 
the Premier really has said. In his election campaign he said that 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

the provincial government would have no trouble absorbing the 
Boughen Commission within its resources that it had available 
to itself. 
 
Instead what they’ve done is they’ve raised the PST (provincial 
sales tax), completely forgot about education, which was 
explained in the Boughen Commission, if you raise the PST at 
least that could go to offset property tax, which the Premier had 
promised. They raise the PST, forget everything about the 
promise on property tax, and now they try and divert the issue 
over to amalgamation. 
 
Why don’t they deal with the issues that they set out at SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and every 
other convention that the Premier talked about on property tax, 
is the fact that they’d be lowering it. They’re doing nothing but 
dividing the attention over to amalgamation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. Order. 
And would the member go directly to his question please. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the question is: will the 
Premier live up to his promise, lower property taxes, and quit 
the forced amalgamation agenda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let’s understand this, Mr. Speaker. In 
the fall election the Boughen report had not yet reported. There 
was no recommendation to increase the PST and expand it. 
What the Premier was referring to was our desire to deal with, 
as our election platform says, restoring fairness and equity. 
 
The member opposite should stick to the facts rather than the 
rhetoric, and that will improve the quality of debate in this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Public Sector Investment in High-Risk Projects 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is for the 
Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan. This 
morning there was yet another report about massive losses in 
the NDP’s disastrous investment portfolio. And according to 
information obtained by CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) television, the NDP government has gambled 
about $40 million of taxpayers’ money on 70 high-risk business 
investments around the province. 
 
Now the NDP says that that’s how they plan to grow 
Saskatchewan. Well as it turns out, the NDP’s high-risk 
business gamble has cost taxpayers about $23 million in losses. 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how gambling $40 
million on high-risk business ventures and losing nearly $24 
million of that amount is somehow good for Saskatchewan 
families? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to answer the 
question today on behalf of the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. I have in my briefing note a response that says this, 
that as you know, many of these investments are long-aged; 
some of them are over 25 years old. And why they are such, 
Mr. Speaker, is that even the previous administration before this 
one made a lot of investment in high-risk, of which the Leader 
of the Opposition would know something about. 
 
And what happened, Mr. Speaker, of course is that these 
investments today have all gone, Mr. Speaker, to be managed 
by private investment companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the members opposite today, just talk to the 
financial institutions in the province. Talk to ACRE (Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy) or talk to Agrivision. And 
they’ll say to you on every account that there needs to be some 
private and public sector investment in high-risk areas, of which 
the previous administration did, in which this one did, of which 
you guys say you don’t believe in, but . . . of which that 
opposition said they don’t believe in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I never hear one word from the member from Canora where 
we have investment in hog barns, Mr. Speaker, which is 
private-public, Mr. Speaker. And I never hear anything about 
Centennial Foods from the Saskatoon people, where you have 
public-private investment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome that 
member back to the House, but unfortunately absence hasn’t 
made his logic any better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the news on CBC TV last night was bad enough. 
The NDP has lost another $24 million of taxpayers’ money at 
60 per cent of the original investment. And that was done on the 
string of money-losing investments through its new investment 
company called Investment Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the worst is yet to come because while the 
business losses from the last four years continue to pile up, the 
NDP has decided to put another $200 million of taxpayers’ 
money into high-risk business ventures over the next four years. 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has managed to gamble and lose 60 per 
cent of the $40 million they’ve already invested. How much is 
the NDP willing to lose on the $200 million it’s going to 
gamble in the next four years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The Minister of Industry and Resources a 
couple of days ago was very clear, that you have today, soon, a 
private sector board that will be managing the affairs of the 
$200 million investments of the future. And there isn’t anybody 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

in Saskatchewan today except the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker, who believe that you can build Saskatchewan alone 
without any public investment in it, because we hear that from 
all of the people who have studied rural Saskatchewan today 
and Saskatchewan investment about the importance of having 
public investment. 
 
(14:15) 
 
And pick the investments across the province, Mr. Speaker. Just 
a couple of days ago there was a huge announcement here of 
ATCO investing $250 million in a power project in 
Saskatchewan, alongside a Saskatchewan corporation, a Crown 
corporation. A public-private investment, Mr. Speaker, in his 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll see more of those kinds 
of investments in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because to grow 
Saskatchewan’s economy and future it requires a blended 
approach with private and public sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, not only is the member’s logic 
faulty, so is his geographic knowledge of the province. That 
investment he’s talking about is not in Cypress Hills, it’s in 
another constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, officials at the NDP’s investment company, 
Investment Saskatchewan, are trying to downplay the NDP’s 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I recognize the 
member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, officials at the NDP investment 
company, Investment Saskatchewan, are trying to downplay 
their $24 million loss. In fact vice-president of Investment 
Saskatchewan, Zach Douglas, says that we shouldn’t look at the 
investment losses in the NDP’s small-business portfolio in 
isolation. He suggests that we look at the NDP’s overall 
performance. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s do that. Investment Saskatchewan 
manages a portfolio worth approximately $600 million. And 
according to their 2003 annual report, that organization — 
Investment Saskatchewan — earned a grand total of $7.5 
million on a $600 million investment. Mr. Speaker, that’s just 
about 1 per cent on a $600 million investment. 
 
So will the minister today admit that the NDP’s small-business 
investment strategy is a disaster and that the overall investment 
strategy is a business embarrassment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it has been the historical 
presence of governments in Saskatchewan to invest in high-risk 
business ventures. That’s been historical, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the opposition . . . a member of the opposition sat in 
confidence with some of his colleagues in the past, they 
invested a great deal in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has invested in high-risk portfolios and in the 
future that will be done, Mr. Speaker, by venture capital folks. 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, what I heard from the member 
opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, last Wednesday, where 
he said, Mr. Speaker, that we need to go back and have a course 
in 101 marketing in Saskatchewan because he doesn’t know 
what the advantages in Saskatchewan are today in marketing 
our province, Mr. Speaker. And how is it that we have a 
member of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party, a Saskatchewan Party today, who doesn’t 
know what the advantages in our province are? 
 
We have an inhibitor in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, about 
growing the province. It’s the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the inhibitor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Safer Communities and 
Neighbourhoods Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 43, 
The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 43, The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 
Act be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
44, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Government Relations that Bill No. 44, The Municipal Revenue 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill 45, The Planning and Development Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 45, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
46, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Government Relations that Bill No. 46, The Northern 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 47, 
The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 47, The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve almost 
forgotten how to do this. But I’d like to move that Bill No. 48, 
The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation, Bill No. 48, The Vehicle 
Administration Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Remarks Out of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day I just would like to bring a matter to your attention. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to review remarks made on page 875 
of Hansard yesterday, where the member from Wood River 
commented about a phone call that the member received from a 
parent and at least two children. 
 
In those remarks the member indirectly implied that another 
member was dishonourable. I would like to remind all members 
that such remarks bring disrepute to the legislature and damage 
to this institution. That is, any time when a member implies 
improper motives or actions to another person in this 
legislature, such remarks are out of order. 
 
For the greater good I ask all members to treat all other 
members as honourable. And I might add that members should 
apply this convention as well, that is they should consider all 
members as being honourable in the heckling that goes on 
across the floor. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 255 through 258 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 255, 256, 257, and 258 have been 
submitted. 
 
Order, please, members. Order, please, members. Would the 
members please come to order so we can conduct the business 
of the House. Once again I would ask the Clerk to repeat. 

I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and convert for debates returnable questions no. 259 through 
263 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 259, 260, 261, 262, and 263 have 
been converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 1 — The 
Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an honour and a privilege to begin the debate again 
on Bill No. 1, The Financial Administration Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been about three weeks since the Minister of 
Finance introduced Bill No. 1, and during that course of three 
weeks, as the official opposition’s Finance critic, I’ve had the 
opportunity to ask a number of questions of the Finance 
officials to determine exactly what was meant with some of the 
wordings and whether or not the intent of a number of the 
clauses were as actually requested by Finance officials. 
 
And I want to thank the Minister of Finance for allowing the 
three officials from his department to meet with me last 
Thursday and spend some time discussing all of the clauses of 
the Bill. It was very helpful, Mr. Speaker, to be able to go over 
each of the Bills . . . each of the clauses to get an understanding 
as to what was intended in the actual draft that’s put forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as has been indicated in this Assembly many 
times in the past, the official opposition, along with the 
Provincial Auditor, has recommended that the province of 
Saskatchewan move forward and begin to get in line with all of 
the other provinces in Canada and follow the production of a 
budget for the province of Saskatchewan on what is referred to 
as a summary financial budgeting. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the government has indicated that they’ve 
prepared summary financial documents before, and they’re 
correct because summary financial documents have always 
been produced after year-end, about three or four months after 
that, where we have a chance, where the public has the 
opportunity, to review the public accounts of government to get 
a clear understanding of the entire financial picture of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has been missing though is that as we look 
. . . As in the past where we have had presented in this 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

Assembly, a General Revenue Fund budget — the GRF budget 
as it’s often referred to — we’re only getting an opportunity to 
see about 60 per cent of the province’s economy. 
 
So the move by the Government of Saskatchewan to adopt new 
accounting standards . . . And as we know, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
very, it’s sometimes very convoluted when you look at remarks 
made by accounting firms and the terminology they use to get a 
clear understanding of what is actually meant. And when we 
hear the words, generally accepted accounting principles, or 
GAAP as is often referred to in accounting documents, we must 
understand that those are accounting principles that have been 
put forward by the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. 
This is a cross-Canada group of accountants that have looked at 
the need to ensure that, first of all, that there is, that there is 
transparency, that there is accountability, and that indeed 
everything is accurate that is put forward before the people of a 
respective province or of the nation as a whole, the country of 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has happened in the past number of years has 
I think shaken the accounting industry to a great degree, when 
we’ve seen the difficulties that have been put, that has . . . that 
Enron has created for North America, when we see the 
difficulties that Parmalat created. And now of course we’re 
seeing some of the things that are occurring to the industry, 
represented by Nortel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that a reputable accounting 
firm has had to — I’ll use the term — sign off on the 
documents of Nortel. And then after concerns were raised, they 
again have to sign off on the revised documents, the revised 
numbers that were produced. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And it’s only a week or so ago, Mr. Speaker, that you recall that 
the chief financial officer of Nortel and two other individuals 
were again released from employment for Nortel, having . . . the 
suggestion is that the numbers that they produced in fact were 
not correct, that there was no profit at Nortel. And as a result 
now, an accounting firm is going to have to look at a third set of 
numbers and sign off that in fact these numbers are correct. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no intent here to suggest that the 
accounting firm isn’t doing the right thing because they have to 
work with the documents that are presented to them. And that’s 
the challenge that many accountants and many accounting firms 
face when they receive from a business, from a government, a 
department, a Crown corporation, they receive the documents 
from those entities, and under accounting guidelines, under the 
generally accepted accounting principles, they do an audit. And 
that audit then verifies that those numbers were correct 
according to what was given to them. 
 
But what we’re . . . what we have seen in the last, those three 
examples that I have highlighted, Mr. Speaker, is that 
sometimes when malice is intended and someone does not want 
to indeed provide accurate information, they can get away with 
it for a while. In the end obviously it has been shown — at least 
I hope it has been shown — that officials who have misled the 
people of Canada and North America in the Enron case, in the 
Parmalat case, and now in the Nortel case will indeed be held 

accountable by the law because those are the dire consequences 
that people face when they start to deal with those kinds of 
things. 
 
So when we start to look at The Financial Administration Act 
and how it’s going to devise a system for the province of 
Saskatchewan for all of our General Revenue Fund accounting, 
for all of our departmental accounting, for the various Crown 
corporations, the agencies, there needs to be — above all — not 
just a true, transparent form of accounting, but there has to be 
the perception that this in fact is accurate, that the numbers that 
we see presented in this Assembly are in fact accurate numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this Bill moves in that direction. And 
there are some concerns that we have identified. And in 
discussion with Finance officials, we’re concerned that a 
number of provinces — Saskatchewan included — have not 
decided to entrench in the legislative Act that indeed the 
accounting . . . the Public Sector Accounting Board that 
recommends these principles are in fact the principles that we 
will follow. That’s not part of this Act, and it’s not part of a 
number of provinces. 
 
The province of British Columbia has moved to actually put 
that clause in an Act. And it specifically states that the 
accounting principles that are going to be followed by the 
province of British Columbia in putting forward its public 
accounts, in putting forward its budget, in putting forward the 
summary financial statements that it will produce will in fact 
follow the generally accepted accounting principles as 
identified by the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is a concern there that maybe it’s time 
that Saskatchewan also moved in this direction to ensure that 
it’s not just talked about, it’s not just understood that this would 
be something that is followed, but in fact it will be required by 
the Act that these are the principles. I am waiting for some 
response from the province of British Columbia to see how they 
have written that clause that enables the province of British 
Columbia to look at those sections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated in his comments on 
April 14 that there were a number of things in this Bill that were 
housekeeping in nature: changing the terminology and reference 
to the general . . . the Consolidated Fund to the General 
Revenue Fund. And those are of course things that we’re not 
going to spend a lot of time discussing in adjourned debates or 
in committee when we actually begin to look at each of the 
sections of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the . . . one of the very first 
sections deals with is section no. 5. And there are three or four 
sections that are substantive in this Bill, that actually make 
changes to the principles that have been followed before. 
Section no. 5 changes and produces a new section 13.1 that 
allows for net budgeting. Mr. Speaker, these are I think plans 
that show that the government needs to be able to be efficient. It 
needs to be able to allow departments to work with other 
departments, so what we see put forward is net budgeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section no. 6, which will produce a new section 
called 14.1 of the Act, is one that we have already looked at a 
couple of times when we debated the interim supply Bill here in 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

the Legislative Assembly. We have had two interim supply 
Bills, one that was asked for the appropriation of one-twelfth of 
the revenue for this year and another appropriation Act that asks 
for two-twelfths. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what section no. 6 does is put in place . . . that 
based on the previous estimates of the previous year, there will 
be an automatic passing or granting . . . I should say not 
passing, but it will be the granting of one-twelfth expenditure of 
the previous estimates immediately upon introduction of the 
budget. 
 
So what this does, Mr. Speaker, is it ensures that departments 
can proceed with operating in the month of April because of 
course many a time March 31 we haven’t had the opportunity as 
an Assembly to pass an interim supply Bill. So I think that this 
will allow for a more efficient operation and an operation that 
doesn’t have as much confusion about whether or not Bills will 
be paid on April 1. 
 
What it also does, Mr. Speaker, is that it ensures that it is only 
on programs of the previous budget . . . the estimates of the past 
year and also only those estimates that are still in effect. And 
the question that I asked of the officials was what if programs 
are cancelled. And as we saw in this current budget when we 
saw programs, especially in the agricultural department, where 
expenditures for the new fiscal year in fact have been cancelled 
and as a result of programs being cancelled. And of course it is 
understood —and the Act has indicated — that those estimates 
of the previous year would not apply to expenditures where a 
program has been cancelled or a program has been reduced 
because of the elimination of part of it. So while it allows for, I 
believe a consistency in operation and it allows for stability, it 
does address the withdrawal of program. 
 
As well as, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note as well — and I 
think accurately — that that granting of that one-twelfth 
appropriation will not involve new programs that the budget 
introduces. There’s still must an interim supply that will grant 
expenditures for new programs that have been introduced in the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 7 is the part of the Act that I’ve indicated 
where I believe there can be some improvement to it, and I’m 
hopeful that the minister will look at some of the suggestions 
that I make and consider them when we get to committee. I 
think it’s important in this section where the existing provision 
identified the certain things that financial statements must 
contain. 
 
As a result of the change now, there is a deletion or a removal 
of that section, and it refers only to the chief controller being 
responsible for the public sector generally accepted accounting 
principle as put forward by the Public Sector Accounting 
Board. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this section can be improved 
whereby it would actually state that the province of 
Saskatchewan, in its preparation of all the documents, must 
follow the Act. And as I indicated in my opening remarks, 
we’re going to be waiting for the Act that is in place in British 
Columbia and to try to identify whether or not that would 
improve the situation. We don’t want to look at putting in place 

a clause or clauses that won’t improve the situation. What we 
want to do is ensure that the Act becomes stronger, becomes 
more transparent, and in fact ensures that the accounting 
principles that are followed in all the departments, in all the 
Crown Corporations, in all the agencies will be those as 
indicated through the Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I’ve indicated there are a number of 
sections that follow in sections 8, 9, and 10 where the reference 
is to the new accounting standards. We see the change in 
section no. 11 where the amount of money that is to be remitted 
was under the old system $1,000, and now that is being 
increased to $5,000. So those are more in line with keeping with 
the current numbers that the Act requires for the job to be done. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the concerns that we’ve had as the 
information technology has taken hold and we move towards 
payments being done . . . And I’m sure many people now don’t 
write cheques for everything they do, and they don’t pay bills 
necessarily from a piece of paper that is produced for them. 
They may do a combination of things — things that are 
produced wireless and are through the Internet. And one of the 
concerns that was noted within the department was that a 
payment requisition, within quotation marks, is a lot different 
than requisition for the payment. And it seemed to be 
understood that payment requisition meant that there had to be a 
hard copy signed for someone . . . to authorize someone to in 
fact pay a bill. As a result of the change and how things are 
handled through computers and through accounting principles, 
we understand that of course requisition for the payment could 
be a number of things. It could be an e-mail. It could still be a 
traditional bill, and it can be the billing of one department to 
another department as this Act allows. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker . . . or Deputy Speaker, in conclusion, as I’ve 
indicated we’ve had an opportunity to review a number of the 
Bills. I’ve had an opportunity to discuss each and every clause 
with officials. And I’m quite convinced that the intent of all of 
these sections is to improve and to change Saskatchewan to a 
system that other provinces have been following. But, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, until I have had the opportunity to receive the 
information from British Columbia, to have a better 
understanding of whether or not we can in fact improve one of 
the sections to ensure that there would be no possibility of not 
actually following the generally accepted accounting principles, 
I would like some opportunity to wait for that information. So 
at this time I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment 
of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 2 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to speak to Bill No. 2, An Act to amend The 
Power Corporation Act. At first glance this Bill appears to 
clarify SaskPower’s current exclusive franchise to transmit and 
sell electricity in Saskatchewan. But it certainly opens up an 
area that is . . . speaks wider than just the Bill and the many 
changes in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it really speaks to the intent of the government. 
What we saw during the election was the government making 
promises about keeping utility rates the lowest in 
Saskatchewan. And as we have seen, the government has 
reneged on that promise, really during the election misled the 
province in its attempt. The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
says, well that wasn’t really a promise; it was a promise over 
four years. Well, Mr. Speaker, that was very unacceptable to 
make that promise during the campaign and then renege on the 
promise right after the election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
What we need in this province is a plan by the government to 
grow the province economically, attract more people to the 
province, and this government doesn’t understand that. And the 
government wants to basically give exclusive rights to the 
Crowns to grow this province. And it’s been shown widely 
across the world that that’s not the only vehicle of growth to 
grow the economy in Canada and across the world. 
 
The Crowns have a very important role in Saskatchewan and 
will continue to have a very important role in Saskatchewan. 
But I don’t believe that anyone in Saskatchewan believes that 
the Crowns should have an exclusive right for economic 
growth, or the government in this province should have the 
exclusive right to be the only player in the field to grow the 
economy in this province. As we’ve seen that the government 
has fallen badly. They have failed again and again and again. 
 
And it’s interesting that this Bill talks about giving exclusive 
rights to SaskPower. Well, Mr. Speaker, when the government, 
the NDP government, expands the mandate of the Crowns to go 
out into the world to compete, there’s some very obvious 
failures. And I’d just like to point out two that . . . huge failures 
that SaskPower was a part of. 
 
The first one was . . . well really the classic mismanagement 
was Channel Lake. The NDP government lost about $15 
million. And just as a bit of a background, 1997 Channel Lake 
Petroleum, a subsidiary of SaskPower, began trading natural 
gas futures on extremely thin margins. This practice was 
unauthorized, resulted in about $10 million losses for the 
company which were not disclosed in the SaskPower annual 
report for 1997. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Channel Lake Petroleum was then 
sold in an attempt to further hide those losses. However it was 
actually sold for $5 million less than SaskPower planned 
because the negotiators didn’t read the final contract. And it’s 
bizarre how many things could go wrong because of the 

ineptitude of the government and its officials. And all the while, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Jack Messer, the then president of 
SaskPower at the time, had resigned, taking with him a 
$300,000 severance package. 
 
Now the other classic mismanagement of SaskPower that was 
forced upon SaskPower by the government was Guyana. In that 
enterprise, the people of Saskatchewan lost about $2 million. 
Now in 1997, SaskPower thought it would be a good idea to 
invest at least $31 million in a broken-down, decrepit power 
company in Guyana, a small country in South America. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SaskPower spent millions 
researching this purchase and actually signed an 
intention-to-purchase document. At the same time, in 
Saskatchewan, SaskPower was cancelling rural underground 
development program and taking a $2 reconstruction fee on to 
everyone’s power bills. Prior to the final purchase, civil unrest 
broke out in Guyana, a result of massive voter fraud in that 
country’s elections and in . . . finally in 1998 SaskPower pulled 
the plug on this project. 
 
Now my point of pointing out those two disastrous investments 
. . . to what SaskPower and this NDP government are doing in 
the province, Mr. Speaker, through this Bill, this Bill to amend, 
Bill No. 2 . . . And, Mr. Speaker, as we have seen, whenever the 
NDP have to actually go out and compete in the real world, they 
are unable to do that. They are unable to compete in the real 
world where other . . . against other companies, other 
jurisdictions. But in Saskatchewan what they do is to give total 
control to their Crown corporation. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s no way that the, that the 
Crown corporation having exclusive rights in the province can’t 
be successful. There’s no competition. And this Bill really 
makes . . . gives SaskPower more exclusive rights concerning 
transmission and selling electricity. 
 
But at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan lose by not opening up competition in the 
marketplace in this province. What we see is the NDP policies 
failing — failing the people of Saskatchewan economically; 
failing, failing to grow the province; failing to attract more 
people to this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we continue investigating this, the NDP 
are talking about having a lowest possible price of utilities in 
the province. But I’d like to point out an article in the 
Leader-Post that was Saturday, April 3, where Gord Gunoff, 
the business manager for the International Brotherhood of 
Electrical Workers that represents 1,300 electrical workers . . . 
and he says that, that he wasn’t waiting until . . . in his 
negotiations with the government on his union contract, the 
government pointed out that there was going to be, among other 
things, increases in electrical power rates that are likely not too 
distant future. And such increases would be unacceptable and 
without merit, according to Mr. Gunoff. 
 
And he also goes on to say that he believes ways could be found 
to save money and avoid power rate increases. More 
specifically, Mr. Gunoff said he believes that SaskPower should 
be amalgamated with SaskEnergy. Such an amalgamation 
would produce efficiency, reduce the amount of management 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

and duplication of such key departments as the human resources 
department in the two corporations. 
 
So it’s interesting that there are people in the NDP circles that 
have other views about how to create efficiencies and economic 
development in this province. But as we’ve seen, this 
government continues to ignore them. And all this NDP 
government can do is just put more control and power into their 
own hands. 
 
It seems like the NDP government really . . . NDP party really 
believes that the Crown corporations of this province belongs to 
them. Well I’d just like to point out, Mr. Speaker, the Crown 
corporations of this province belong to the people of 
Saskatchewan, not to the NDP. And they have to realize that 
when they make decisions for the good of all people in the 
province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly many concerns when we 
look at the way the NDP government runs the Crowns. What 
we need in this province, Mr. Speaker, is a strategy to grow this 
province. What we need in this province is another million 
people; we need 2 million people in this province. We’ve been 
at . . . stuck at 1 million, or now we’ve even dropped below 1 
million. 
 
And the members on the opposite side have been quoted as 
saying, well maybe it wouldn’t be . . . a candidate I believe in 
the last election for the NDP said, well it wouldn’t be such a 
bad thing to have the population go down to 600,000 or 800,000 
people. And it seems bizarre that such thinking prevails in the 
NDP Party when we need to grow this province and develop 
this province and attract more people. 
 
Why do we want to attract more people? We want to attract 
taxpayers; we want to attract business to this province who will 
hire people. The businesses will pay taxes in this province. 
They will hire people, and their workers will pay more taxes, 
Mr. Speaker, and so that the government of the day will have 
the tax base to increase spending on education, on health care. 
But this government doesn’t see it that way. All that they want 
to do is have control of everything. They want to control the 
economy and run it as if it’s their own. And what we have to do 
in this province is to find other ways to grow this province, not 
exclusively within the NDP Party and the way they view the 
world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to note, when we talk about power generation, 
that there’s other forms of power generation. But the NDP Party 
they always want to get control of it. What we need is to 
encourage private investment in power generation and allow the 
private companies or individuals that have windmills or 
produce . . . or, as an example, Weyerhaeuser in the North, to 
produce their own power. But instead, what does the 
government do? They . . . any savings Weyerhaeuser was going 
to get from producing their own power, they were going to take 
away those savings, and again not encourage that type of 
investment, that type of power generation that would be good 
for the whole province. 
 
We see many a number of First Nations groups that are very 
interested in something that SaskPower has been interested in, 
and that’s a nuclear power plant. It’s interesting that when we 

talk to First Nations they don’t want to see more dams being 
built across the North, or in Saskatchewan, because it ruins so 
much of the province’s resources, the lands. And they have 
certainly been in the forefront of looking at nuclear power 
generation, as SaskPower has. 
 
And what we need is a public-private partnership to investigate 
things like cogeneration, nuclear power, and other forms of 
power that unfortunately for the NDP government, it may not 
be under their total control. But it would be under control of the 
people of Saskatchewan, for the benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s the way that we need to produce jobs 
in this province, and economic development in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we see in certain selective areas, the NDP government do 
allow other forms of deregulation in the market. As we see, the 
cities of Saskatoon and Swift Current are allowed to purchase 
electricity from other suppliers than SaskPower. But it seems 
this NDP government is just stuck to very isolated examples. 
And what we need in this province, to expand the thinking of 
private-public partnerships in the province to generate 
electricity and to really encourage the private sector, with the 
public sector, with SaskPower and other Crowns, to grow the 
province more efficiently. And, Mr. Speaker, as we see, the 
government continues to just kind of jump in and scare away 
private investors whenever possible and try to take over those 
areas that the private sector could do a better job, or possibly 
with the public sector. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think as an example that I mentioned 
before, the First Nations are really a source of economic 
development in this province. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’re an untapped resource in a number of ways. And as we 
see the First Nations of Saskatchewan get their treaty land 
entitlement and other settlements are coming along, they have a 
huge source of capital that they want to invest in this province. 
And we as a province need to tap into that capital and for the 
good of the whole province, and so that everyone in this 
province can benefit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, also the First Nations are a huge supply of 
talent and for the future workforce. And we must, Mr. Speaker, 
make sure that we adequately address the First Nations 
concerns when it comes to education and training so we can 
utilize not only their capital and the people power, so that we as 
a province can move forward in this . . . and take advantage of 
the future developments that are out there and that’s needed, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we talk about power generation, we see that SaskPower 
is buying power; they buy power from Manitoba. Why would it 
be a problem to expand that and buy power that’s generated in 
Saskatchewan from cogeneration projects or other projects that 
have been talked about on the Saskatchewan River, that have 
been turned down by the government because they don’t have 
total control over that? And if they don’t have total control, 
they’re not interested, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so we certainly have to have a strategy in this province to 
utilize all the people in this province, all the talents in this 
province. As we’ve seen in one report after another, there isn’t 
the capital in this province to grow the province like we know 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

that it needs to grow for the future of this province. We have to 
address that and we have to encourage investment from outside 
of this province. 
 
And what better way to do that — number one, utilizing the 
capital that we have in the province through our First Nations, 
and allowing more private-public partnerships to bring in 
capital from outside the province, to invest in power projects in 
this province. 
 
(15:00) 
 
We have seen that there is . . . the federal government 
announced that there is going to be a pilot project built 
concerning cleaner coal-burning energy. And as we know, Mr. 
Speaker, the . . . Saskatchewan is highly dependant on burning 
coal to produce electricity. And certainly I believe that we 
should be in the forefront of trying to attract that pilot project to 
southern Saskatchewan in conjunction with the University of 
Regina, where I had a tour with my colleagues yesterday. 
 
And that’s one of the areas that all universities, in particular the 
U of R (University of Regina) and the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), are looking at to access those federal dollars. 
And I think a pilot project in Saskatchewan, that it’s . . . would 
attract investment like we’ve seen with the synchrotron in 
Saskatoon. It brings the expertise; it keeps the expertise. We 
have expertise in this province; it would attract other potential 
investments into this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is something that the NDP government 
seems to not understand is to, in order to attract this investment 
we need to work hand in hand with the federal government, the 
public sector, and the private sector to encourage those 
developments, those projects in the province to . . . so that we 
have a broader tax base in this province, so we have more 
money in the end for health care and education and other 
infrastructure projects that should be the sole responsibility of 
the government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s something that this government 
doesn’t understand, that that should be the main responsibility 
is to look after the infrastructure, look after health care, and 
education, and should not be so concerned with taking taxpayer 
dollars and investing them around the world and losing money, 
because inherently government-run projects are not run well. 
 
And we need a . . . and I believe it’s a public-private partnership 
that we must look at to take the benefits of our Crown 
corporations that they do in their core businesses, which do a 
great job, and partner with private sector people that have the 
expertise and outside capital that we can access to develop these 
projects. 
 
So there are many, many areas that this Bill speaks to, Mr. 
Speaker, and we certainly need to work towards fostering other 
types of energy development in this province. And I believe that 
any Bill that limits the private sector from coming into this 
province to do other projects such as coal burning, and as we’ve 
seen in the North with Weyerhaeuser burning some of their 
waste products to develop energy, and just small operations, 
small individual operations — windmills is the best example — 
we should be encouraging those types of developments and 

certainly cogeneration with, in the oil industry and other types 
of businesses in the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, certainly we’ll be asking third party groups 
exactly how they feel about this statement, and certainly ask 
them how this could impact on their cogeneration projects. And 
we’ll wait to hear from those groups before we move this Bill 
along because I think it’s very important that we get the 
thoughts of other people in this province concerning the 
direction that this Bill is going to take. So at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the member for Biggar that debate 
on Bill No. 2 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 
  
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 7 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
add a few more comments to Bill No. 7, the automobile 
accident insurance amendment legislation that we have before 
us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day I was talking about and raised some 
comments regarding the no-fault insurance program we have in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And as we have seen in the past, 
Mr. Speaker, we have had many comments about the no-fault 
program. And in many cases the opposition has been painted as 
being totally opposed to the no-fault program. But I think, Mr. 
Speaker, if you would take the time to review . . . or any person 
in the public could take the time to review Hansard, they’d find 
that many opposition members have spoken out very positively 
about many aspects of the no-fault insurance program. 
 
However, we all realize that there are certain aspects of the 
no-fault program that have impacted a number of Saskatchewan 
residents over the past number of years, and impacted them 
very significantly. To the point that there are individuals, as a 
result of the no-fault program prior to the bringing forward the 
option of the tort clause about a year ago, who have been 
basically sitting, Mr. Speaker, in a situation of limbo; and the 
fact that their issues, their cases, their concerns and the health 
needs, and their economic needs continue to be overlooked. 
And we would hope, Mr. Speaker, that what the minister was 
indicating in the changes coming forward in this piece of 
legislation, that many of these individuals and certainly 
individuals down the road will not have to face the challenges 
that about 5 per cent of the population have faced over the past 
number of years since the no-fault program was introduced. 
 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

Now the minister talked about the proposed changes ensuring 
that benefits would continue to be adequate and fair and we 
certainly agree with that. We have asked this government to 
take a look at the sections of the no-fault legislation where we 
have felt that fairness has not really been forthcoming; where 
the compensations have not really been adequate. And we have 
asked this government to look very carefully and to come 
forward with recommendations that would meet the needs of 
individuals who have . . . haven’t been adequately covered 
under the no-fault program. 
 
Now the minister indicated in . . . when he was talking about 
the adequacy of the program and the fairness, he mentioned that 
. . . talked about top-up benefits. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re quite 
well aware of the fact that over the period of time individuals 
who have been injured in automobile accidents or accidents of 
other nature, have also as a result of the types of accidents have 
received compensation from other programs such as Workers’ 
Compensation. 
 
And in many cases we have found, Mr. Speaker, that the 
funding that is made available such as through the Workers’ 
Compensation program haven’t quite been at the same level that 
the no-fault program was . . . that the funding would have been 
available. So what the no-fault program has done has topped up 
to bring that individual’s coverage to the level that no-fault 
would certainly have covered had they been strictly under the 
no-fault program. 
 
And we certainly, Mr. Speaker, have agreed with that. But there 
was a point where single individuals were not covered and the 
minister indicated that single individuals would now be covered 
under the changes. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns we have raised as 
well is the whole appeal process. And the minister indicated in 
his second reading speech, he was talking about the appeal 
commission, talking about its independence, and the fact that its 
rulings are binding to SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) and the claimant. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister mentioned that some of the 
claimants who pursue appeals through the appeal commission 
eventually lose interest in the process. And what this piece of 
legislation is doing, Mr. Speaker, is allowing the fact that if an 
appeal before the commission hasn’t been pursued that, after six 
months if it doesn’t continue to be pursued, it can be dismissed. 
 
The question I have, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that many people 
actually lose interest, not that they haven’t been dealt with fairly 
or not with the fact that the concerns have not been heard or 
adequately addressed. They just find that the frustration of 
appealing a decision . . . a ruling, going to the commission — 
and I would question sometimes whether or not the commission 
is independent and as removed from SGI as the minister would 
like us to believe or if the facts are — that when people go . . . 
They make an appeal to a commission that they believe is 
independent. We have questioned at times whether or not this 
commission is as independent as the government would claim it 
is to be. And certainly, that is a concern that has been brought to 
our attention by many individuals over the past number of 
years. 
 

And our concern is if . . . The commission can say, well there’s 
an appellant has raised a claim, however six months have 
passed since we’ve heard anything further. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this could be after a year of an ongoing process of raising the 
concerns and bringing the appeals forward and finally, out of 
frustration, the appellant just gives up. And as I said earlier, Mr. 
Speaker, it doesn’t necessarily mean that the claimant had their 
concerns addressed. It’s just the fact that the minister is saying, 
well if we haven’t heard anything over a six month period, 
we’re just going to dismiss that case. And this piece of 
legislation gives the opportunity for dismissal. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one would have to ask if, as the minister’s 
indicated, after six months, if we haven’t heard anything further 
from a claimant that we’re just going to dismiss the case, would 
we basically find that the commission or SGI would just 
continue delaying the process until people finally give up in 
trying to hear their claimant heard and walk away and then say, 
well we haven’t heard anything for six months, therefore this 
appeal has now been dismissed and cannot be further pursued? 
 
And so, it’s certainly a question that we want to raise with the 
minister because, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that the people of 
Saskatchewan recognize and are aware of the fact that their 
insurance company is properly and adequately dealing with 
their concerns, ensuring that they are . . . receive adequate 
coverage should they find themselves having to deal with the 
health related circumstances due to an accident and the fact that 
if there are some questions arising from the way they’ve been 
dealt with, and they feel they haven’t been dealt with fairly, that 
they have adequate access to the appeal process to follow up on 
those concerns to ensure, as the minister indicated in the earlier 
part of his speech, that fairness and the adequate financial 
coverage is made available to individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well the minister indicated that there are two 
proposed amendments to no-fault injury coverage, one of them 
dealing with the fact that an insured individual with no-fault 
coverage, who is entitled to sue for non-economic loss, is not 
subject to a $5,000 deductible. 
 
Now one would have to ask, why was a 5,000 deductible put 
there in the first place? I would assume, Mr. Speaker, the 
$5,000 deductible was put there . . . And one would say, well, 
for frivolous claims. I think that’s fair. But at the same time, 
Mr. Speaker, very few people that I’m aware of would be going 
after an insurance company or SGI for something that’s fairly 
frivolous. Most times when an issue is raised and the issue is 
followed through in the courts, it’s for something of substantial 
nature. 
 
And so one would have to ask, why would we have put a 
$5,000 deductible in place? Is that just so SGI could say, well 
we don’t have people suing us because there haven’t been any 
lawsuits come forward. Well if you’re going to have a 
deductible of this nature, it’s going to actually intimidate people 
to the point that they may not pursue some economic benefit or 
coverage for insured coverage and loss — whether it’s 
economic loss as a result of . . . as a result of a health injury, or 
due to an accident or whatever the circumstances. So we would 
have a number of questions we’d like to ask of the minister. But 
I think, Mr. Speaker, this certainly appears to be an adequate 
move on the part of this government in removing that $5,000 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

deductible. 
 
The minister also said some of the changes will clarify how SGI 
calculates an income replacement benefit under no-fault in 
cases where an insured suffers a relapse in their medical 
condition after the first 180 days. And, Mr. Speaker, I think this 
is appropriate as well because, Mr. Speaker, many times when 
you’ve been injured and whether an accident of some form or 
other . . . Especially as a younger person. Mr. Speaker, we all 
feel that we are quite capable, and physically capable, of 
bouncing back and getting back into the workplace, or being 
able to resume our activities. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that most people 
themselves, if they’re involved in an accident will do whatever 
is necessary to get back to their place of work. Or in the case of 
a private business, that individual will do whatever it takes to 
get back to work so that he . . . because his business does . . . is 
not affected as a result of time loss because of his dealing with 
his physical problem as a result of a work-related accident, or 
an injury on the highways, or whatever the circumstances. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have seen — and individuals in the past 
have found — while they felt very good after a period of 
rehabilitation, felt that everything was under control, that their 
lives were back to normal, all of a sudden a relapse occurs. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what has happened as a result of this — if a 
relapse has occurred — there has been a failure to recognize 
that that relapse is related directly to the accident the person has 
just been recovering from. And as a result of the failure to 
recognize that, individuals have lost their ability to receive 
adequate and fair financial funding and recognition for their . . . 
the health needs that they face, the financial needs of those 
health costs, as well as the economic loss that they have faced. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is another . . . appears to be another 
correction to this piece of legislation that I would think would 
be appropriate and we would look . . . certainly want to look at 
addressing a number of questions with the minister in this 
regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that at this time I have raised some of the 
major concerns that I’ve had. I know a number of other 
individuals have also wanted to speak to this Bill, so I’ll take 
my place and allow others to stand up in the Assembly and 
continue to address the issue. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take the 
opportunity to also speak to Bill No. 7, An Act to amend The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are numerous amendments to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and 
we certainly will be sending this information out to various 
groups to get their feedback because this is a very important 
Bill that changes . . . that speaks to the changes of no-fault 
insurance, Mr. Speaker. And it’s interesting to note that the 
minister’s, in his second reading speech, that there had been 
proposed for no-fault is ensuring that someone who has no-fault 
is entitled to sue for non-economic losses and is subject to a 

$5,000 deductible. 
 
And it’s interesting that the government has allowed the tort 
insurance . . . And I spoke on a Bill yesterday to allow people 
. . . well basically the government set a cap for people to sue for 
non-economic losses. And now under the no-fault insurance, 
the government is also setting in process the ability to sue under 
no-fault for non-economic losses, which is interesting to see the 
government move in that direction. 
 
Of course, also in this section, it deals with changes to the 
insurance coverage in terms of off-road accidents. And we have 
some questions concerning, does it cover . . . does it exclude 
farm-related or hunting-related accidents and rollovers and 
things like that. Also, you know, simple accidents that may 
involve hunting or going to the beach and things like that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And one thing that has come up in my constituency is . . . 
Actually just recently my son was driving down the highway 
very close to our home and hit a deer. And as it turned out, the 
vehicle has been written off. Which brings to mind a project, a 
proposal by a local RM (rural municipality) concerning deer. 
 
As we know, the numbers of deer in the province has grown 
dramatically and there’s various reasons why the number of 
wildlife have grown. And I think the government’s policy on 
increasing the fees to the . . . hunting fees and things like that, 
have dramatically affected hunting, and there’s just not as many 
people out there hunting wildlife as there used to be. So, in turn, 
that means there’s more wildlife on our roads and highways. 
 
And where I live, just 3 miles east of Biggar on highway . . . 
No. 14 Highway, there’s a spot there that deer come across. 
Actually, I believe the deer cross the highway so they can come 
and eat my grain and my hay bales. But it’s an area that’s . . . 
has a lot of animals. 
 
And further down Highway 14 from Perdue and on to Asquith 
again, there’s a lot of trees and brush. And the people in that 
RM, their proposal, their pilot project which they want to set 
up, really speaks to wildlife. And what they want is to get some 
. . . to do a count of traffic, the number of hits along that part of 
the highway where vehicles hit wildlife. And we, we are unable. 
I don’t believe SGI has kept statistics concerning the number of 
accidents along that stretch of the highway. 
 
And what the RM wants to do is to, is to expand their mowers 
and update their mowers and tractors. And of course the RM 
cuts their own ditches. And what they want to do is set up a 
pilot project basically first, to get a count on the number of 
accidents caused by wildlife on the . . . on that stretch of the 
highway. But they also want be allowed to, on a pilot project 
basis, to cut the ditches along the highway more than is being 
now. Basically the highways . . . the ditches along Highway 14 
are being cut once a year. 
 
And as we know, the wildlife will come to the edge of the ditch 
to feed on any grain that’s been spilt or salt actually that they 
pick up along the, along the highway. And in turn as the traffic 
come along, the wildlife will in many cases jump out in front of 
the traffic and be hit, which causes considerable expense to SGI 
and to the Auto Fund and a lot of cost to the individual, as well 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

as the huge possibility of death and injury to travellers along 
that stretch of the highway. 
 
And the RM would like to do this pilot project, and I’m helping 
them with that project to see if there’s a possibility of the 
Highways department or SGI — I would imagine it should be 
SGI — that would encourage this type of pilot project. Because 
if we did things to keep the wildlife away from the ditches, that 
would lessen the risk of animals running on and causing traffic 
accidents. So that’s something that we’ll continue to work at. 
 
And I believe SGI needs to look at that type of pilot project 
because, quite frankly, the government, the NDP government 
has really cut . . . has allowed the dramatic increase in wildlife 
in this province along the roads and highways. And it’s just not 
Highway 14, a secondary highway, but even the grid roads and 
smaller highways running north and south; this is certainly a 
huge, a huge problem where there’s a lot of costs and expense 
to the SGI fund. And like I say, it certainly is a possibility of 
injury and death to travellers along those, those roads, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, really we need to look at where the 
government is going. You know, the government brought in 
no-fault a number of years ago. And after a lot of concerns and 
. . . from people in this province, they finally brought in the 
option of a tort system. And now we see that under no-fault 
they’re starting to move away from no-fault, which is allowing 
some lawsuits concerning non-economic losses, as we have 
seen that is allowed under tort. 
 
So it just makes you wonder what the government is thinking, 
what direction the government is going. Concerning their 
thinking about SGI and the Auto Fund, we certainly want to 
keep in mind the impact of changes to the cost of insurance in 
this province. 
 
Again the government has talked about keeping this basket of 
utility rates the lowest in Canada. But we certainly have to look 
at keeping insurance rates low in this province as well to make 
sure that it’s one of the things in the province that will attract 
investment into the province. And insurance rates is certainly 
part of that package that businesses from outside the province 
look at when they are planning to come to the province to set up 
a business, or employees. It’s one of the many things that are 
taken into account. 
 
Another area, Mr. Speaker, that when we talk about no-fault is 
really the insane situation where — we’ve had in the past — 
where an individual really committed a criminal act, was tried 
and convicted of really ramming another person, doing serious 
damage to the individual’s legs by ramming him against another 
vehicle, but when the no-fault kicked in, the no-fault insurance 
kicked in to cover the costs. And even though this individual 
has committed a criminal act, done bodily damage — really, 
really it was a physical assault — but one could conclude that it 
was an attempt to kill someone. And in those situations where 
no-fault continued to be the way that the insurance claim was 
handled, and so a person that was convicted of a physical 
assault fell under no-fault when it came to damages. And so it 
certainly is a odd way that no-fault works in some cases. 
 
Now under this Bill it’s opening it up to some, you know, some 

which is entitled to sue for non-economic losses, which the 
government says is deductible up to $5,000. So it’s kind of a 
hazy area where we don’t know exactly where the 
government’s going and what their thinking is. Or is the 
government just making changes, just try to look after certain 
individual concerns without looking at the broad picture, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And we certainly have to look at other areas that the Bill 
addresses. And as I had said initially, there’s certainly many 
amendments that this Bill speaks to. And we certainly will have 
to take this Bill and talk to many interest groups and third 
parties so that this Bill is not really hurting the province in a 
way that will stop attracting businesses in the province. 
 
Just one thing, it speaks to people . . . not giving insurance to 
people that are in an accident because of suicide, and it’s going 
to be interesting how those types of things are determined, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We hear second- and third-hand that there are vehicle accidents, 
that people do commit suicide by vehicles — but I just wonder 
how this is going to be determined when there’s no witnesses 
that there’s an accident. So many times people fall asleep on the 
highway and ram another vehicle and are killed. And 
unfortunately I suspect that maybe that is one situation where 
people have committed suicide by driving into another vehicle. 
 
So we certainly don’t want to bring in any situation that does 
not look after people’s insurance needs — and people that are 
injured and the families of these individuals who have people 
that have died in automobile accidents — or have the 
breadwinner of the family injured and is unable to work in the 
future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I certainly will — speaking to this pilot project that was 
brought forward to me — I certainly will be . . . like to talk to 
the minister about this particular project. And so at this time, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to adjourn debate, move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on Bill No. 7 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. Committee of Finance. The first item 
before the committee are the consideration of estimates for the 
Department of Agriculture. 
 
I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much. I would like to 
introduce my officials, and also make a few comments about 
Agriculture and Food, and then I’d be . . . look forward to 
questions from the opposition. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’d like to introduce Doug Matthies, sitting to my 
immediate left, and Doug is the deputy minister for Agriculture. 
Immediately behind Doug is Hal Cushon, who is the assistant 
deputy minister. Next to me, on my right, is Louise Greenberg, 
assistant deputy minister, and behind me, Maryellen Carlson, 
who is assistant deputy minister. 
 
Back in the back row — there he is — Stan Benjamin, who is 
the general manager for the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation; and Greg Haase, in the row on this side, second in, 
is director of lands branch. And next to, I think I’ll start on this 
end and just go across there, Ross Johnson, manager of 
operational services, corporate services branch. And then next 
to Ross is Greg Haase. And then Kari Harvey, manager of 
business services, agri-business development branch. And Rick 
Burton, director of policy branch. And next to Rick is Dave 
Boehm, director of financial programs branch. And then 
immediately behind Hal Cushon, is Karen Aulie, who is 
director of corporate services branch. 
 
Mr. Chair, it is with great pleasure that I come before the 
committee for estimates and Committee of Finance doing 
estimates for Agriculture and Food. I’m sorry to say that my 
voice is probably not so good today. I’ve got a bit of a cold, but 
I’ll try and speak loudly enough that I can be heard. 
 
In terms of Agriculture and Food, I think a number of items that 
are key as we’re working at building the agriculture industry 
and giving support to farm families in this time and in the time 
ahead. And that is that over these past few years we have faced 
some very trying times in the agriculture community. The 
droughts that we have faced, the diseases that we have faced, 
have certainly taken a toll on the agricultural economy. And 
that shows up somewhat in our having to pull back on some of 
the very exciting development work that we have been doing. 
 
And it’s our belief and our hope that in these areas where we 
have had to pull back, that it will only be for a short term. 
Because as I indicate, there are certainly have some very, very 
exciting developments that are happening in agriculture and in 
food and in rural revitalization; and we want to make sure that 
these continue because certainly agriculture is a key sector in 
the economy of Saskatchewan. And we’re very excited to see 
some of the growth and development that has happened despite 
these very difficult times. 
 
Mr. Chair, we have also, I think it’s important to note, really 
done a . . . I think the former minister of Agriculture, Food and 
Rural Revitalization and this team that he has worked with and 
our government has worked very hard to make sure that 
throughout these difficult times that we have had programs and 
funding available for programs that would help people through 
a time of crisis. 
 
And it’s very, very challenging for us when we’re working with 
the federal government on 60/40-based programs to try and 

meet those financial needs with a small, relatively small tax 
base. And I say relatively — it’s relative to the large size of 
agriculture in this province. And we know that there are other 
provinces, Prince Edward Island being one, that are facing 
similar problems dealing with the 60/40 programs. So we are 
working to try and overcome some of those difficulties. 
 
Hopefully, the federal government will see things the same way 
that we do; we will get kind of a more equitable support across 
the nation for agricultural producers; and hopefully that too will 
positively impact the agriculture industry in this province. 
 
When I look to the future, of course we look forward hopefully 
to a better year this year. We’re hoping that there will be 
consistent rains in the next few weeks that will put the moisture 
levels up. And we also look forward to building the industry 
with our intensive livestock operations. We hope to see more 
slaughter processing facilities in the province. And we also 
recognize that there is a significant place for many successful 
family farms in the province, and we want to continue to be 
able to encourage those developments as well. 
 
So with those comments, Mr. Speaker, and with . . . or, Mr. 
Chair, and with consideration for all of the struggles that 
agriculture has faced in these past few years, I look forward to 
the questions from the members opposite. 
 
The Chair: — Administration, (AG01). I recognize the 
member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for introducing your officials, and I in turn welcome 
your officials to the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. We 
know that they’ll be a great help and a great service to us in 
answering the questions that we’ll be asking this afternoon. And 
I’m sure that the minister will appreciate their expertise as well. 
 
And I hope the minister’s voice holds out. We have an hour and 
a half nearly to cover here, and I’m sure that my colleagues and 
myself will take it as easy on the minister as possible. 
 
For a start, I’d like to turn the questioning over to the member 
from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to also 
welcome the officials today, Mr. Minister. The area I want to 
check . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Just to let the member 
know that in the committee of estimates, or Committee of 
Finance dealing with estimates, members are required to stand 
while speaking. It’s not a standing committee. Thank you. I 
recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was just getting 
comfortable. 
 
Mr. Minister, the area I want to go into is the national water 
supply expansion program, and I believe we’ve had some 
conversations on this. There seems to be some discrepancies, 
though, Mr. Minister, between PFRA (Prairie Farm 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

Rehabilitation Administration) officials and your own 
explanation of where we are with the program. So I guess my 
first question is, and we’ve talked about this before, but have 
we signed on to this new program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — At this point we have not received the 
agreement back from the federal government in order to sign 
that yet. And I think as I indicated to the member the other day, 
Mr. Chair, the PFRA, for whatever reason, the program . . . the 
actual program that they’re engaged in is not changing. It is 
really a delineation of the shared responsibilities — the work 
that Saskatchewan Watershed Authority is doing, the work that 
Agriculture is doing, work that Sask Water is doing in terms of 
water development — but PFRA’s work still remains the same. 
They are still responsible and I really, from all of our . . . 
looking at this, there is no rational understanding or explanation 
for why PFRA would be holding back on taking agreements 
and signing agreements. 
 
They may have made a unilateral decision to hold that back, but 
I think as far as the federal government is concerned, this is no 
change of operation. It’s just a change of the fact that we are 
now signing joint agreements between the federal government 
and the provinces and each province and each federal . . . each 
provincial and federal government agreement is unique. So 
really, as far as we are concerned, there is no rational reason 
why PFRA could not be moving ahead on these farm programs. 
It’s just a unilateral federal decision to not be there for them at 
this point. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the 
question that comes next . . . And I’m having a hard time with 
this one because I’ve talked to federal PFRA people today as 
late as 11 o’clock this morning, and their opinion is that 
Saskatchewan has not signed on to the program and that’s why 
at this point we do not have a program. So I’m getting mixed 
messages here. But having said that, I’ll take the minister’s 
word for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess another question I have then . . . And we’d 
asked written questions to find out how much the province had 
put into this program in the past such as 2001-2002 and 2002 
and so on, and the answer we got back was nil. The province 
put nothing into that program. Would the minister comment on 
this. We may have used the wrong name for the program or 
something like that. All we wanted to know is what the 
province had to put up each year into it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — No, the province has not put anything 
into this program. The PFRA program is a federal program and 
once again we have not signed only because there is no 
agreement that has been delivered from the federal government 
at this point to sign. It’s true; we haven’t signed, but it’s 
because they have not given us the documentation to sign. 
That’s it. 
 
In terms of provincial money into the PFRA program, we have 
not ever put funding into that program. We do have our own 
programs which deal with pipelines and some of the other 
pieces but the on-farm programs for dugouts, wells, etc. — 
those are PFRA, federal government funded programs, have 
been for decades, and that’s how they remain at this point. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister 
then brings up the other . . . another question then, I guess. We 
have farmers — I have them in my constituency and I know a 
number of the members do on this side of the House — that are 
in need of digging a well, or possibly a dugout. I haven’t had 
that come up yet, but we know how dry it is in a number of the 
areas out there. And the April 1 deadline has come and gone. So 
should we get an agreement — and hopefully very quickly 
because the need is certainly out there and I think the need is 
growing — but the problem farmers have out there is the April 
1 deadline has come and gone. How are we going to deal with 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Our authority is in place now to sign 
this agreement. We have asked for the agreement. And 
whatever the holdup there is we’re not sure, but we will 
continue to press for an agreement because we recognize the 
need, we recognize the timeline there. And we certainly don’t 
want our farmers to be disadvantaged. They are already because 
of that deadline, but we’re prepared to move this just as quickly 
as we get the agreement and can sign it and move it forward. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I may have 
missed it right at the start of your remarks, but I was wondering, 
I know some of the farmers that have been asking me are in 
urgent need of this to happen very quickly. Is there a list that 
they can apply now and get on that list because as we know, 
Mr. Minister, you have to be pre-approved to qualify for a loan 
for the PFRA sharing of these projects. Is there a list in place 
now that they could get on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Because — excuse me — because this 
is a federal program, I mean it would be our suggestion that 
they call PFRA, ask to get put on a list in an orderly manner. So 
I mean they’ll do them first-come, first-served basically. But at 
this point, as far as we know, there is no list until the agreement 
is signed. Officially they’re not taking any action. And that’s all 
we have from them. But I certainly if . . . I would encourage our 
producers who are in need to phone them, pressure them, to — 
if they don’t have a list, start a list, put my name on it, and let’s 
move this along. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s all I 
have at this time, Mr. Minister. I’d like to pass questioning over 
to my colleague from Kindersley. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and welcome to 
your officials this afternoon. My first question is of a very 
general nature; it has to do with animal husbandry. Could you 
outline which particular Act under provincial legislation limits 
liability for producers in the practice of raising livestock 
relative . . . after they’ve dispersed of their livestock? 
 
(15:45) 
 
The reason that this question is being asked is specifically with 
regard to the BSE situation that we saw last year. Possibly, the 
cow directly came from Saskatchewan and producers need to be 
clear about where their liability ends with regards to provincial 
legislation following the liquidation of an animal. 
 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Because BSE is under federal 
jurisdiction, we do not have any provincial legislation with 
regard to liability. That will be under federal jurisdiction. It is 
their issue to deal with as BSE is federal jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My question 
wasn’t about BSE in particular. BSE was outlining just as an 
example of how liability could be affected in the practice of 
animal husbandry. 
 
What I’m asking is where is the legislation in place, 
provincially, that protects producers with regards to raising 
livestock and it defines what their liabilities are relative to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the best of the information that we 
have, there is no legislation that deals with animal disease. 
Basically, you’re dealing with the normal rules of commerce. 
 
And in terms of liability, people might press the issue but there 
is no legislation dealing with that currently. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps the 
minister can then define for me how the Department of 
Agriculture and Rural Revitalization is able to classify which 
animals fall under the practice of livestock; be they hogs, cattle, 
what have you. How is that classification and demarcation 
determined and under which Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Each program defines livestock. 
Particularly if you’ve got particular livestock questions or 
issues, if you name those, then we can deal with the particular 
issues under each Act. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would appreciate 
if you could name for an Act in particular on beef cattle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s really . . . without any kind of 
specific . . . because each program has its own definition, if 
you’ve got something specific that you’re looking for, ask 
directly, and we will deal with that. If you’re . . . I mean under 
The Animal Products Act you’ve got livestock that’s defined. 
But each Act, each program will have its own definition. So if 
there’s something in particular, just ask. We’ll let you know. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. No, what’s in 
particular is producers are often moving into different forms of 
animal husbandry, and it is important that they have an 
understanding from this government of what classifies them as 
being agricultural producers, whether they’re moving into wild 
boar production; whether they’re moving into pheasant 
production; whether it’s hog production; whether it’s cattle 
production. And I shouldn’t think that this would be an overly 
difficult question for the Minister of Agriculture to answer. You 
said bring up an animal, so I did. 
 
So in general, to turn this in another way hopefully to be helpful 
to the officials, what does the Department of Agriculture and 
Rural Revitalization use as a benchmark for classifying an 
animal as legitimate in the pursuit of agriculture and 
agricultural animal husbandry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, my officials advise me that you 
know you could basically raise, grow any kind of animal within 

the province as long as you know the issues around endangered 
species or dangerous species. But if people are interested in 
developing a particular line they would generally seek some 
advice and guidance on that. 
 
And I mean it’s . . . we’re relatively free here in terms of 
people’s ability to develop their agricultural products. And 
we’ve seen a fair bit of diversity over the years and encourage 
that diversity. But in terms of — in terms of openness to what 
could be defined as livestock and agriculture product there’s . . . 
it’s pretty wide open at this point. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I’m glad to hear 
that that is the direction that the department wishes to go. And I 
would ask the minister to qualify for me if that would include 
the raising of elk or deer or reindeer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Our domestic game farm regulations 
allow for Cervidaes to be raised as domestic animals on the 
farms. And there are people within the province who are 
practicing that, who are raising elk, deer, and we see these 
practices right now. And so if you have any further questions in 
that area, go ahead. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that elk 
and deer farmers would greatly like to see the ministry 
responsible for their . . . the welfare of their animals and 
whatnot. 
 
However, as of recently they’ve been forced to sign releases, 
put forward the Saskatchewan Cervidae chronic wasting disease 
surveillance and certification program, and there’s a registration 
form from Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food. And from this 
it basically puts the liability for production completely onto the 
producer regardless of, you know, what happens to the animal. 
And this seems to be a very negative aspect to the industry. 
 
So specifically what could happen is, if an individual animal 
left a producer’s yard, maybe he sold it as a breeding animal to 
another producer . . . and in theory this . . . perhaps this animal 
could go even through five or six producers. And at that point 
the animal had somehow . . . develops chronic wasting disease. 
Every producer that has had effect with this animal could be 
liable. Hence the whole industry, with its interrelatedness to one 
another, could be liable at any point relative to these 
government regulations. 
 
Would the minister be kind enough to explain these forms and 
the logic — or lack thereof — behind them? 
 
The Chair — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — To request leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Chair — The minister has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Chair — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m very pleased today to introduce in the west 
gallery a group of young people who have come to meet with 
some members of the cabinet to discuss how we move 
Saskatchewan forward in a more youth-friendly way. 
 
I’m particularly pleased to introduce Victoria Morris, Lee 
Reaney, Wade Luzny, and Danylo Puderak. These individuals 
are with a group called the Youth Action Now. This is . . . 
they’re putting together a very exciting program for the 
province’s centennial that will focus in on how we make 
Saskatchewan more youth-friendly and take a look at some of 
the great opportunities here. They’ve got some great ideas, 
they’re full of energy, and I’d ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, there is a national 
certification for cervids and this is handled by the CFIA 
(Canadian Food Inspection Agency), and we are administrators 
of the program here in the province. The forms are federal 
forms. And for diseases of the . . . like CWD (chronic wasting 
disease), these are federally reportable diseases, and if need for 
inspectors to be involved, the inspectors are also federal 
inspectors. So if there are issues with the forms, they are federal 
forms and you can follow through on that front. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The question I 
would have to the minister is: what lobbying has the minister 
done to the federal government with regards to the closure of 
the Korean border to elk velvet . . . antler velvet? As the 
minister I’m sure is aware, since that border was closed because 
of changes to the CWD monitoring, that market has in essence 
collapsed and the New Zealanders have picked it up. 
 
The New Zealanders have a huge herd of elk and reindeer and 
their total CWD testing consists of 20 heads a year. It’s 
absolutely not relevant, but for political purposes it has more or 
less destroyed our industry. 
 
So could the minister be kind enough to table any 
correspondence he would have had with the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs with regards to lobbying for the opening of the Korean 
border relative to the velvet market in Korea. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I thank the member for the question 
because this is a very important . . . elk in Canada, certainly in 
this market, key is the elk velvet. There are other, other places 

that are raising elk — I believe New Zealand — where meat is 
the key resource. But here it is elk velvet. And with CWD 
reported the borders to Korea did close and that had a major 
negative impact on the elk market. 
 
The previous minister of Agriculture wrote to the federal 
minister and urged some action there. I’ve also addressed this 
issue with elk breeders and we have been pressing for more 
open borders and doing that on all fronts really with all the 
diseases, to try and make sure that there are science-based rules 
that are applied. 
 
And we now with the new federal minister, and I think even 
more importantly with the new federal deputy minister, Mr. 
Leonard Edwards, who has significant experience in the Orient 
and particularly Japan, Korea markets, with issues around 
foreign trade we do have some hope that with his understanding 
and his connections that we will hopefully see some further 
action there and the borders be opened. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I thank the minister for that answer and I 
would appreciate if the minister would be able to table that 
correspondence that the previous minister put forth. 
 
My next question returns again to the forms put forth. And I 
have to ask the minister, in the agreement to distribute these 
forms on behalf of the federal government, did you have any 
say into the indemnification and release? Because under section 
1 here, and I quote: 
 

The operator agrees to assume all risks and responsibility 
for and in connection with the program, any aspect of the 
program or its implementation. 

 
And I’ll end the quote there. That’s from the first paragraph 
under release. 
 
It just seems to me, Mr. Minister, that this is an exceedingly 
harsh position for our government to be distributing to 
producers. And could you please comment on that, why this 
was allowed into the forms and what’s going to be done about it 
for the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The answer to your first question is 
no, we did not have input. There were certainly protests and 
concerns raised by department officials with the federal 
government, with the CFIA, but to no avail. It’s their program. 
They’re operating it the way that they want. 
 
Now in support of the elk producers here, what the department 
is responsible for is for the testing of elk heads because we want 
to be able to provide CWD-free proof and hence be able to help 
this market to move again. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
somewhat bewildered why we would participate with the 
federal government when there was a North American 
recognized surveillance program for CWD presented by . . . 
(inaudible) . . . recognized by Americans, why we would sign 
onto the federal government program so easily without any 
input into the forms. This is devastating to the industry or has 
the potential thereby to be. Why would we be in a position that 
we would be participating in it? 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There is no North American 
recognized program for CWD. The USDA (United States 
Department of Agriculture) is working at developing approved 
programs, but at this point do not have that fully in place. And 
because we want to see this industry move forward, we would 
help. But certainly at this point there is no North American 
program that we could tap into. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, it’s 
true that there is no program recognized by the various levels of 
government across North America. However industry wide 
there have been voluntary programs for a number of years, 
these being of the highest standards in North America, 
recognized by the industry and by academia. But we’ll leave 
that aside, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The more important question is, why would your department 
administer such forms when you didn’t have an input into what 
they said, and as from the last quote that I read, these forms are 
particularly damaging and have the potential to devastate this 
industry? Why would this Department of Agriculture in 
Saskatchewan participate in this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I’ll say one more time, Mr. 
Chair, that in terms of our involvement with the program, there 
are a couple of facets of that. One of them is that it is a federal 
government program that is designed to deal with the disease 
issue. 
 
And if it is not a government program — the member referred 
to producer programs — but if it is not a government program, 
the problem is that foreign buyers are not interested. They want 
the certification of a broad government program before they’re 
interested in buying. 
 
And the reason why we participate, even though CFIA has not 
given us leave to change any of the program at all, the reason 
why we participate is because we want this industry to move 
ahead. And we have staff in place and we can help through the 
administration of this program. 
 
But I mean, in terms of our motivation for helping, even though 
we don’t have control, we want the industry to move ahead, and 
we can offer this help that will enable that to happen. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would counsel 
the minister that I, as a producer, if I ever had to sign contracts 
that says the operator agrees to assume all risks and 
responsibility for and in connection with the program, any 
aspect of the program or its implementation, relative to what’s 
produced on my farm, any legal counsel would tell me that that 
is not a wise thing to do. 
 
There is no way, Mr. Minister, that this form can at all be 
expected to be positive for this industry. And having simply 
read the form, Mr. Minister, I’m sure that you or your 
predecessor would have had to have been aware of that. This 
does nothing to . . . This is simply an attack on the producer. It 
doesn’t get beyond that, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I’d like to switch my questioning now to some questions 
around the egg marketing board. And with regards to that, Mr. 
Minister, I am particularly interested in how quota is being 

distributed in Saskatchewan and who is capable of receiving 
new quota for egg production? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Excuse me, Mr. Chair, I need some 
clarity. Are you speaking about table eggs? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Okay, Thank you. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, yes, Mr. Minister, from under 
the . . . We’re talking about eggs for consumption, not for a 
hatchery. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The quota for table eggs is allocated 
under basically what is the old system, where a certain amount 
is allocated to existing producers and a certain amount to new 
producers. And that is done basically through the . . . 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could the minister 
please inform the committee when the last time new quota was 
allocated to a producer? 
 
An Hon. Member: — To a new producer. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — To a new producer. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The officials inform me that it hasn’t 
been for some significant time. They can look back on the 
records to find out. But the table egg industry is not growing in 
the province at this point, so there has not been new allocation 
of quota for some significant time. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe that 
it’s been 32 years since any new producer was granted quota. 
But perhaps the minister could answer for me, have any existing 
producers been increasing their quota during the last 32 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The officials informed me that they 
will check to see when the actual last new quota was 
introduced. Really the direction that we’re going is, we want to 
see this industry grow. We want to see more quota come, and it 
is our intention to move to an auction system for quota similar 
to what we have in the chicken industry. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My question was 
not about . . . My last question was not about when we had a . . . 
when the last issuance for quota to a new producer was. The 
question is simply: since that has occurred, have existing 
producers expanded their quota? And I think that that shouldn’t 
be a difficult question for the department to answer. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s my understanding that the changes 
within the industry are primarily with the sale of barns and 
facilities, and that’s what’s led to any changes that have 
happened since the period when new quota was brought in. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So what I’m given 
to understand then is there has been increase in quota for 
existing producers. Is that correct? 
 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — For real details, you may want to go to 
the egg marketing board, but as we understand it the quota has 
not changed over a significant period of years. There have been 
consolidations within the industry but no new quota added. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately, the 
board which you spoke of I believe obtains its jurisdiction 
directly from legislation in this House — the Egg Producers’ 
Board. And I would ask the minister directly — the egg 
marketing board, rather — does the minister have access to the 
egg marketing board’s minutes on an annual basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There is no legislation that requires 
the boards to release their minutes. At this point it’s their 
determination whether or not they want to release them. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Could the 
minister explain to me how The Agri-Food Act is the piece of 
legislation which empowers the egg marketing board? Yet 
where’s the accountability in that? Who does the board report 
to, who are they accountable to, if they’re put directly in 
legislation — because I would hope that it would be to this 
Assembly through this minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s very important for the 
member to know that we do not try and micromanage these 
boards — that really this is an elected board — and we do 
expect the board to be accountable to those producers who elect 
them. And they are overall responsible to the agri-food equity 
Act. If there are members who believe that their board is not 
acting appropriately under that Act, then there is an appeal 
mechanism for them. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t ask for the minister to 
be micromanaging the board. I asked for the piece of legislation 
to be accountable to this House. And can this minister tell me 
what steps he will take for next year or for the coming year to 
have those minutes present so that individuals can review them, 
because I have a letter here, Mr. Minister — it’s from March 
19, signed by yourself — which says they don’t have to report. 
And the people of Saskatchewan and the constituents of 
Kindersley don’t think that that question and answer is 
sufficiently met at this time. 
 
So what will the minister be doing to have the Saskatchewan 
egg marketers report to . . . who will they be accounting to, and 
when in this Chamber, as it is the legislature . . . legislation 
from this Chamber which gives them their mandate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There are a couple of forum. First of 
all, they do annual reports with the major decisions in them. 
And secondly, they have annual general meetings where 
members can question the board. But in terms of provision of 
the minutes, no, and there’s reasons for that, very good reasons 
. . . is that there are a lot of sensitivities in terms of the industry 
in terms of pricing. And if the member doesn’t like that, well 
he’s going to have to work his way through the system and find 
out if there’s a way that he can get those minutes. But it’s not 
coming here. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you for that answer, Mr. Minister. I 
would ask the minister how pricing can be affected in a supply 
management situation where 4 per cent of the national egg 

market is designated to Saskatchewan. So perhaps the minister 
would be kind enough to elaborate on his answer that prices and 
whatnot can be . . . are sensitive material and shouldn’t answer 
to this legislature even though the legislation is something 
which is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that gives them their 
mandate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The issue about sensitivity in pricing 
is not around the formula set by the national program. It really 
is around the sellers into the wholesale market, and we are not 
privy to all of that detailed information that is there with the egg 
marketing board. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With regards to 
the Saskatchewan egg marketing board who seems to be in 
control of this quota, a quota that is supposed to be a public 
trust yet no new producer has been allocated quota for over 32 
years? Only — and the minister has said that they’re 
accountable at their annual meeting — only quota holders are 
able to participate in such meeting. So unregulated poultry 
producers and/or egg producers have no say. And unfortunately 
this Act, The Agri-Food Act which empowers the egg 
marketing board, is accountable to this legislature, which 
represents hopefully the public trust and all producers. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you again: who is the Saskatchewan 
egg marketing board accountable to? Is it to themselves, or is to 
this Legislative Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well as I suspect the member opposite 
knows, this is a supply managed industry; it is not a free market 
industry. In a supply managed industry, there has to be 
assurance that those who are into the domestic production will 
have a livelihood. That’s why it is a supply managed industry. 
And therefore the information is held within the industry itself. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is the minister 
then saying that because it’s a supply management industry, it 
doesn’t have to report to this Legislative Assembly? It’s not 
accountable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It does report to this Assembly, Mr. 
Chair, and we do get those annual reports from them. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you. Will the minister please advise 
this House and this committee whether in the future he will be 
asking for the board minutes relative to new producers coming 
on? If that’s been handed over to them, where is the evidence 
that this quota has not been usurped by a small group under the 
Saskatchewan egg marketing group and held as a public trust, 
but outside of the public’s control? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well as I’ve indicated, this currently is 
in a situation where there has not been a new quota allocated. 
We will undertake to get the date when the last new quota was 
allocated. But I also indicated to the members opposite that we 
are in process of working towards a system where there will be 
an auction of new quota and where we will be pressing for new 
quota, and that’s what we’re looking forward to in the future. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
quota and supply management — could you please from the . . . 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

especially from the philosophical background that members on 
the opposite side come from, how do we make the move from 
quota — which is supposed to be a public trust, which is 
supposed to be allocated relative to percentage of population in 
the country — to suddenly that this is going to go to a market 
aspect, which really excludes new producers? Could you 
explain the philosophical shift and how this is going to allow 
for new producers to enter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We do have some experience in this 
movement with the chicken industry, which remains supply 
managed. The quota is given through the supply-managed 
system, and it is auctioned in blocks so that a producer can be 
viable. And I think also in past experience, there has been a 
sensitivity to those who have been looking for applying for 
quota, and that would be the case in terms of new developments 
in the egg marketing as well. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well that’s very interesting that the minister 
should answer in that way, since his officials were unable to 
come up with when new quota for new producers had been 
allocated, which seems somewhat contradictory. 
 
Mr. Chair, I found these answers by and large unsatisfactory. 
And I’m sorry my line of questioning will have to now be 
finished, but I know that the member from Carrot River Valley 
will have some questions. Thank you. 
 
(16:30) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Two quick 
questions for the minister and the department, if I could. And 
before I ask the first one I want to preface it by saying that it’s 
sort of partly related to the chicken industry, and my colleague 
from Kindersley was asking questions about the egg industry. 
I’m not sure which question should have come first, the chicken 
or the eggs. 
 
However with the recent outbreak of avian flu in British 
Columbia and the depopulation of some 19 million birds and 
with the recent . . . within the last certainly 12 months the cases 
of BSE that have come out of Western Canada, my question for 
the department is, what contingency plans do we have in place 
here in Saskatchewan pending something we hope never 
happens of course, but pending the outbreak of avian flu or 
another case perhaps of BSE within the province? It is 
important that we have those contingency plans in place, Mr. 
Minister, and I would ask what those might be and what costs 
would be attached to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well at the current time, I mean 
recognizing that there is avian flu in North America, there have 
been actions taken by the producers themselves to try and make 
their farms as secure as possible. And we have also been 
encouraging best practices around bio-security and as well as 
that the department has been working on contingency programs. 
If we did have an outbreak here, it comes then under the CFIA 
and they have their plans they bring in place. 
 
Currently, also we have sent someone to British Columbia also 

to look at what is happening with regard to disposal and trying 
to get the best sense of how we organize in case there ever is an 
outbreak here. But right now it’s just in terms of best practices 
for the producers. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Well thank you, Minister. That’s a good 
answer. I appreciate the answer. 
 
Just a supplementary on that same subject before I move on 
then. Is the department aware of any CFIA people or practices 
within Saskatchewan . . . Are we testing at this point in time for 
avian flu within the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it is important to know that not 
just in the area of birds but other areas of animal commerce, 
that we do test dead animals, sick animals, and we test with the 
birds for avian flu and other diseases as well if they are showing 
sickness. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you. On another issue, and not at all 
related to the livestock industry. A number of years ago, in the 
fall of 2002, a great deal of crop was left out in the fields, 
certainly in northeast Saskatchewan, in the Carrot River Valley 
and area. An issue that’s come to my attention over the last 
number of months and in fact very recently is the fact that the 
Crop Insurance Corporation administered the Wildlife Fund that 
deals with the crop that was damaged from wildlife, as it lay out 
throughout the winter of 2002-2003. 
 
I am very aware of many, many numbers — hundreds in fact — 
of producers throughout that area . . . in fact the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena is certainly very well aware of that, 
Canora-Pelly as well. It was a big area that was affected where 
many producers did not receive any compensation for wildlife 
damage when the crop was in fact harvested the next spring. It 
was condemned in many cases and unfit for consumption of any 
kind. 
 
Some producers were compensated through this Wildlife Fund; 
some were not compensated. A great deal weren’t. Some were 
told that they would have their compensation taken back if they 
complained. 
 
Again this fund was administered through the corporation. It 
wasn’t a provincial program, it was a federal program. Some 
producers were told by crop insurance authorities that there was 
no money left in the fund. And yet when we have talked to 
authorities from the federal government, they said there was 
adequate and still is adequate money for that program. 
 
And my question then is a big one. Why have these claims not 
been paid and why is there provision within this . . . with these 
estimates, this budget, to take control and to pay these claims — 
legitimate claims — out? This is an issue that’s ongoing and it’s 
huge. And I think that we as a the provincial government ought 
to get some closure on this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well there are a number of elements to 
the question, and I’ll try and address each of those as they came 
forward. In terms of over-winter loss, unless people had crop 
insurance there is no payment for winter loss, for over-winter 
loss. For waterfowl damage and loss there is value; the value at 
the time of harvest is what is paid. And for those people, all 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

legitimate claims have been paid out. But for those people with 
crop insurance which also covered losses there, they’ve 
generally been satisfied. For those without crop insurance, 
there’ve been some concerns that they felt like they didn’t get 
as full a coverage as they would have liked. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — I would just . . . just in closing my portion of 
this question and answer period, I’d just like to invite the 
minister and his department to come to northeastern 
Saskatchewan, to come to the Carrot River Valley and 
Kelvington-Wadena and meet with producers who really have 
felt that they have not been fairly dealt with. Some include 
those that were in crop insurance and some others. I could 
easily say here today that we could put together hundreds of 
producers who would like to talk to the department about this 
issue, and would be very happy to do that if I could get a 
commitment from the minister that he and his officials would 
come there. 
 
Mr. Chairman, at this point in time though I am going to hand 
off this question and answer to the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. And I would like to thank this House, this 
committee for this time. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome to the 
minister and to the officials. Mr. Minister, I guess I would like 
to finish the questioning that the member from Carrot River 
Valley had started about this issue, because there are many of 
my constituents that are also dealing with the issue. I’ve had 
phone calls in the last while asking what we can do and I’m 
wondering if the minister will commit to meeting with these 
producers. They are really concerned that the big game damage 
was . . . Of course it’s out of their control and there’s many of 
them feel that there was some wrongdoings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It is our understanding that those who 
had crop insurance and were covered for the over-winter loss, 
that in terms of any appeals or appeals mechanism . . . been 
very, very, very few of those. And that most of the concerns are 
for those who did not have coverage by crop insurance and did 
not feel that there was adequate in the big game and waterfowl 
which does not cover the over-winter loss. It’s just a basic 
coverage for the value at harvest time. 
 
And at this point we don’t really have any plan to expand the 
programs. And we would just encourage people, if they’re 
concerned about the losses, to purchase crop insurance and then 
they’ll be covered for the over-winter loss as well, and basically 
get better coverage than what they could just leaving it for the 
big game and waterfowl. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will be taking your 
words back to the people that are concerned about this issue. 
I’m sure that you are aware that within the same area there 
would be some farmers in the very same situation. Some of 
them received coverage. Some of them didn’t receive coverage. 
Their land is connected and they seem to be a difference of 
opinion on why there was damage claims required. And I think 
it’s something that has to be looked into further. So the next 
time we have an opportunity to speak, I’ll be bringing further 

issues up. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to talk to you about an issue that took place 
in the budget, and that is the minimum gasoline purchase of 200 
litres at card locks. And I’m wondering . . . we have concerns 
expressed to us by a number of places. This one is the co-op in 
Kelvington. 
 
And one of their concerns is the cost that will be incurred to 
create the systems and programs to account for and handle the 
purchases. Can the minister tell me, has there been any decision 
made on whether they’ll still be eligible at the end of the year to 
add up purchases that were made at less than 200 litres, so at 
the end of the year farmers can apply for the rebate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In terms of your comments on the 
earlier question, what I would encourage the member to do is to 
have those people who — and both members actually, the 
member from Carrot River as well — if there are people who 
feel that they were not adequately dealt with, if they could write 
to the Department of Agriculture we will undertake to look at 
those claims and see if there is further work that can be done on 
them. 
 
Now secondly you were asking about the fuel, and that would 
be better asked of the Department of Finance who administers 
and makes those decisions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So none of the questions that people have on 
the fuel tax can be asked at this time. Then my question, Mr. 
Minister, will be on the Crown . . . the lease lands. We have a 
number of people that are concerned because they haven’t had 
the opportunity, first of all, for changing the leases over and 
also for grandfathering. 
 
I have a constituent who has bought some land and the person 
they have purchased land from also has lease land and there’s 
no opportunity for them to transfer this . . . leases from these 
people who have the leases to the new owner of the other land. 
What is your department doing? 
 
I am very well aware that the Premier and some of his officials 
have met with individuals who are saying that this is a concern 
that has to be addressed; it’s not just one individual case. And 
what is your department working on to deal with this issue? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — That’s under the 200 per cent size 
restriction. If a person has over 200 per cent of the lands, 
available lands within a municipality, there are restrictions then. 
And that is under active consideration within the department at 
this time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, thank you. And so to give my 
constituent some sense of, of hope, when you’re saying it’s 
being actively looked at, what are you saying? Like, how long 
before you’re going to make your decision? When these rules 
were put into place tens of years ago and the farm sizes were 
considerably different, and with farming changes the way they 
are nowadays, we’re going to have to make some changes to 
allow the larger farms to operate. 
 



May 4, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

These people are very concerned that their operations aren’t 
going to be viable, and I think that if the Minister of Agriculture 
is really aware of what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan it’s 
. . . we’re going to have to move quickly on this issue. Is there 
something that I can tell my constituent? It’ll be dealt with in 
this session? Over the summer? What is your time frame? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The best I can tell you at this point is I 
do expect it to come forward shortly. There is some information 
being put forward to us to examine, so I expect it will come 
forward fairly shortly. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll have to . . . I’ll 
take your exact words back to my constituent, and I’m sure he’s 
going to be very pleased with the idea of the word shortly. So 
I’m . . . I would expect probably then by the end of the month 
you’ll be talking to him, because in my time frame that’s quite 
short. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d like to defer questions over to the member 
from Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair. A few 
specific questions to the minister. As Agriculture minister in the 
midst of BSE and the avian flu, what value do you see in the 
Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization at the U of S? 
And would you say that . . . would it be fair to say that this 
organization is a priority for your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Just basically we believe that the work 
that VIDO (Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization) has 
been doing has been excellent work, and we expect to see 
further developments. Right now there are a number of 
discussions underway about the type of funding, whether 
there’s core funding or grant funding. And we have continued 
to provide quite significant support to VIDO over the years, and 
we anticipate that they will continue to do good work and be 
funded for that work. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well further to 
that, your department did provide $300,000 a year for a number 
of years in addition to about $500,000 a year that was provided 
from the Industry and Resources department. That funding 
started about ten years ago, and that agreement was a five-year 
agreement. So for the last five years, Mr. Babiuk from VIDO 
has said that he’s living a hand-to-mouth existence, spending 
half his time looking for different pots of money to find for 
their operating needs. 
 
I guess my question to the minister is that the best way for a 
world-class researcher to be spending his time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Now just as I indicated, we’re 
certainly looking at . . . I mean we recognize again the value of 
VIDO, and we’re looking at how we can best provide the 
funding for this. Discussion is ongoing. And I think if you have 
some further specific questions, when it comes to Department 
of Learning, that would be the appropriate time to ask this. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well I guess that was one of my further 

questions was, what would be the best department to look at? In 
talking to various VIDO officials, they said that they’ve had 
officials from three different departments visiting their facility 
from Agriculture, from Industry and Resources, and from 
Learning. I certainly intend to bring this up in the Department 
of Learning estimates. 
 
But I guess, just a couple of more questions maybe you can 
shed some light on. 
 
VIDO has been successful in obtaining funding through the 
Canadian Foundation for Innovation for the Level 3 
INTERVAC (International Vaccine Centre) facility. As you 
know, this is a heavily competed for federal fund and it is quite 
an accomplishment for them to be able to receive that money. 
Are any negotiations underway between your department or the 
Department of Learning and Industry and Resources with the 
federal government, with Western Economic Diversification or 
Industry Canada to come up with the eleven and a half million 
dollars for operating that VIDO is looking for? 
 
I believe they’re asking the province for $3.5 million per year, 
which I think is a reasonable amount. But I would, you know, 
ask the minister, as the Minister of Agriculture, to maybe take 
the leadership role from the provincial side and come up with 
the $3.5 million. I don’t think VIDO really worries about where 
it comes from but, if some assurance could be given to them 
that $3.5 million would be coming from the province, I think 
that would allow Mr. Babiuk to sleep a little better at night. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I would like to reaffirm again that our 
government recognizes how valuable VIDO is and how 
important it is to make sure that there is funding. The three 
departments are working together and working together with 
the federal government to try and make sure that it is adequately 
funded in this year and future years. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I will be, 
as I say, bringing it up with the Department of Learning as well. 
 
But in talking to officials from VIDO, I understand that they’re 
in the final rounds of competition for money from the Bill Gates 
foundation which, you know, says something for their 
international prominence. 
 
And I understand that Mr. Babiuk and other officials have just 
returned from a BSE international conference where they and 
the Canadian cattlemen were the only two organizations that 
were asked to provide a presentation from Canada. 
 
So you know, members on this side of the House are very 
concerned about this organization, especially in light of other 
things, like the microgravity drop tower that seemed to fall 
through the cracks; pardon the pun. But it just . . . It didn’t 
come to fruition. 
 
Promises have been made and as you can appreciate, from 
VIDO’s point of view, dealing with three different provincial 
government departments and several federal government 
departments can be very frustrating. But I hope the minister is 
able again to make a commitment that he will steer this thing 
through the provincial government levels. 
 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Once again I would just like to say 
how important we see VIDO not just as stand-alone. I mean, it 
is a national centre. But we look at the whole development that 
there is going on at the U of S, and we’ll look at elements from 
the synchrotron to VIDO to ag-bio incorporated, and all of 
those developments which I think look forward to really a 
prosperous future and to a tremendous expansion of knowledge 
and understanding. 
 
And with that being a national centre, it is our expectation that 
the federal government is going to provide significant funding. 
But I want to also reaffirm that recognizing the value, our 
government will also be — and the university — will be 
carrying their share, and as I indicated earlier, that the 
Department of Learning is lead in terms of the funding for this 
operation. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the serious 
way that you’ve answered the questions. We appreciate that. I 
guess the only other direction we would like to offer is that, you 
know, the government looks at maybe setting aside a certain 
amount of money per year to match the Canadian Foundation 
for Innovation awards that are granted to Saskatchewan 
researchers. I know other provinces do that and it makes it 
easier for the companies to do that. 
 
But I’ll finish my line of questioning now and take it up with 
the Department of Learning. And I’d like to introduce the 
member from Carrot River Valley for further questioning. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I see by the 
clock we have just a very few short minutes left, and I’m glad 
to get the opportunity just to get back up once more. 
 
I have an issue in my constituency, and I’m assuming that 
probably other MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
may have run into the same issue. An outfitter on the shores of 
Tobin Lake made request to make some changes and 
amendments to his business. He got approval from SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), got 
approval from SaskPower, but did not get approval from Sask. 
Ag and Food. 
 
My question to the minister and to the department is why in the 
world would Sask. Ag and Food have an interest in lakeshore 
first of all; and secondly, why would they want to be involved 
in it and how did that happen? And I guess lastly, would the 
department be prepared to get removed their responsibility on 
lakeshore property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Just in terms of the question of why 
land under water in southern Saskatchewan is our responsibility 
and we are also administering that particular area around Tobin 
on behalf of SaskPower . . . But I would ask the member and I 
recognize we’re pretty much at the end of our time, so we’ll 
close with this answer and with an invitation. And that would 
be an invitation to either ask your constituent or yourself to 
send the details to the department. My staff has indicated that 
they will look at the details and respond accordingly. 
 
So I thank you and thank members for their questions and their 

time today and I also want to thank my officials for their time 
and sharing of their expertise and knowledge. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move that we rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
Is this agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................893 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................894 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................894 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................916 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Minds Eye Pictures Wins Genie Awards 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................895 
 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................895 
 Vaccine and Infectious Diseases Organization 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................895 
 Prince Albert YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................896 
 Mental Health Week in Canada 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................896 
 International Youth Week 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................896 
 Watrous Girls Win High Honours 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................897 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Softwood Lumber Tariffs 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................897 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................897 
 Complaint Regarding Treatment of Patient 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................898 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................898 
 Amalgamating School Divisions 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................899 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................900 
 Public Sector Investment in High-Risk Projects 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................901 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................901 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................902 
 Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................902 
 Bill No. 45 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................903 
 Bill No. 46 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................903 
 Bill No. 47 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................903 
 Bill No. 48 — The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................903 



 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Remarks Out of Order 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................904 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................904 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................904 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................904 
 Bill No. 2 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................907 
 Bill No. 7 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................909 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................911 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................913 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................913 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................913 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................914 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................919 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................920 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................921 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


