















































Hansard: May 18, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 41B  TUESDAY, MAY 18, 2004, 7 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1215 
 May 18, 2004 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 35 — The 
Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
is an interesting Bill that we have before us today, Bill No. 35, 
The Crown Corporations Amendment Act. And if we 
understand right what the Bill is to deal with . . . is to make it 
legal for the Crown corporations to . . . well, a number of 
things, but to sponsor the Future is Wide Open campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to the point that the Crown 
corporations were actually funding the Future is Wide Open 
campaign before, have spent money in the past on this program, 
and now a Bill comes forward to make it legal to do so. 
 
Now we’ve also . . . My colleague from Canora-Pelly a couple 
of days ago asked the minister in charge about a legal opinion 
that was obtained to see if this actually was legal before. And 
her response was, well no; we spent taxpayers’ money to get 
that legal opinion, but we’re not sharing it with anyone. And I 
guess we’ve heard that for a number of years out of this 
government, Mr. Speaker, so we find that also very interesting. 
 
I think what comes to the forefront here is that what may have 
happened is that the Crown corporations were sponsoring 
programs such as this. And, Mr. Speaker, they weren’t doing it 
in a legal fashion or with the backing of legislation that was 
already in place. We also understand, Mr. Speaker, that the 
auditor will take a look at this, and he’ll report on this, Mr. 
Speaker. The date that we have to this point is June 3. So 
whether it’s June 3, July 3 or August 3, we’ll be here, Mr. 
Speaker, waiting on that report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of questions on this Bill, but I 
think until we hear the auditor’s summation of what he sees in 
whether the legalities of the sponsoring of programs such as this 
were legal before or not legal, at this point I think we would 
adjourn debate and try and get our questions answered 
according to what the auditor reports. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats that debate on Bill 35 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

Bill No. 36 
 
The Assembly resumed adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 36 — The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 
pleasure to speak to this Bill, Bill No. 36, An Act to amend The 
Provincial Sales Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the recent election campaign, the Premier 
promised that property tax issue could be addressed within the 
financial capability of the government and without raising any 
other taxes. Then after the election campaign was over, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier said that well, yes, we can provide some 
property tax relief as called for in the Boughen Commission, 
but in order to do that we’ll have to raise the PST (provincial 
sales tax) one point. 
 
And then at budget time, Mr. Speaker, the Premier stated that 
well, yes, we’re going to raise the PST one point all right, but 
we still won’t be able to provide any property tax relief, as 
promised in the election campaign and after the election 
campaign and at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) convention, Mr. Speaker, where the 
Premier stated that as far as property tax, the property tax 
burden on the people of Saskatchewan, the status quo was not 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the property taxpayers in Saskatchewan may have 
been willing — although they didn’t expect it in the election — 
they may have been willing to pay another 1 per cent PST to get 
some property tax relief. It doesn’t seem like there should be a 
trade-off there, but in any event, Mr. Speaker, that might have 
gone over a little better. 
 
But now with no property tax relief and still a 1 per cent 
increase in the PST, people are very unhappy about that. They 
feel that they have not been dealt with fairly and openly by this 
government. And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I’d adjourn debate 
on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek, that debate on Bill No. 36 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 37 — The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 
to speak to this Bill — Bill No. 37, The Tobacco Tax 
Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill raises the tax on tobacco products again. 
And while we are against tax increases in principle, we 
obviously won’t be terribly opposed to this Bill as we are 
mindful of the potential positive effects of increasing the price 
of cigarettes. 
 
We do note that while the government will raise an extra 17 
million through this measure, the budget for the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency will only be increasing 6.5 million. However, 
Mr. Speaker, we would like to think that this measure . . . this is 
more of a health measure than a revenue generating measure. 
And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I would move this on to 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance, that Bill No. 37, The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
37, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 37 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 38 — The 
Credit Reporting Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Justice, that Bill No. 38, The 
Credit Reporting Act be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
38, The Credit Reporting Act be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 38 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on House Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for this House to go 
into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The order of business before the 
committee is estimates for Health. Would the minister introduce 
his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m 
pleased to have with me, to my left, Mike Shaw, the associate 
deputy minister; then to his left, Bert Linklater, the executive 
director of regional accountability branch. And then to his left, 
the member from Moose Jaw; and then right behind them, Max 
Hendricks who is the executive director of finance and 
administration; Lawrence Krahn, assistant deputy minister. 
 
Duncan Fisher, the assistant deputy minister is right behind me. 
Roger Carriere, who is the executive director of community 
care branch, and to my right is Lauren Donnelly, who is the 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

executive director of the acute and emergency services branch. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The question before the committee is 
subvote (HE01), Administration. Is the committee ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to take this opportunity on behalf of the official opposition 
to welcome the minister and his officials to deal with the issues 
surrounding health care this evening. 
 
As you can probably anticipate with the announcement of some 
significant changes to the structure of the health system today, 
there are many of our members would like to have further detail 
in terms of what the plan is exactly and how it’s going to affect 
facilities and their communities. 
 
So I would like to offer this opportunity to my colleagues to ask 
questions, beginning with my colleague from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to the minister, 
I’m looking at the news release that your department issued 
listing the various communities that are affected by conversions 
and relocations and consolidations and eliminations of health 
facilities. And there’s one community in my constituency, and 
that happens to be my hometown of Cupar where there are 
some changes going to happen. 
 
I guess I would ask a question in the general nature, of a general 
nature. What measures did your department take to advise the 
local communities prior to this announcement? How much 
advance notice did — say — the mayor or affected people in 
the community get, and what level of detail did they get? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think there was any advance notice 
with the mayor, but clearly in the area the people who were 
working in the facility and others had been in discussion with 
the regional health authority. And I guess it goes back to some 
of the things I said earlier today in this House, which is that we 
were asking the regional health authorities to look at everything 
they were doing right across the whole system. And so there 
were some discussions like that. 
 
I think the other thing is that we’re going ahead with these 
kinds of changes and the suggestions that come from local 
communities will be included in the discussion as we go 
forward with the implementation. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, if I understood you correctly, what you 
said is that the health authorities were working with the people 
that are working in the various facilities. There has been no 
consultation with town councils or village councils. In some 
cases some of the facilities, and particularly the one affected in 
my constituency, is not owned by the health authority but it’s an 
association so it has its own board and that sort of thing. Was 

there any consultation with any of those bodies, whether it be a 
board that operates a facility or a town council where the 
facility is located? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m not sure that I can answer that on 
behalf of the regional health authority, but I think you have to 
understand that the challenge that we had was to work with all 
of the different options that were put forward around this. And 
ultimately we ended up basically saying, well some of these 
possibilities could go ahead and other ones couldn’t, based on 
an assessment across the province. And so the regional health 
authorities were put in a bit of a bind as well because they 
didn’t know sort of how broadly this would be after we looked 
at the total provincial picture. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So what you’re saying is that the responsibility 
was left with the regional health authorities and they were to 
contact whoever in the community. Because as you can well 
imagine, when there’s an announcement of this nature, whether 
it’s a closure of two beds or closure of a complete wing and that 
sort of thing, in smaller, rural communities that’s . . . you know, 
it’s certainly the whole community is interested. And so it was 
left up to the regional health authorities to contact the 
community and let them know that this announcement was 
coming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think to be fair to the regional health 
authorities, they were, you know, willing to work with 
communities, but practically we said no, don’t do that until 
we’ve made a broad, province-wide decision. And we did that 
and basically didn’t give the regional health authorities a lot of 
time to go and talk to the people in the community. And I 
appreciate the fact that you’ve identified that in this particular 
community it’s two long-term care beds, but even that makes a 
difference in how the perceptions of the things that happen in 
the community. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not only the closure of 
two long-term care beds. It’s the relocation and consolidation of 
health services from one . . . the health centre will be closed and 
relocated in the long-term care home, and I think . . . I talked to 
the mayor of the community at noon and she told me that she 
got a call at 11:30 with very little detail and she was, to put it 
mildly, a bit upset. And so I basically took the news release and 
said, well this is all I know, and read the bit of information that 
was in your news release. And I would think that, you know, 
the community would certainly appreciate it, and I can only 
speak for the community in my constituency, but I would 
suggest that probably if other communities were handled in 
same way, I would think that they would have appreciated a bit 
more information and, you know, a bit more advance notice on 
that. 
 
Having said that, has your department or the regional health 
authority — well confine my comments to the community of 
Cupar and the changes that are being planned there — have you 
got figures that will tell us what type of operational savings 
there will be by consolidating the two . . . the health centre and 
relocating it in the long-term care facility? What type of annual 
operational savings will that accomplish? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, the kinds of 
information that we have relate to the fact of having one facility 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

rather than two, so there are the operating costs of operating in 
one facility other than two. The actual number of jobs affected 
is point six of a full-time equivalent job, and the benefit of that 
. . . elimination of that is about $50,000 in the calculations that 
we used. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, the only thing you can tell us here 
tonight is that there is point six of a job that will be lost and 
you’re estimating that there will be about $50,000 worth of 
savings by the consolidation. 
 
Currently there are two facilities that are being operated. The 
health centre is in the former hospital, a reasonably large 
building for the amount of services that are being provided in 
out of that facility. I would think that . . . I understand that the 
operational budget of that, the health centre alone, was 
somewhere approaching $200,000. So are you telling me 
tonight that you’re only going to achieve $50,000 worth of 
savings, annual savings by having this consolidation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that the member has 
misunderstood what I said. Point six of a job, that’s about 
$50,000 on an operating cost. So that only relates to the job. 
The costs around the consolidation of the building are 
substantially more, as you have indicated. 
 
One of the challenges in the first year is that you won’t get 
savings because we will end up having to make some 
adjustments and some capital expenditures. And so what we’re 
looking at, what we do know from experience from facilities 
right across the province, that integrating facilities does provide 
substantial cost savings. But I don’t have that specific amount 
because we’re also then looking at what kinds of costs there are 
to do a consolidation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, I would think that then when your 
officials, the health authority officials are looking at a 
consolidation that they must look at, once the consolidation is 
achieved, there is obviously a cost. 
 
And that will be my next question as to what type of additional 
costs are we looking at this year to achieve this consolidation. 
And once that consolidation is achieved, there must be some 
annual savings in operations down the road. And in order to 
make these decisions I would think that somebody must have 
done some calculation and some cost estimates as far as what 
type of operational savings there will be once the consolidation 
is achieved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the number may be in the order of 
$200,000 that’s involved here on an annual basis. But part of 
the challenge is working with the community around the 
consolidation project. What do you do with the existing services 
that are there? Which facility are they provided in? Is there 
some other appropriate use that can be decided with the 
community for space in the building that’s where the service is 
moved over to the long-term care facility? And a lot of those 
kinds of things are ongoing and will be worked out with the 
regional health authority. 
 
And so as it relates to what we’re announcing now, we looked 
at some things which were going to, you know, eventually be 
done and this was clearly one that the regional health authority 

was looking at. And so we’re going to basically allow them to 
go ahead and do that, but they will do it together with the 
community. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So what you’re saying is nobody seems to have 
those firm numbers at this point in time. There’s a number of 
things that need to take place before you can come up with 
some firm figures as far as annual operational savings and as far 
as additional capital costs that will need to be incurred so that 
that consolidation can take place. And that seems to be a 
progress in work at this time. 
 
Also I would like to draw to your attention a news release that 
indicates, in the case of Cupar, that there will be no effect on 
services. That isn’t correct then, Minister. With the 
consolidation, currently there is a lab in the health centre that 
provides the . . . well a number of services including X-ray. 
And I have to admit I think it’s only three days a week or 
whatever, but what will be lost will be that X-ray service. So 
there actually is a loss in service to the community because the 
X-ray equipment is old and the community has been told that to 
provide the X-ray service in the new health centre would be too 
costly and that sort of thing. So I would just like to correct the 
misinformation that you have there. 
 
I think what I should do, Minister, because obviously I don’t 
think you’re aware of what has happened in the community 
over the last number of months, and I think I should bring you 
up to speed actually. And it seems to me that the regional health 
authority is working in one area and the Department of Health 
is not up to speed or else has intervened in this whole process. 
And I think the latter is true. 
 
The community for quite a while, for quite a number of years 
actually has felt that the current . . . the way health services are 
being delivered in the town of Cupar are very inefficient. 
Operating that large building as a health centre just didn’t make 
sense to most people — I mean the heating costs, lighting, all 
those sorts of things. 
 
And in fact there was a study done, I believe by Mr. Boyd in the 
late ’90s, that suggested there be a consolidation of the health 
care services in the community. And in fact I informally 
discussed some of that with a former minister of Health, the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana. And the community is 
certainly, like I said, is onside. 
 
In the early part of 2004 there was communication between the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority and the community of 
Cupar to lay down a process to accomplish this consolidation. 
And what was to happen and what has started, actually, was that 
the health authority has reviewed the circumstances in the 
community and were to bring back to the community, to the 
town council and to the board of directors of the long-term care 
home and any other interested parties, at a public meeting, 
alternatives. 
 
One was to simply relocate and close some beds in the 
long-term care home. And the second alternative was to add 
some additional space so that there would not be any loss of 
beds. And that was to be then discussed and an agreement was 
to be arrived at. 
 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

Now it seems to me that this whole process . . . And the 
community was proactive in this then because they could see it 
just didn’t make any sense and they felt that they should do 
something to make it happen, and the health authority agreed 
and so on. But now it seems like this whole process has been 
short-circuited by your department, Minister, with the 
announcement that there will be a loss of two beds. 
 
So my question to you, Minister, tonight is, will you allow that 
process that was agreed to earlier this year prior to any budget 
announcements or anything like that — it started back in 
February, as a matter of fact — will you allow that process to 
continue and let the health authority and the community 
complete their process of consultation and negotiation so that 
the community is happy and we would expect that the health 
authority is happy with the process? 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d like to thank the member for that clear 
explanation of what is happening in that particular community. 
And what I would say is that the announcement today is an 
affirmation of what the regional health authority was proposing 
to do in that community. So that practically, the concern about 
how the regional health authority will work together with the 
community is affirmed by this announcement today. 
 
We had challenges right across the province. And part of our 
job here in Saskatchewan Health was to make sure that there 
weren’t decisions made in one regional health authority that 
might cause dramatic problems in the neighbouring one or in 
the overall service in the province. And so the explanation 
that’s been given here really affirms that it is a process, and it’s 
an ongoing process in communities. 
 
And so that practically one of the challenges we have when we 
deal with budgets overall, on a province-wide basis, you take a 
snapshot on one point and say, well yes that should proceed. 
And so I would be pleased to confirm that the regional health 
authority and the processes that are going there together with 
the whole community in Cupar and surrounding communities, 
should continue the way it has been. 
 
Mr. Hart: — But, Minister, by your department stating that 
there will be a loss of two beds, which I find rather interesting 
because the regional health authority had said that if there was 
no additional space provided that they would need to close four 
beds, which the community certainly wasn’t willing to accept 
. . . So I guess there’s a whole number of questions around how 
you’re going to accomplish, you know, the consolidation of 
services by only closing two beds. You know, I think there’ll be 
a lot of discussions that need to take place on that. 
 
But however, the process wasn’t complete. It was just starting. 
And I think, just to provide you with a bit of additional 
information, back in 1993 the community had asked the health 
board of the time if they would make this consolidation because 
they had . . . there was someone came to the community and 
was very interested in buying the hospital and turn it into a 
private personal care home. And the answer was no, it was not 
for sale at that time. That was back in ’93. 
 
Now there’s been estimates from people in the area, in the 

community that are very knowledgeable with the operation of 
the health centre that said there could have been annual savings 
of at least $100,000 per year since ’93, and there could have 
been a viable private personal care home in the community. But 
that didn’t happen. And the community, like I said, was very 
supportive of that initiative. In fact they were very disappointed 
that that didn’t happen. 
 
Now we’ve got a situation where we may have this empty 
building and really . . . I am told that there really isn’t anyone 
really interested in the building and so we’re going to have a 
very sound structure that is reasonably expensive to operate if 
there isn’t any viable operation happening in it, sitting in this 
community — and a blown opportunity, Minister. 
 
And I think with the past history, the town of Cupar and 
surrounding area needs to have some special consideration 
because they were proactive and they wanted your government 
to make some changes and the government wouldn’t go along 
with it. They said okay, things have gone on enough. Early in 
this year they said, let’s initiate . . . there was discussions 
initiated and they were very, very agreeable to that. 
 
I think the community of Cupar is going to demand that the 
process as agreed to, way before any budget talk and way 
before any of these announcements came along, that they’re 
going to demand that that process be allowed to continue to its 
fruition. And I am here to serve you notice, Minister, that that’s 
what the community of Cupar wants. And I think they deserve 
it because they took the bull by the horn and they didn’t sit 
back. They realized that there was inefficiencies there and they 
said, let’s spend our health care dollars more wisely. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that further explanation. 
And I appreciate the willingness of the community to work 
together around a project which they’ve identified for a long 
time. 
 
I would just advise the member that in the list of facilities that 
are attached here, this tried to describe the change that was 
happening in a very few short words and so I recognize that 
there may be some things that aren’t quite exactly described and 
that practically the regional health authority and the community 
will continue to work and we will make sure that we understand 
fully as they move forward to make sure that the services are 
provided up in that area. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, since the 
Herbert hospital is to be integrated into the long-term care 
facility and the number of beds reduced by seven, and since this 
facility has handled the overflow from the Swift Current 
Hospital on many occasions, where do you think these people 
are going to find hospital beds after this facility is reduced by 
seven beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I thank the member for the question about 
the Herbert facility. What the regional health authorities try to 
do and what we try to do on a province-wide basis is look at the 
average daily census, and in fact the numbers of beds that are 
occupied on an annual basis. And I know earlier the member 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

referred to the peaks that cause some challenges. 
 
But in the facility in Herbert the average daily census for the 
last couple of years, which we don’t have the figures for ’03-04, 
but for ’01-02 and ’02-03 there were about just under eight beds 
per day. And I think the number of acute beds was 13. And so 
there’s anticipation that the seven beds will probably match 
that. 
 
The question was also asked about what would happen. Well 
the closest hospital’s clearly in Swift Current and the occupancy 
rate there is about 68 per cent or average daily census of about 
54 out of 79 beds. And so there is some capacity there. 
 
The challenges come when there are flu or some other kinds of 
things that come into a community and then we look at the 
whole, the whole system to try to figure out how to provide that 
care. 
 
But over the last number of years, it’s fairly clear that there’s 
been significant capacity available at the Herbert hospital and 
so this reduction will be manageable, we think. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, does the department have any 
parameters as regards the distance, ideal distance or maximum 
distance between hospital facilities in the province, since 
Herbert is currently the only hospital that exists between Moose 
Jaw and Swift Current on the busy Trans-Canada Highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific question around the hospital 
beds relates to an in-patient service, people who are there for a 
longer term. But as far as the emergency service, we’re 
maintaining that 7-day-a-week, 24-hour service at Herbert. It’ll 
just be at a consolidated or integrated facility. 
 
So as it relates to some of the concerns around emergencies, the 
same service will be there, only it will be at this new location. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well I guess, Mr. Minister, my concern is with 
the unusual events and emergencies that do occur and in fact 
just peak seasons for hospital bed usage and that’s . . . I don’t 
know how that’s going to be addressed. I still don’t know how 
that’s going to be addressed. 
 
But let’s move on, Mr. Minister. Since the Herbert Nursing 
Home is always full and there’s a perpetual waiting list for beds 
in that facility, where do you see these people finding long-term 
care beds in the region? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — My understanding is that in Herbert there 
is no wait-list at this particular facility, that there aren’t people 
that are waiting to get into the facility. The sort of bed ratio, 
which is what we use in the calculation, is about the provincial 
average; it’s not way out of line. 
 
What we try to do in many, in all communities is to have sort of 
a mix of sort of condominiums — independent kind of living 
spots with some assistance, whether it’s home care with some 
of the assisted living things, then personal care homes, then 
long-term care homes, and there are . . . I know a personal care 
home in Herbert that sort of complements the long-term care 
home. And so the perspective is, I think, that the longer term 
plans will work based on the load in that particular community. 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, it’s certainly my information 
and from people who should know in Herbert, that there 
certainly is a waiting list for that facility. I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, are you concerned that with the downscaling of that 
facility by 15 beds that we’ll find people who should be in that 
facility being put in beds in acute care facilities instead because 
they can’t be looked after at home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that looking at all the factors in 
Herbert and surrounding area the mix, as described in the 
changes that are to be made, is appropriate for the demography 
as we go forward. And that’s one of the things that the people 
who work within this long-term care area continually are 
watching because we don’t want to be in a position where we 
put a lot of money and invest it in facilities that 5 or 10 years 
from now aren’t being used. 
 
But at the same time we continue to monitor this. And if the 
member has information or the community has information that 
should be included in this, which includes looking at what will 
the demand be 5 or 10 or 15 years from now, that’s information 
we’re quite willing to look at. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You mentioned 
demographics. I’m wondering, how do our demographics of 
75-year-old-plus stand up as a percentage of the population of 
southwest Saskatchewan as compared to other parts of the 
country and as compared with long-term care beds in other 
areas? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We actually do look at the population of 
75-year-olds and older across the province. In the year 2001, 
the total number for the province was 74,791. The population 
for the whole province of 75-plus will peak in the year 2006 
with 76,471. And then it’s anticipated that there will be decline 
in this population down to just under 73,000. So in effect we’ll 
have a flat line over about a 10-year period and then it will 
increase a little bit, but never come back to the peak that we will 
have in 2006. 
 
As it relates to the Cypress Health Region, which is where the 
Herbert hospital is located, it’s anticipated that the peak year 
will be 2006. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you have similar 
demographics for age 85 for the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We don’t have it available with us here 
this evening but it is the kind of information that we could 
probably obtain if the member would so desire. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would appreciate 
that. You see, this is where I believe that your department is 
making mistakes in your calculation. The average age of entry 
in the Herbert Nursing Home is 83 years of age and I know that 
your calculations have all been based on 75 years of age. There 
is hardly anybody in Herbert Nursing Home that’s 75 years of 
age. Fortunately people in the Southwest live good, long lives. 
 
Mr. Minister, have the costs of renovating the facilities to 
include the hospital in the nursing home facility been 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

established? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The initial estimates — and as you can 
well expect that this isn’t involving the various consultants who 
might be involved — would be that it’s somewhere around half 
a million dollars but possibly up to $800,000. And so that’s the 
estimate. 
 
And if I may refer to your previous comment about the cohort 
of 85-plus, well practically when we’re doing the planning, 
because it takes a while for the facilities to get completed, we 
would use the 75-plus in anticipation that as the planning spills 
forward, many of those people who are now 75 would be 80 
and on up. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How much will the 
annual savings and plant costs be from integrating these 
facilities? We’ve already established it’ll cost probably 
800,000, and that’s not including some consulting fees I think 
you said, to make the renovations. And so I’m interested in 
what the annual savings will be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s anticipated in this particular facility 
it’ll be about $1 million a year in saving by consolidating the 
two facilities. That means that if it costs us about $800,000 with 
the capital, if that’s sort of the maximum, we should be able to 
recover that cost within one year. And the operating costs 
include staffing costs as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, of that $1 million that you 
speculate that the department will be saving a year, what 
percentage of that or what part of that is plant costs and what 
part would be in wages, employee costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What we know on a system-wide basis, 
that our costs in health care about 73 per cent relate to staffing 
and the other 27 per cent relate to facilities. We anticipate that it 
would be similar to that in this particular operation. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — At that rate, Mr. Minister, you’d have to save 
$730 in salaries a year. How many people are you going to lay 
off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We anticipate there’d be approximately 
20 full-time equivalent jobs. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to talk about 
the facility bed closures in Davidson. I believe you and me were 
there when we did the ribbon cutting a few years ago. And I 
think in the speech there you failed to mention that you’d be 
cutting a quarter of their long-term care beds is basically what 
you’re doing to that facility is cutting a quarter of the long-term 
care beds. 
 
What is the reason for slicing that many bed closures in 
Davidson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are a number of different pieces of 
information that come into working and making up this 
decision. I think the one factor is that in the Heartland Region, 

there are no waiting lists at all for long-term care. Another 
factor is that this particular wing is the old wing, and it’s below 
the code. In other words, it’s not up to the same status as the 
parts of the building that were there when we did the opening a 
few years ago. 
 
And also, the overall capacity for long-term care within this 
region is pretty close to the provincial average that we have, 
which we use as a guideline around the number of long-term 
cares in the region after we have reduced it by 10 in this facility. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — You talk about some of the rooms in that wing 
not being up to code. Can you explain that a little more to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the explanation lies in the fact that 
this wing, which is part of the former Prairie View Lodge, was 
— it was built in 1965 — so that’s almost 40 years ago. It 
hasn’t been renovated since it was constructed, and it has a 
number of deficiencies such as small rooms, they have shared 
bathrooms, there’s poor heating, and the wheelchair access is 
inadequate. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On that, that would 
be just on a few of the rooms, the shared bathrooms. I have 
been into the wing there and some of the rooms are a little 
small. But in fact my grandmother is in one of the beds in that 
old wing and she even finds it nice because that wing, that 
particular room, you can actually open a window, you know, 
and get some a little bit of fresh air. She enjoys it quite well 
there in that wing. 
 
And I know it was raised to me quite a while ago there that they 
were worried that they would close it. But they were hoping 
that they would be still using it for when there is an excess of 
bed users in Davidson, because I know that they use them beds 
last. For right now that there is 36 beds filled in Davidson, so 
there is going to be a shortage of six beds right now. Where are 
you planning on putting them six people out of Davidson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There wouldn’t be any plans to have 
people moved out of their rooms. But as the time goes on, there 
are more rooms available and basically we would be having 
new residents go into the other wings and slowly stop using this 
particular wing. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, that was my train of thought. And 
also I talked to some of the people there, and that’s what they 
are worried about, that they would be closed immediately. But I 
am glad that you will be, as time goes on, maybe not say 
reusing them beds and slowly just eliminating them as they 
become empty. 
 
I guess question is, what will you be doing with that particular 
wing?. Do you have any plans right now for long-term usage of 
that wing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The plans would be the Heartland Health 
Region’s plans, but my understanding is that at this point they 
will just close it down. But if some other options should 
become available I’m sure that they’d be willing to be looking 
at that. But practically they’re planning to basically just use the 
newer rooms in the facility. 
 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

Mr. Brkich: — So I understand as the beds become empty they 
just won’t be used, that they won’t be actually trying to shuffle 
some people around in the next month or that’s the 
understanding. 
 
Okay. Another call I had when I was talking to the people there 
was, will there be any immediate job loss connected with the 
announcement of closing that particular wing down? Because if 
you’re not going to be actually be moving some of the people 
out of the facility, you will still need the staff there to maintain 
your 36 people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — On an annualized basis, when the wing is 
no longer being used, there will be three full-time equivalent 
jobs that will no longer be required, which is an annual saving 
of in excess of $100,000 on an ongoing basis. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another point I’d 
like to talk about, Davidson. You did announce the bed closure; 
there was quite a bit of concern because just, I think it was two 
weeks ago if that, there was notice put out for home care that 
there would be no overtime. So basically they weren’t going to 
be going out to home care on the weekends from what I 
understood for a while. So then all of a sudden these bed 
closures are announced. 
 
And also I just had a letter or two concerned about no home 
care being done on the weekends for the next month. Can you 
give me a status on the status of home care for Davidson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have the detail here about that 
particular decision. Those are Heartland Health Region 
management decisions around how to provide home care in a 
particular area. But by you raising it here then we’ll, you know, 
raise it with them as well. 
 
Practically I know that often there are some challenges around 
providing home care across some of the broader areas. But I 
think we have to really commend the people who do that work 
because they often travel quite long distances and then provide 
very good care, which allows for many of our elders to spend 
most of their elderly years in their home and not in a long-term 
care facility. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s our thought, 
my thought, and the thoughts of the people in that area. So they 
were quite concerned when the two kind of come together 
because it does take a lot of pressure off long-term care beds in 
that facility because I know people are cared at home. But some 
of them just needed that little extra help once a day that keeps 
them in their own home for quite a few years before they 
actually have to move into a long-term care. 
 
So I’m hoping that that’s a program that is kept going for quite 
a number of years and basically no cuts. Because I know on the 
weekend . . . It was like they say, if you need it Monday — the 
care — you need just as much on a Saturday and a Sunday, you 
know, as you do during the week, Monday to Friday. 
 
Another question I’ll put to you — and it’s being put to me — 
is will there be any other bed closures or cuts in the Davidson 
hospital coming up? 
 

(20:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s not anticipated that there would be 
any other change at this facility, and that was one of the reasons 
that we set out a list like we did. But we do know that on the 
operational side, as you were raising, that the health authorities 
are still looking at how to deal with operational costs cuts, as 
opposed to facility changes. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
And, Mr. Minister and your officials, thank you. I appreciate 
the opportunity to ask some questions on behalf of some of my 
constituents, and they are people from the Foam Lake area. 
 
I don’t know if you had the opportunity to watch the news 
tonight, but if you did then I imagine you saw the mayor from 
the town of Foam Lake. And to say that he was frustrated is 
probably the understatement of the year. 
 
They have a facility that has been . . . They’ve been advised 
today that their patients from their hospital will be moved . . . 
Move patient and residence services of health care centre to 
Jubilee Nursing Home. Home care and public health offices 
will remain at the health care centre. Reduction of four acute 
care beds — it says they haven’t been used since about 2002 — 
11 long-term care beds, and a respite bed in the health care 
centre. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that one of the things that your department 
talks about quite a lot is the integration of departments and the 
relationship between various departments when it comes to the 
work that a government is supposed to do. I am wondering if 
you realize what happens in a town when they actually lose the 
health care facility. There is no opportunity for growth. The 
economic growth is gone. 
 
And building a new home, the opportunity for somebody to see 
this town as a place where they can call it home isn’t going to 
happen any more, whether it’s for a senior or whether it’s for 
somebody who’s going to start a business. I know as a business 
person myself — when I had a life — I was . . . there was no 
chance that you’d consider a town viable if there wasn’t some 
kind of health care services if you were going to have a 
business. 
 
So my first question to you is, when we talk about rural 
revitalization and the opportunity to grow Saskatchewan, do 
you look at this issue when it comes to closures of health 
centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I thank the member for that question 
because I think that’s exactly what we have done in this 
particular announcement today, is that basically there are 
changes in the kind of health care that’s provided even in these 
12 communities. But all of the communities will retain health 
services. 
 
One of the challenges that we have, as we look at the resources 
that we have, is how do you use those resources in a particular 
region and in the province. And sometimes the suggestions 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

come forward to just eliminate health services completely in 
communities. 
 
As I indicated before, I think that when we’re looking at these 
facilities from a health perspective, we are also looking at them 
in conjunction with what kind of educational facilities are there, 
what kind of communication facilities — the highways, the 
SaskTel kind of services, these kinds of things — because we 
know that all of those things have to work together for the 
community to have a base to build their local economy on. And 
so practically what we’ve been trying to do in this 
announcement, but also in how we’ve looked at facilities right 
across the province, is recognize the big pressures for people to 
cut taxes and reduce the amounts of money that come into the 
provincial system, but at the same time provide services as a 
good base for the whole, the whole of the local community. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, with the resources that your 
department and your government has when it comes to tracking 
information, can you tell me when the last time was that there 
was actually a home built or a business started in a town 
without a hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I wouldn’t have that information within 
the Health department, but I think, you know, that’s a fair 
question. But I think that also there are, there are some 
communities that don’t have health facilities where there has 
been some building going on but often they’re in relative 
proximity to other towns or cities that do have health care 
facilities. Because we all know, practically, that you end up 
making decisions like that based on the kinds of services that 
are available. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure that if your 
department or whatever department would be involved in this 
kind of information would check it, I would think it would be 
next to nil. There is no chance for a town or a community to 
grow if they don’t have the basics, and the basic is what a 
government is supposed to provide and that is health care 
centres, education, and infrastructure — a highway where they 
can get to work. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m aware that they had to close down the actual 
hospital part because of a nursing shortage a couple of years 
ago, but the mayor and the people from the town are telling me 
that this is something they would have liked to work with 
within the health district but they haven’t had the opportunity. It 
seemed like it was easy to just say no, it isn’t going to work. 
 
We do know that the Jubilee nursing home, though, has 48 beds 
and they have a waiting list. Can you tell me what kind of 
waiting list they have in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I am pleased to provide the 
information. My understanding that the wait-list for the Jubilee 
lodge right now is eight people, and the wait-list for the whole 
of the Sunrise Health Region is 52 people, and sort of the 
average waiting time for placement is about five weeks. 
 
But we also know that there is a project going forward in 
Yorkton which was also on the news, I think the night before, 
which is the new long-term care facility next to the Yorkton 
regional hospital. So that that will provide further capacity in 

that particular area. But I think the simple answer is that there is 
a wait-list at the Jubilee lodge of eight and that is something 
that we’re aware of. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure that there are enough 
people on your side of the House to know . . . have rural roots 
enough to know that when people have been in a town all their 
lives, they’re raised in the town, and their family grew up in the 
town, when they want to retire they don’t want to move to a 
town that’s 50 or 60 or 100 miles away. And I know that that’s 
what’s happening in this area because some of my colleagues 
have had people that have to move to Foam Lake from as far 
away as Saltcoats. 
 
This isn’t any kind of a lifestyle that not only do they want to 
have or should we expect that they would have to have. The 
pioneers and the people that have built this province shouldn’t 
have to be expected to move around the province in their golden 
years to find a place that our government decides is just some 
place to dump them as they get older. And I think it is the kind 
of frustration that we’re seeing right around this province when 
we’re just looking at numbers. People aren’t just numbers. 
 
And the people in the Foam Lake area, you’re saying there’s 
just eight of them. I’ll be delighted see if that’s what the people 
in the Foam Lake are telling me are on the waiting list. But I’m 
wondering if those people are . . . if there’s names in other parts 
of that region as well where we’re saying these people have to 
have a home so we’re just going to put them someplace. The 
frustration is growing and with this kind of announcement, I can 
assure you it’s not just the mayor of Foam Lake but it’s the 
community that’s saying, we’re being gutted again. 
 
Mr. Minister, the waiting lists we have discussed, and I’m 
wondering if your department is aware of the fact that this 
health district took away the opportunity for grocery stores to 
actually supply some of the food that was used not only in the 
hospital but in the Jubilee nursing home this year. It used to be 
that quite a few hundred thousand dollars were purchased in the 
town and not . . . in the last couple of months they decided there 
would be more cost savings by buying it all in Yorkton and 
shipping it out to Foam Lake. Is your department aware of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is yes, that the department is 
aware of it, and I’m aware of that. 
 
And this points out one of the challenges. We have $1.7 billion 
that we spend in the regional health authority budgets, and we 
ask them to make the best use of those dollars right across the 
board. As I said previously, approximately 73 per cent of that 
money relates to staff and the benefits and salaries and things 
like that. 
 
Other areas, though, we ask them to use their ability to try to 
purchase things at the best price possible. I understand that in 
this particular region that they went to ordering a bigger amount 
of certain products, bakery products and that which allowed 
them to get a better price. That’s something that they’re trying 
to do so that they can make the operation run with the funds that 
they have. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, you may want to be aware then 
that the local grocery stores, the local businesses were never 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

given the opportunity to bid on those businesses, on all of the 
products. We didn’t have the chance to see if they could 
actually bring in material and perhaps, for goodness’ sake, 
unbelievably maybe even supply the town of Yorkton. Why 
would we always think that the largest centre could provide 
something at a better cost? 
 
These businesses were just told that they would no longer have 
the opportunity to supply goods to their local town. And we’re 
talking about milk and bread and bananas being shipped out 
from Yorkton because supposedly there’s some cost savings. 
And at the same time when we’re talking about the big picture 
of keeping a community going, we’re saying that these people 
didn’t have an opportunity. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the cost is going to be to 
move patients and residents to the nursing home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding it would be a 
minimal cost. If the movement takes place by attrition, or 
mostly by attrition, there probably wouldn’t be any cost. But 
then if there are some patients that are moved, it would be done 
with the appropriate facility, most likely using the local 
ambulance. And that would be a cost that would be paid for by 
the regional health authority. Some of the furniture and other 
costs, that would be a relatively minimal cost for a move within 
that particular town. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’ve been advised that there’s 
actually been . . . they’ve been told to resubmit a cost, a capital 
cost proposal to the health district. Can you tell me what that’s 
about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — My understanding would be that when 
you integrate a facility there will be some costs to have some of 
the services that were previously in the health centre, in the new 
building, and they will all be in one place. And so what would 
be requested would be, well what are the anticipated kinds of 
things that would need to be done at that facility to 
accommodate some of the services from the health centre? 
 
We have information about these kinds of construction projects 
from right across the province, and part of what would happen 
then is the regional health authority would get some advice for 
some of the people in Saskatchewan Health who work on 
capital projects. So that would be what the request would be 
about, is what kinds of things you need to do to accommodate 
some of the services. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the 
anticipated annual savings will be by closing down this facility? 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s anticipated that the annual savings 
will be about $1 million and it will affect about 20 full-time 
jobs. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I would think that $1 million 
isn’t the 20 full-time jobs, so at some time can you provide the 
breakdown of how the million dollars is actually going to be 
saved? 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that the answer will be the same as 
I gave to the member who asked about the Herbert situation, 
which is very similar. And it usually works out that the 
employee costs are around 73 per cent and that the remaining 
27 per cent relate to the other operating costs. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, just so you’re aware, I’ll tell you 
that the Foam Lake area, to say that they’re unhappy and 
displeased and frustrated and saying that it’s genocide for the 
town is probably the feeling that’s happening out in that area 
right now. And when I spoke to the mayor and to some of the 
people today, what they are telling me is what they believe their 
town needs is the doctor that they have right now and a nurse 
practitioner so that they have 24-hour service in their 
community. 
 
I’m not sure what the health district plans are right now, but I 
can tell you that’s what the community wants and that’s what 
they need to remain viable, in their opinion. And I think it’s 
very important that some of the local people’s input is sought 
when it comes to making the decision that’s going to put a 
stamp on the future of the town. 
 
So that’s what we’re asking for. That’s what we’ll be making 
sure your department is well aware that we need to ensure that 
Foam Lake remains a viable community. And in the next short 
while I’m sure that you’ll be having not only delegations but a 
lot of pressure on your department to ensure that that is what 
the town of Foam Lake receives from your government. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member asked a question about what 
possibilities there are. It’s my understanding that the Sunrise 
Health Region, working together with the people involved with 
the primary care health centres across the province, have 
identified that Foam Lake is possibly a site where a primary 
care team could work. And so we anticipate that it would make 
sense for the local people to work together with the regional 
health authority as they look at what kinds of services can be 
provided over the long term. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have a 
few questions regarding health care as well. 
 
And in your announcement today, Mr. Minister, you talked 
about putting more money into health care on one hand, and 
you also talk about the fact that the districts still have to find 
$20 million worth of savings. And when everything is said and 
done, there’s actually more savings and more money, than there 
is money going into the health care services. 
 
When we talk about savings, Mr. Minister, there’s an issue that 
comes up every time when you . . . no matter where you, who 
you, when you’re talking to people. And it arises from the fact 
that people still do not believe that we’ve really have found 
efficiencies in how we deliver health care services in the 
administrative level and as we’ve amalgamated health care 
boards. 
 
And you can take a look at . . . come out to any one of the 
health care districts, certainly in the area I represent. There isn’t 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

a person that wasn’t involved in administrative before that isn’t 
in some position of administration in the new facility in many 
cases. And in many cases some of those positions are actually 
much higher paid than they were in previous years. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when we talk about savings and efficiencies, 
has your department ever even looked at some of the savings 
that could be achieved if you look at home care? As a result of 
the most recent amalgamation services and the fact that the 
districts and the people, the employees in those districts had to 
look at different union structures — because of the fact that in 
the larger district they had to decide which union they wanted to 
be under — and it’s created a lot of controversy. It certainly 
created some problems in the fact that, for example, home care 
workers, home care workers living in an area that used to 
provide it now are driving down the road to get their 
assignments and maybe having driving further afield. 
 
And it doesn’t matter where you go. Montmartre was a good 
example recently where there was home care workers actually 
right in the community but are actually sent elsewhere and 
people brought in from, say, Grenfell, for example. And it’s a 
stormy day. And you have to ask yourself. People are saying, 
well if they’re travelling, that’s a cost. 
 
Aren’t there ways . . . and I suppose what it comes down to is 
talking to the unions and having them sit down and find out 
ways they can find efficiencies so that those savings can be 
passed on — we can actually provide, put the money into direct 
patient care. 
 
Same thing goes with nurses, Mr. Minister. We hear of 
overtime, Mr. Minister, and yet I don’t know. You may have 
had . . . my colleagues and I have had young people coming to 
our office with nursing degrees and they’re telling us they’re 
just having a difficult time getting full-time employment. 
 
Are these some of the issues, Mr. Minister, that can be looked 
at? When you start talking about efficiencies, are you asking of 
your department, asking of the health districts to look at . . . 
when you’re saying all areas, are these some of the things 
you’re asking them to take a look at? Can we find efficiencies 
in addressing some of those issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer for the member is yes, that 
it’s about all of the things that the member raised and many 
more things. The way I like to put it is that each one of us is 
responsible for making the most appropriate use of health care. 
So there’s a responsibility of the individual. 
 
For each of the people who work within the system, there’s a 
responsibility to do their job well and to make sure that they’re 
doing their job in the most effective way. For those people who 
are administering and managing the system, it’s their job to 
make sure the dollars are used well throughout the system. And 
then clearly on a province-wide basis, we have to continue to 
raise questions about how we spend money and what do we do. 
 
I think that it’s, you know, valid questions that the member 
raises. When we look at what we’re doing with the asking for 
further administrative efficiencies, we have to remember that 
the amount of the budgets that the regional health authorities 
have is $1.7 billion. I don’t have the exact number, but in effect 

what we’re saying is we know that you probably need $1.72 
billion to do everything the way that you did it last year. We’re 
asking you to do that with $20 million on that amount. And we 
know that there are challenges because they are asking 
questions about everything that they’re doing, and that’s what 
we expect them to do. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair . . . thank you, Mr. Minister. And Mr. 
Minister, I was pleased to see in the announcement this morning 
that you actually had administrative efficiencies were some of 
. . . was the first item that you talked about, service changes and 
program changes. 
 
And I would take from the service changes and program 
changes that some of the areas we discussed about home care 
delivery and that, that some of . . . if they’re caregivers and we 
can somehow get unions to recognize this and recognizing how 
they can be a part of the delivery of the system. 
 
And I guess the question to you, Mr. Minister, is has the 
department actually sat down and looked at some of the overall 
expenditure? You’ve said it. We know it. We realize it — 
2.7-some billion dollars. It’s getting fairly large. It’s likely 44 
per cent of the provincial budget, and we all recognize that that 
cannot go on for ever. In fact as a result of the expenditure there 
and the fact that people are still on waiting lists, I’ve run across 
people recently who are actually buying insurance policies, that 
if something happens they’re not waiting for Saskatchewan 
Health to provide health care, they’re prepared to look 
elsewhere. 
 
And so I think what we need to do is not just decide we’re 
going to put more money in but find out if we can find the 
efficiencies to deliver the services so that communities like 
Moosomin . . . And I noticed there is an extra $6 million being 
taken from the capital fund. The people in Moosomin would 
kind of like to know exactly where their project is sitting and 
when they eventually will have a go-ahead to proceed. 
 
There’s been a lot of time and effort over the past number of 
years, Mr. Minister, to raise funds. People have worked very 
diligently to put these funds together. In fact, Mr. Minister, you 
had the privilege of coming out to one of the Moosomin Moose 
hockey games just to see how the community was working as 
. . . and not just a community, the surrounding area. It’s a 
regional area that has combined their forces to put their 
responsible . . . the dollars that they are responsible for in place. 
So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give us an idea of 
what the plans are for this facility and when a go-ahead will be 
given regarding the facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member is correctly identifying me as 
a Moosomin Moose, and I’m not sure if my fellow Moose is 
here on this side of the House with me tonight but we’re very 
proud of that role. 
 
What I am happy to explain to the member is that that project is 
on track to proceed and that the dollars are there for this year to 
proceed. They’re just almost ready to approve the functional 
plan which then allows for the design of all of the appropriate 
drawings which will allow for construction. And those things 
are all just flowing in the course that they should. And so we 
have the dollars for that, and they’re not affected by any 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

decision today. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, so is there kind of a 
timeline you can kind of give people in regards to this process 
of moving to that structural design and — say — a sod-turning, 
an actual movement of dirt on the facility and construction 
beginning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I can advise the member that the 
appropriate announcements will be coming very shortly which 
will allow for this project to proceed I think at quite a good 
pace, which we’ll all be pleased with. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you. I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I 
know the people in Moosomin are certainly looking forward to 
that as there had been so much letdown over the years that 
they’ve almost given up hope, but there is still a little glimmer 
of hope. So your comments tonight I think are certainly going 
to be appreciated, and we thank you for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, as well there is . . . the community of Wolseley is 
facing some transition, and part of it has to do with the fact that, 
as I understand it, the kitchen was located in the . . . and the 
heavy care home was located in the basement, and they’ve run 
into some fairly significant health problems. As a result, they’ve 
started to utilize the kitchen in the old . . . in the hospital, I 
shouldn’t say old, the hospital wing. Now they’re planning on 
rebuilding, redesigning the kitchen in the care home. 
 
The concern however for most residents is the longevity of the 
acute care facility, and I think we can get, as my colleague from 
outside of Moose Jaw, Thunder Creek, had mentioned too, like 
when you look at Wolseley, basically you’re looking from 
between Moosomin and Regina. You do have Wolseley, and 
you do have the communities of Indian Head. 
 
But a couple of the concerns in regards to long-term care is of 
course patient availability. Pardon me, not patient availability 
but physician availability. And also you’re well aware of the 
fact that West Central Pelleting has set up a plant, and you’re 
well aware of the serious injury accident that occurred last year 
and the importance of that physician in that community. And 
Natural Valley Farms is also planning on constructing a 
processing plant in the area. And the type of businesses that 
certainly accidents can happen and availability of facilities such 
as the Wolseley hospital is certainly paramount. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can give people of 
Wolseley an assurance as to what they can expect from their 
acute care facility and its longevity in the community, because I 
think it’s very important for the well-being of that community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that part of what we wanted 
to do today was to indicate to those communities where there 
may be some change in those communities, and Wolseley is not 
on that list, so it’s not anticipated that there would be any 
change. But I do recognize that they’d have to do some fairly 
major work in the facility to deal with the mould in the kitchen 
and that that work, as I understand it, is ongoing. And so 
practically there may be discussions in the community, but it’s 
clearly not part of anything that we anticipate happening this 
year. 
 

(20:30) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I guess the reason for the question 
is the fact that there is still some significant decisions that 
regional boards are going to have to make. And in view of that 
and the assurances from the department that these services will 
. . . the efficiencies will be found in other areas . . . like, I mean 
a determined effort will be made to find efficiencies before you 
just start closing beds and more acute care beds in the system. 
 
And as I’ve indicated earlier, the necessity of facilities, 
especially when communities are working so hard to bring 
economic activity to their area . . . and I can assure you and I 
think, Mr. Minister, you are probably well aware of it that the 
communities that are being more successful these days are 
communities that actually have access or have acute care 
services and physicians available in those communities, and it’s 
paramount. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d like to thank the member for a 
description of why we made this announcement today about 12 
communities that were having some changes. The goal was to 
say that these are the 12 communities. The other communities 
are continuing to build and work in their own areas and are not 
on a change list. So thank you for that question. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And good 
evening, Minister, and your officials. I just have a quick 
question pertaining of course to Paradise Hill. Your 
announcements affected 50 per cent of the hospitals in my 
constituency. There is only two, so that’s certainly one of them. 
 
I guess the question is this: what would your advice be, Mr. 
Minister, when I’m speaking to the people in the constituency 
around Paradise Hill that have struggled very hard over the 
years to maintain their hospital? You know that we’ve had 
delegations come to Regina, that they’ve met with you, Mr. 
Minister, and I think your officials on maybe more than one 
occasion. And I think they’re highlighting the fact that this is an 
important part of their community. 
 
And I guess in the bigger picture . . . Maybe you have to do 
what you have to do from your perspective and your 
department’s perspective. But in the bigger picture, people in 
the rural areas, under the guise of being told that there’s rural 
revitalization ongoing, they’re being picked away at time and 
time again, and they’re getting a little frustrated with the things 
that are happening. For instance, the closing of the rural service 
centres is affecting the rural areas. The consolidation of the 
highway maintenance areas have affected small communities in 
rural, and it’s just downloading on the municipal governments, 
so they have to struggle with these taxes. 
 
I guess what I’m saying . . . there is an ongoing frustration, and 
the people in Paradise Hill particularly, who see the hospital as 
a vital part of their community being changed. As you know, 
it’s very close to Lloydminster. It’s certainly within the 
shopping area of Lloydminster, and the increased PST makes it 
very awkward. 
 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

So, Mr. Minister, what advice can you offer the constituency — 
the constituents — around Paradise Hill that in fact this is in 
their best interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — So, I appreciate the question. It’s always a 
challenge in any particular community, but in this situation, the 
average daily census in the hospital using the beds is 1.4. That 
means approximately less than two patients a day. So 
sometimes it’s higher. Other times it would be lower. And so 
the total numbers of days of stay in the year 2002-2003 is only 
500 for the 365 days in the whole year. 
 
So one of the challenges is this is a million dollar operation. 
With changing what we’re suggesting here, we’ll save about a 
million dollars, and it will affect about 17 jobs. But if people 
aren’t using it, the facility, then I think that’s the kind of thing 
that the citizens of Saskatchewan ask us to make some changes. 
So in this particular case, there are clearly some challenges, and 
there may be some other ways of providing the services that the 
people will actually use. 
 
So I think that that’s where we have the challenge on this 
particular facility. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, yes, you’re right. It is a 
challenge, and if . . . I think I heard you right when you said a 
million dollar savings in that facility. Will that be per year? And 
the 17 job displacement, I’m just confirming those things. 
 
I was going to ask what the savings might be and how then, Mr. 
Minister, does that translate into what people in the Paradise 
Hill can expect in return? I see in the follow to the news release, 
there is something like conversion of the existing hospital to 
health service, consisting of visiting medical service. I assume 
that means visiting physicians coming on occasion, or regular. 
There will continue to be lab and X-rays, and the 17 beds 
closed. 
 
The question is, is there a visiting physician? Has there been 
consultation to have a visiting physician to continue to come to 
Paradise Hill? Without a physician, there really . . . is there a 
need for the X-ray and the lab service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that there is one 
doctor there that shares call with St. Walburg and that as long as 
the physician’s there then some of these services will be there. I 
know from my discussions with the regional health authority 
board up in that area, that one of the challenges is providing the 
staffing, the medical staffing, but I know they are working at it 
as well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It is a challenge, 
an ongoing challenge in areas like that. But the jobs that are in 
place are very important to those communities, and a reduction 
of 17 jobs in a community like Paradise Hill is going to be 
pretty hard for them to swallow, for sure. 
 
Also in the backgrounder to your press release, under Paradise 
Hill it says, “all other services are to remain.” And I guess my 
question is, what other services do you anticipate with that 
statement? Are we talking about respite beds? Are we talking 
about other services that normally apply to health centres in 
other locations? Just so that when I’m asked that question, what 

can I respond? Other services will remain. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member asks about the services. This 
is information that we try to describe changes that happen in the 
community. We’ll get further information from the regional 
health authority so that you can have that clear information 
about what kinds of services will be there in the longer term. 
 
I also assume though that in this particular community they will 
work with the regional health authority to see what kinds of 
services that can be provided that the people will actually use 
given the fact that the services that are there now haven’t been 
used very much. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I have just one more question, and then I’m going to turn 
it over. The question, Mr. Minister, is not about Paradise Hill, 
but it’s a proposed addition to a new long-term care facility in 
Maidstone. 
 
I know that area well. It’s where I grew up. And I know lots of 
people. And the questions will be coming to me as well as the 
member from Cut Knife-Turtleford. Could you give me any 
idea that this project, which I think was being proposed and 
moving along, is it still continuing to move along or what stage 
is that at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This project is in the initial planning 
stages, which means that they’re looking at kind of how they 
can do that within the regional health authority. And so that’s 
where it’s at right now. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, my question or questions . . . and there may be one, or 
there may be many depending upon your answers, Mr. Minister, 
I guess. Representing Canora-Pelly and Canora-Pelly being part 
of the Sunrise Regional Health Authority, there has been a lot 
of concern in the Preeceville area as the member from 
Moosomin has indicated with concerns in Moosomin. And I 
noted, Mr. Minister, that last fall — specifically September 19 
— you travelled to the community of Preeceville, and you 
announced the government’s commitment to the integrated 
health care facility there. And I believe you announced that the 
province was committing $700,000 for the project’s plan and 
design work. That was an announcement that took place on 
September 19. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of the capital expenditure that has been 
indicated to be spent in this year’s budget, could you indicate to 
the people of Preeceville what the status is of the capital project 
in the community of Preeceville? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would like to thank the member for that 
question. I think the way I can describe this, these are also in 
initial planning like the Maidstone project that’s kind of in a 
similar track. All of these projects are going to go ahead, but we 
are having to slow them down a bit this year because some of 
the challenges around the financing. But it’s still planned to go 
ahead, but it’s not going to be moving quite as fast as 
anticipated, given some of the bigger financial challenges 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

around the whole system. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister I know that that answer will 
come as a bit of a challenge to the people of Preeceville 
because, as you are aware, the funding that they were asked to 
put in place by former Health ministers in fact is in place. 
They’ve been ready to go for a number of years, and I note your 
comments, Mr. Minister, the quotation that is in the Preeceville 
Progress of September 25 says, and I quote: 
 

Today’s announcement is about moving ahead and 
building a better future for the people of Preeceville and 
surrounding area. 

 
It didn’t talk about a delay. It didn’t talk about a future. It talked 
about moving forward in September 2003, interestingly just 
before the election, Mr. Minister. Now I heard you today say 
that your government and you are committed to this project. 
Will you be able to indicate to the people whether this is 
delayed for the current fiscal year, or is it just part of the fiscal 
year, or are we already delayed into 2005? Will you be able to 
commit to the people of Preeceville when this project will 
undergo a sod-turning ceremony as the member for Moosomin 
asked about the facility in Moosomin? Can you be more 
specific and indicate exactly when this project will begin to be 
reality in the community of Preeceville? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think what I can explain is that when 
we’ve made commitments about projects going ahead, we will 
go ahead with them. There are other communities like 
Preeceville that have raised quite a bit of money where there 
isn’t a commitment to go ahead with the project, but they’re 
hoping there will be. So this is different than that kind of a 
community. 
 
What the process of looking at the functional design . . . doing 
those kinds of things, we’ll continue working with the regional 
health authority, but we won’t be in a position during this year 
to basically say we’re going full speed ahead because it takes 
some time. 
 
I think the member from Moosomin will identify that there 
were quite a few years where there was a lot of discussion about 
how and where these things were going. With the member from 
Moosomin I can say that project’s going ahead and moving 
along because there’s so much work that’s been done. 
 
We have more work to do in Preeceville. We have more work 
to do in Maidstone, but these ones are moving along. The 
project in Outlook has lots of work done, and it’s moving along. 
So it often depends on what’s happened. But practically, when 
we’ve made a commitment to move forward, we’re going to do 
that, but we have to do it and fit it in with the amount of money 
that we have. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that answer. 
And I’m sure that the people of Preeceville will accept your 
word that you are committed to this project. 
 
Mr. Minister, a final couple of areas regarding this project . . . 
and there was some uncertainty as to the announcement that 

you made last fall regarding the commitment of the $700,000 
for the work as I indicated, for the plan and design work. Was 
that $700,000 provided in the fiscal year that has been passed? 
Or is the commitment for that monies to come out of the current 
fiscal year to allow them to proceed? 
 
When I asked the Chair of the committee and the mayor, Mr. 
See, about whether or not there was indeed a $700,000 actual 
amount of money that was allocated and allowed this committee 
to move forward with their plan and design, the answer was 
quite, you know, unclear. And it almost seemed like that there 
was no financial commitment other than a promise that indeed 
finances were available for this fiscal year, ’04-05, that this 
design stage could go ahead. Can you clarify, Mr. Minister, 
where the $700,000 commitment is at as far as the level of 
actual dollars being provided to have this project move 
forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What I can advise the member is that 
there is a written commitment for the $700,000, but it will be 
drawn down as they spend it. And so as they’re moving forward 
in this planning process that, as it’s required in the Sunrise 
Regional Health Authority, that money will be available for 
them as they move forward. 
 
And this is basically the process that’s used. So there is money 
that’s committed. And as the expenses are incurred in their 
planning process, they draw that money down. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Just one final question, Mr. Minister. If the 
Sunrise Authority incurs some expenses for design 
immediately, in the next month, will they be able to access the 
$700,000 in this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is yes because that money is 
committed there for them to move along so. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good evening, Mr. 
Minister, to you and your officials. First of all I’d like to start 
off by thanking the minister for making time in his schedule 
again today, as he did last week, to meet with delegations that 
came to the legislature on behalf of their communities and their 
facilities to address their concerns directly to the minister. And I 
appreciate the fact that he made time to meet with them on short 
notice. 
 
Having said that, I would ask the minister, following his 
meeting with the delegation today from the Climax-Frontier 
area, what assurances he was able to give them that their 
concerns would be addressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I appreciate that 
question. And I too enjoyed the chance to hear from the people 
in the local communities of Climax and Frontier and 
surrounding areas. 
 
I have some personal knowledge of that area, which I then 
explained it, so I understood sort of the topography and some of 
the challenges that they have in that particular area, and also 
understood the concerns that they’re raising around how they 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

can go forward in developing some of their economic plans. 
And in many ways it’s similar to other communities across the 
province that are concerned about having available health care, 
education, and the roads and connection. But they are in many 
ways like some of our northern communities where they have 
basically one road into that area, and it often has challenges 
around weather and other kinds of things. And so that was 
recognized and understood. 
 
But we also have questions about how to provide some of these 
services. I think that my own sense of the discussion with the 
community is that they have some ideas and some suggestions 
about how these things might be provided. They have some 
challenges getting sufficient staff, but they also have a doctor 
who’s down there, who works together with them, and I 
encourage them to work with the Cypress Regional Health 
Authority and look at planning for the health care in that whole 
southern part . . . or the southwestern part of our province. 
 
And so I want to thank the people for the meeting. And it was 
sort of fit together in between a few other things that were 
pressing today, but my sense is that the goal would be to work 
together with the community and with the regional health 
authority to see what services can be provided and how to do 
that in a way that’s good for them and good for the rest of us in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think the 
delegation, if I understood correctly, were somewhat assured, or 
reassured maybe, by your familiarity with the geography and 
the topography and the challenges that they face there. As they 
probably indicated to you repeatedly, it’s isolation that is their 
biggest concern and the fact that the transportation in and out of 
there is so unreliable, frankly. And when you get an air 
ambulance rushing in there to evacuate a patient and getting 
stuck in a mudhole in the middle of the only runway in the area, 
that only amplifies the fear and the concern about the isolation 
and the access to services. 
 
Having some reassurance though from your familiarity with the 
area, I guess, Mr. Minister, what they want to know is the 
possibility or the probability of continuous lab services being 
available on the current schedule — five days a week, as I 
understand it right now — just as a means of making the 
viability of the current physician’s practice real for the long 
term. We have a physician in that community that is prepared to 
stay there. He seems quite settled there and happy to provide 
medical services to the people of that area. And the viability of 
his practice really hinges on having lab services available on a 
five-day-week basis. Is that a realistic possibility for that 
community after your discussion with the delegation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate the question, and that’s 
clearly one of the possibilities that they’re looking at. One of 
the challenges, as I’m sure the member understands, is the 
availability of staff on a continuing basis. And so some of the 
discussion we had was around how to have people recruited to 
go and live in that area. And so that is often tied in with quite a 
few of the other things that we know, the schools and the . . . 
whether it’s a full-time job or a part-time job, and in fact 
whether they’re used to living in that beautiful part of the 
province which some people have never seen before. 
 

So I think that, practically, that’s part of the discussion, and it’s 
clearly . . . we want to have support for the physician doing his 
work. And that’s, I think, what should be the continued 
discussion with the regional health authority. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I noticed in the sheet 
that was handed out at the press conference today in which the 
changes to the various facilities around the province were 
delineated, there is an indication here that there may be a 
possible hiring of an advanced clinical nurse. 
 
Now I’m not particularly familiar with that designation, but am 
I to assume that this position would be one that was brought 
into place if the physician was to leave, or is this an adjunct, an 
addition to the physician services in that particular clinic? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think one of the big challenges in that 
particular area of the province is the fact that if you’re the sole 
physician, you’re on call 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. And 
so one of the suggestions or one of the things that they’ve been 
talking about . . . is there some way to provide some support to 
the physician so that he can in fact have some time off and 
know that somebody else will be covering many of the things 
that are there. 
 
This is something that has worked in other communities. And I 
know your member to the right there knows how that works in 
the area around Kyle and Beechy, and it has turned out to 
provide some very good services. Have the physician service 
available when that’s needed, but have it supplemented with 
these advanced clinical nurses or nurse practitioners. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, the communities of Gull Lake — 
and Gull Lake was represented here — but also Cabri, which 
was not represented at the legislature, have had some concerns 
that they have brought to my attention both previous to and 
since the announcement today. 
 
And in view of the fact that you have indicated that there will 
be $20 million of expenses to be cut from health district budgets 
throughout the province, should those communities and should 
those health facilities in Cabri and Gull Lake be concerned 
about the programs that they’re offering in their communities as 
a result of that budget reduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the announcement 
today was to set out clearly where there would be changes in 
facilities. There is also a recognition though that there are 
changes in the amounts of some of the administration and 
services. And as I explained previously, if you look at the 
regional health budgets as approximately $1.7 billion, we 
recognize by this statement that the actual operating running 
rate may be 1.720 million. It’s that extra 20 million that we are 
asking for some efficiencies to be found across the system. I 
think if you took a percentage of the total 1.7 billion as a 
budget, for example for Cabri, and sort of figured that it would 
somehow be proportional to that, there’d be minimal, if any, 
effect in most communities. 
 
But what it does mean is that we have to have everybody 
continuing to look at the most efficient way of doing things 
within any particular service, and that we’re going to be 
working with everybody — whether it’s the patient or the 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

provider or the overall administrator of the system — to make 
the most effective use of our dollars. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, the 
implications of the service cuts however . . . can you envision 
any circumstance in which cuts might be significant enough that 
it would affect the viability of any given facility in the health 
district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer to that is no. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the minister 
and his officials for their attendance here tonight, for their 
willingness to discuss the issues with us, and we would look 
forward to another opportunity at some time in the immediate 
future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d like to thank the members for the 
questions and for the opportunity to explain some of the things 
that we announced earlier today. And I especially want to thank 
all of the people who are here with me this evening who have 
been working very diligently on a number of challenging issues 
in the health care field. 
 
So thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Could I ask the minister to move 
progress? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that we report progress and ask for 
leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The minister has moved that the 
committee report progress on the estimates for the Department 
of Health. Is it agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Okay. The motion is carried. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Later . . . Oh no, next sitting, Mr. 
Speaker. Sorry. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I move that the House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:04. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
 Bill No. 36 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
 Bill No. 37 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1216 
 Bill No. 38 — The Credit Reporting Act ..................................................................................................................................1216 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1216 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1217 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1217 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1219 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1221 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1222 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1224 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1226 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1227 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1228 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




