















































Hansard: April 30, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 29A  FRIDAY, APRIL 30, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 829 
 April 30, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of Crown leaseholders in the 
constituency of Cypress Hills. Their prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
community of Maple Creek. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise on behalf of the people from the Porcupine Plain 
area to present a petition about their concern for their hospital. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore you petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to . . . government to take the 
necessary actions to ensure that the Porcupine Carragana 
Hospital is not closed or further downsized. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible closure 
or downsizing of the Herbert Nursing Home. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Herbert Nursing 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Herbert and Gouldtown. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who are very concerned about the closure or 
downsizing of long-term care beds, as announced in the recent 
provincial budget. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Mainprize Manor & 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Midale, 
Macoun, Ceylon, and Alameda. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the possible closure of 
long-term care beds. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that long-term care facilities 
in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency are not closed or 
further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Ogema, and 
Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of my constituency that are 
very, very concerned about the possibilities of losing more 
health care facilities and long-term care beds. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche, 
Glentworth, and Fir Mountain. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan and my constituency that are 
concerned with the government’s handling of the Crown land 
leases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from my 
hometown of Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
calling on this government to repair and resurface Highway 15. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
highway be repaired and resurfaced immediately so as to 
remove the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Raymore. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from constituents against the closure of Biggar’s rural service 
centre, Environment office. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reverse the decision to close the 
rural service centre and Environment office in Biggar. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens of west central Saskatchewan that 
are concerned with health care in the region. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and 
to ensure that current specialty services are sustained to 
better serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 63, 72, 73, 128, and 145. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 34 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: in what locations is your 
department expanding rural service centres; and, further to 
this, what is the proposed budget for each of these 
expansions? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Well, members, I have a very special guest to 
introduce to you seated in the Speaker’s gallery. She is my 
grandniece and her name is Lesia Rathje. And Lesia has come 
here today from the city of Saskatoon with her grandmother, my 
sister Audrey Langhorst, who is here in North Battleford. And I 
ask all members to welcome them to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Presentation to Senate Committee 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on Wednesday, April 28, I was invited by the Minister 
of Finance to be part of a Saskatchewan delegation that would 
travel to Ottawa to make a presentation to the Standing Senate 
Committee on National Finance. This committee has received 
numerous delegations from other provinces as well as 
individuals, most notably Professor Thomas Courchene on 
Wednesday, April 21, 2004. 
 
I want to indicate to this Assembly that the Minister of Finance 
for Saskatchewan made a strong presentation and that his 
remarks and the formal position paper he put forward were well 
received. The minister indicated in his opening remarks that 
both the government and the official opposition were raising the 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

equalization issue collaboratively on behalf of all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Chair, Senator Lowell Murray, indicated that 
that consensus approach seemed to be a strong message that 
was being delivered by the minister on behalf of Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
A presentation and question-and-answer period, Mr. Speaker, 
was to last about one hour, and that presentation was about 10 
minutes short of two hours. And the minister, I must indicate, 
handled the questions very well and responded on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people in putting this issue forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issues raised in the paper were the five key 
issues, I think, that the minister has indicated in the House. But 
I want to end by a quote from the minister’s remarks. And he 
said: 
 

The issue of fairness has united Saskatchewan and goes 
beyond partisan politics. The reason is evident — at stake 
is the level and quality of key public services provided to 
our citizens and, indeed, all Canadian citizens. 
 
Now is the time to correct the current inequities in the 
equalization program. 

 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Third Annual Bell Walk for Kids 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, every year professional counsellors 
at Kids Help Phone answer calls and on-line questions from 
troubled and abused young people across the country. Last year 
children from nearly 3,000 Canadian communities received 
help from this line, and here in Saskatchewan 23,000 young 
people had their concerns addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Sunday, May 2, Kids Help Phone will be 
hosting its third annual Bell Walk for Kids in more than 35 
communities across the country, including Regina, Saskatoon, 
Yorkton, Prince Albert, Kamsack, and Moose Jaw’s Wellesley 
Park in Wakamow Valley. This is the first year the walk will be 
held in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, and organizers are hoping to 
raise about $5,000. 
 
Last year the Bell Walk for Kids raised approximately one and 
a half million dollars nationwide and attracted close to 25,000 
participants. This year the Bell Walk is hoping to raise $1.6 
million to ensure the Kids Help Phone can continue to provide 
the support that troubled and abused children need and deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bell Walk for Kids helps get the message to 
our young people that this service is here for them. I ask all 
members to join me in acknowledging the counsellors at the 
Kids Help Phone and all those involved with the Bell Walk for 
their dedication to helping our children. And I invite everyone 
to take part in this fun and important event. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

High-speed Internet Service 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past January I 
was contacted by Ken Garinger, the high school principal at 
Young. He told me that SaskTel had not yet installed 
high-speed Internet service to his community, as SaskTel 
officials had promised for the early fall of 2003. 
 
Principal Garinger could not get a clear answer as to when the 
service would be installed, so he approached my office. He said 
that his school had been ready for the distance courses offered 
by high-speed Internet, similar to those already offered in 
Watrous and other rural centres. The high school had purchased 
the computer upgrades needed for high speed, and the students 
had already chosen their courses for the year. 
 
I followed this up with a call to SaskTel’s minister’s office 
where an MA (ministerial assistant) informed my staff that 
high-speed service may not be installed until maybe this coming 
fall or not at all. So far my letter to the minister has not resulted 
in any clear answers to this concern. 
 
Today the high school and the Young community still have no 
firm date from SaskTel. It appears as if this government is 
breaking yet another promise to rural residents, one that leaves 
our students and citizens at great disadvantage to those who 
already have high-speed Internet. This is yet another example of 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) attack on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 

Credit Unions 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Credit unions provide a vital service to Saskatchewan 
communities, employing more than 2,900 people in towns and 
cities across our province. Credit unions have grown into a 
strong and important part of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only are Saskatchewan credit unions a part of 
the very fabric of our province, but they’re also sharing their 
knowledge and financial expertise with the rest of the world. In 
January, Joan Baer, manager of the credit union in my 
hometown of Goodsoil, travelled with seven other Canadians to 
Ghana to work on development plans for local credit unions. 
While there, Ms. Baer assessed and gave advice to a number of 
credit unions, some that were more advanced than others 
obviously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through this program, run by the Canadian 
Co-operative Association, Ms. Baer says one of the most 
important lessons she has brought back is a greater appreciation 
for the grassroots of credit unions. Ms. Baer says the program 
was not only about teaching, but it was also one of learning. 
She says, and I quote: 
 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

Sharing experiences, ways of doing business and culture 
with another credit union in another part of the world is a 
very humbling experience. Although we are so far apart 
and different in some aspects, there is a great deal of 
commonality. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in acknowledging 
Saskatchewan credit unions for their importance in our 
economy, and I thank Ms. Baer for taking Saskatchewan’s 
co-operative spirit and knowledge to the rest of the world. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Closing of Rural Service Centres 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a sad day in 
our province. Barring a last minute reprieve from the NDP 
government, this is the day all but a handful of rural service 
centres will close in Saskatchewan. 
 
In my constituency, the Biggar office will close, services will 
be lost to producers, and jobs will be lost in the community. 
This is only the latest blow the NDP government has targeted at 
rural Saskatchewan. Throughout the years we have seen time 
and time again as the NDP has moved to strip rural 
communities of more and more services . . . At a time when we 
continue to hear the members opposite pay lip service to the 
concept of rural revitalization, every action they take, every 
policy they come up with seems designed to make sure rural 
revitalization remains elusive. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much money will be saved through this 
action? It is unclear, keeping in mind that at least some of the 
offices used for rural service centres remain under lease to 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) for 
some years. In Biggar the lease extends to December 31 of this 
year. Will the NDP honour this lease to the RM (rural 
municipality) of Biggar? The loss of revenue will result in 
higher taxes to the ratepayers in the RM of Biggar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when these closures are complete, the NDP seems 
intent to land an even more devastating blow — one that rips 
more health care facilities out of our communities. 
 
People from rural communities such as Biggar have one 
question for the members opposite: when will their attacks 
against people in small towns and rural areas stop? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Saskatoon Principal Named Canada’s Best 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m married to a teacher; I have 
two brothers who are teachers, and my father is a retired 
principal — so I know the value of education. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very especially pleased to share with the 
Assembly that a principal of a school in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Sutherland has been honoured with a prestigious 
national award. Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Association of 
Principals is in Saskatoon this week for their annual convention 
and has honoured Ms. Patricia Prowse of Brunskill School with 
their Distinguished Principal of the Year Award. 
 
The award is presented in recognition of outstanding 
achievement and leadership in school administration and 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Prowse is a self-described lifelong learner. 
She holds a bachelor’s and master’s degree in education and is 
currently completing a bachelor’s degree in psychology. 
 
Apparently, Mr. Speaker, that passion for learning has also 
translated into a passion for teaching. Ms. Prowse has been a 
teacher in the Saskatoon Public School Division for 23 years. 
She says she was drawn to the profession because, quote, “We 
have a real responsibility to educate our children and make our 
world a better place.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating Ms. Prowse on receiving this honour from her 
peers and in thanking her for her hard work and dedication to 
students and education that earned her this award. I look 
forward to visiting Brunskill School and congratulating Ms. 
Prowse in person in the near future. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

Addressing Disabilities Issues Conference 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I 
had the opportunity to attend the third biannual Addressing 
Disabilities Issues Conference in Saskatoon, and the title for the 
conference was “Building Communities, Living, Laughing, 
(and) Loving.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this was a conference that brought together 
people from across the province that deal with the disability 
issues, that deal with . . . that dealt with all of the issues, be they 
physical, mental, medical, or aged. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
Co-Chairs of this conference were Bev Duncan from the 
Saskatchewan Voice of People with Disabilities and Carole 
Morrison from the Canadian Mental Health Association. 
 
And it included, as I said, people from across the province: 
Saskatchewan Health, Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres, Saskatchewan Association for the 
Rehabilitation of the Brain-Injured, the Saskatoon Health 
Region, Métis Employment and Training of Saskatchewan, 
Canadian Paraplegic Association, Saskatchewan Association of 
Community Living, North Saskatchewan Independent Living 
Centre, Autism Treatment Services of Saskatchewan, the Gary 
Tinker Federation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well as through the caregiver groups from 
across the province, it also included clients and parents, Mr. 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

Speaker. There was a lot of discussion; there was very good 
sessions. And fact is it was set up such that there was too many 
sessions; you couldn’t attend them all because they were 
running concurrently, Mr. Speaker, but it dealt with issues 
ranging from the needs of clients to abuse of the system, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think it’s a program worthwhile continuing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Motion for Moratorium on Health Facility Closures 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
within a few weeks this NDP government is expected to 
announce its plans to close hospitals and long-term care homes 
throughout Saskatchewan. They plan to do this with no public 
input from the communities that will be losing their hospitals 
and senior homes, just as they did in 1993 when they closed 52 
hospitals throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in today’s paper CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 
Employees) is running ads calling on the public to speak out on 
the closure of long-term care beds. We want to give the public 
that chance. Later today, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
will introduce a motion calling for a moratorium on any health 
facility closures until public hearings are held in every affected 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier support this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of days ago the 
Leader of the Opposition brought forward a document as if he 
had found some sort of amazing piece of paper that . . . when I 
explained it to him, it seems that no further questions arose 
because what that document was, was part of our long-term 
planning and working as we go forward with our budgets. 
 
In this budget this year, we have $160 million. Those amounts 
were announced to the regional health authorities on March 31. 
They are now working very diligently around how the increased 
money that they have can be used to provide ongoing services. 
It’s including looking at many different parts of their 
operations. We’re going to continue with that process. It’s 
something that we’ve been working at for a number of years, 
and it includes discussions with many of the people involved. 
And we think that that’s an appropriate way to deal with this, 
and we’re going to continue with the process that we’ve 
developed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, in the early 1990s this Premier 
and this NDP government closed 52 hospitals. They said it 
would fix the health system. It didn’t. Then they closed the 

Plains hospital. They said that would fix the health system. It 
didn’t. The NDP prescription for health care isn’t working, and 
now they want to double the dose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP is so convinced that their planning 
process is going to result in closure of hospital beds and senior 
citizens’ homes, if they really believe that that makes sense, 
will they commit to hold public hearings in every affected 
community before these closures take place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have 
lived with 50 years of change in health care, and we’re going to 
be living with change in the years to come. There’s no question 
about that. I think the real issue is, how do you manage change, 
not only in health care but in all of the communities? And you 
continue to work with people, with institutions that we’ve 
developed as we move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in our action plan in December 2001 set out 
goals for what we wanted for our health care system. We’ve 
met many of those, but there are many more challenges that 
we’re going to address. We’re going to continue to do that with 
the people within the health care system, with the people of 
Saskatchewan because that’s how an NDP government does it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member, the members opposite have a 
situation where they have no health care policy, and they don’t 
seem to be wanting to develop any. We’re looking forward to 
their contribution to the health care discussions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
understand how an NDP government does things. In the last 
election, the Premier didn’t say a word about closing hospitals. 
He didn’t say a word about closing long-term care beds. In fact 
in December 2001 when they announced this action plan that 
the minister refers to, the Premier said it didn’t make sense at 
all to close any further hospitals, that there was no financial 
benefit to be granted by closing these hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it looks like the Premier is about to break another 
one of his promises. Is that the way the NDP government does 
health care policy? He needs to hear from the Saskatchewan 
people before they take this unilateral action. They need to 
listen to Saskatchewan people and not just to a bunch of senior 
bureaucrats living in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier support our motion? Will he 
commit to having hearings in every affected community before 
the closures take place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

would just go forward to the member who is sitting just in front 
of him and ask him how to talk about what we’re doing as it 
relates to health care, I think he’d get a good example of how 
you can talk positively about the issues of equalization, the 
issues of sharing on costs of health care, because those are key 
points in how we can afford the health care system across the 
country. And practically, what we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is 
work together as the member for Canora-Pelly is with our 
Finance minister as we move forward in addressing many of 
these issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government’s budget did not include 
another amount of money this year that would allow for any 
expansion. We’re continuing to look at the resources that we 
have. We’re going to work with the people involved in the 
system to make sure we have the right kind of care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Public Consultation on Health Facilities 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Herbert and those 
in surrounding communities are concerned about the future of 
their hospital and the future of long-term care beds in their 
town. Rumour has it that the Herbert hospital is slated for 
closure. People in the area are concerned the hospital will close 
and be replaced with something less or nothing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I recognize the 
member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I know members opposite think 
this is funny, but the people of Herbert don’t. People in the area 
are also concerned the hospital will close and be replaced with 
something less or nothing at all. Also on the chopping block are 
15 long-term care beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health, will he promise today to 
travel to Herbert and to consult with people in the community 
and the area before the NDP closes the hospital or any 
long-term care beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is very serious business. 
We are working hard to deal with the resources that we’ve got 
to make sure that we plan the right kind of care for across this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are working hard in local communities and 
at the regional health authority boards and at Saskatchewan 
Health to deal with $160 million of new money into the health 
care system. But it doesn’t mean that everything’s going to be 
the same. Mr. Speaker, we have to move forward and look at 
how we provide services, how we do the things that we do. 
 
This is not a Saskatchewan problem; this is a national problem. 
We’re working on a national stage as well, Mr. Speaker, to 
make sure that the kinds of goals that we have for our own 

friends, neighbours, relatives are also the kinds of goals that we 
have for Canada. That’s why the minister . . . member from 
Canora-Pelly supported our Minister of Finance in Ottawa . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Minister of Health. 
 
In the constituency of Cypress Hills, the town of Gull Lake has 
33 long-term care beds at the Gull Lake special care home. And 
health care professionals in the community of Gull Lake are 
hearing that the NDP will be closing all 33 of those long-term 
care beds in the community. This of course, Mr. Speaker, as 
you can appreciate, is very distressing and worrisome to the 
people of Gull Lake including those with relatives living in that 
long-term care facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister promise the people of Gull Lake 
today that he will travel to the community of Gull Lake and 
consult with the community before the NDP government closes 
all the long-term care beds in that town? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, every regional health 
authority in the province received an increase in the funding 
that was available to them. It’s not sufficient to have everything 
running exactly the way we had it going last year, but it allows 
for us to have discussions in communities, in the regional health 
authorities, in the whole province about what kind of care do 
we need in the long term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have been very diligent in 
bringing forward cases around some of the very highly 
expensive care that takes place in our tertiary care centres in 
Saskatoon and Regina. We end up having to try to look at how 
do you balance the costs there of those very expensive things 
with some of the costs that are out across the province. We’re 
doing that. We’re doing it very carefully because that’s the kind 
of administration that we are. We are very concerned about 
individuals and people, and we’re going to make sure that we 
get the best care for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to ask a 
question of the Minister of Health on behalf of the people from 
Porcupine Plain and community. 
 
The residents of this area are very upset that their health care 
facilities are also at risk in the NDP’s upcoming round of health 
care cuts. Residents are worried that the NDP will make 
significant cuts that will affect the services by both the 
Porcupine Carragana Hospital as well as the Red Deer Nursing 
Home. 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people are speaking out. In a letter . . . 
(inaudible) . . . health care in the community, the Porcupine 
Credit Union writes, and I quote: 
 

We request that sufficient dialogue be held with the 
community to review all possible options. 

 
Will the minister honour this request? Will he commit today to 
meet with the people of Porcupine Plain to discuss all options 
before the NDP make decisions that affect their hospital and 
their nursing homes? 
 
(10:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are going to take the 
extra resources that have been provided to us in this budget and 
work with all of the regional health authorities and all the 
communities to make sure that we use these resources in the 
most appropriate way possible. This includes much discussion 
in boardrooms. It’ll include discussion in communities. All of 
these things are important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been working very diligently to try to 
make sure that our system provides the care for people — the 
highly technical, expensive care — but care with access right 
across the province. That’s our goal. We’re going to continue to 
do that. 
 
And I ask the members opposite, if they have some ideas or 
suggestions, get them out in the community. There are no ideas 
that come from that side; we’re waiting for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also for the Minister of Health, and the suggestion I would have 
is to support our motion this morning. 
 
I represent yet another community in this province whose 
residents are concerned about the future of its health care 
facilities. People in Kerrobert are concerned the NDP is looking 
at downsizing the Kerrobert Hospital and reducing services by 
cutting 14 long-term care beds. As one concerned citizen who 
wrote me put it, quote: 
 

Our health care has already been reduced in this area more 
than once. We believe that if greater difficulties are put on 
the population to receive health care, there would be a 
self-imposed neglect inflicted. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have caused problems for the people of 
Kerrobert. They don’t want to be targeted by the NDP’s . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Will the minister promise today to hold public 
meetings in Kerrobert to discuss all options before he and his 
NDP government reduce services and cut long-term care beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have been having 
discussions in this province for a number of years around the 
kinds of care that we need, and we set forward a plan in 
December 2001. We’ve been working with that plan in 
communities right across the province. We will continue to do 
that. 
 
This year we have $160 million in new resources for health 
care. We’re going to be using that money very carefully. Of that 
money, much of it is going to the regional health authorities. 
They have been working with us on how to allocate that money 
within their regions. That work is ongoing. It will include 
making sure that all communities have some kind of an interest 
in what happens because it’s important that every person in 
Saskatchewan feels like they are going to have the access to 
health care that they need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 
member from the Battlefords got up and he told this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “We know that we continue to have a 
crisis in health care.” Yes, the NDP does have a crisis in health 
care, and they have no one to blame, Mr. Speaker, but 
themselves. 
 
After the last round of cuts to health care where the NDP closed 
52 rural hospitals, cut nursing education seats and fired nurses, 
Saskatoon hospitals began to feel the crushing effects, Mr. 
Speaker. Today ER (emergency room) doctors warn of patients 
dying or being disabled because of staff shortages. Patient 
safety is put at risk in overcrowded ERs. Nurses are overworked 
and have low morale, and surgeries are being cancelled because 
of tight budgets. 
 
Will the minister commit today to hold public meetings in areas 
where closures are being considered so that the situation in 
Saskatoon will not continue on a downward spiral? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I invite some of the veteran 
members on that side of the House who have been here for 
many years to contribute to the debate on health care in 
Saskatchewan by suggesting some proposals that relate to . . . 
how do we finance health care? How do we manage health 
care? How to we move forward in our Canadian situation in a 
way that supports our economy? Because those are the key 
issues as we look at health care. 
 
Health care is a basic part of what it means to be a Canadian. 
It’s very clear that the Prime Minister is recognizing that, as we 
go forward in this election. We are going to continue to talk 
about health care for years to come because it’s very crucial in 
how we build our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those members opposite seem to have vanished as 
it relates to health care policy discussions. We urge them to 
have some policy conferences in their party and give us some 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

ideas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Regina hospitals have also 
suffered at the hands of the NDP. We all remember it was the 
NDP government that closed the Plains hospital. Doctors in 
Regina tell us that the shortage of beds and the increase in 
waiting times escalated when the Plains hospital was closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we not only lost beds at the Plains hospital, but we 
also have continued to see a reduction in beds at both the 
General and the Pasqua hospitals. Bed closures have led to an 
extraordinary number of days when Regina hospitals are on 
code burgundy. In fact Regina General was on code burgundy 
for 24 full days from January to March. Mr. Speaker, that is one 
month out of three that the Regina General Hospital was on a 
code burgundy. And there are times when both the Regina 
General and the Pasqua Hospital are on code burgundy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to consulting with 
people in Regina and throughout the province of Saskatchewan 
before he and his NDP government launch another attack on 
health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working with the 
people right across the province who are involved in the health 
care system, and we are going to continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I got into trouble in this House before, making 
comments about that member’s policies on health care, but I 
think there is no question that she is one of the members who is 
very much in favour of privatizing our health care system in 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, I ask those members to either come 
forward with that kind of a proposal so we can debate it or else 
admit that they’re changing their proposal so that we can get 
something that is positive here in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in this government are very concerned about 
making sure we have health care here today, tomorrow, and for 
our children and grandchildren because that’s what’s going on 
right now in this country . . . is we’re having a debate on the 
future of health care. Mr. Speaker, I urge those members to get 
involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Expenditures for Proposed Ethanol Plant 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Points West Consulting is a 
Regina-based lobby firm with very close and well-known ties to 
the NDP. When Broe industries of Denver, Colorado, needed to 
hire a lobbyist that could influence NDP cabinet ministers in 
Saskatchewan in the negotiation of the imaginary Belle Plaine 

ethanol deal, they hired Points West Consulting. 
 
And earlier this week, the NDP’s Minister of Industry and 
Resources admitted that Points West was paid $163,000 by 
Broe industries to lobby the government with regard to the 
NDP’s imaginary Belle Plaine ethanol deal. The problem, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the minister also admitted the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are on the hook for 40 per cent of the bill. Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister: why is the NDP using $65,000 worth 
of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money to pay part of the political 
lobbying bill for Broe industries? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Investment 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well this is the same question we had 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, except yesterday I think we had the 
member suggesting that the Premier or the NDP or the 
government had hired Points West, and at least today the 
member acknowledges it was Broe industries, Mr. Speaker, that 
hired Points West Consulting. 
 
And as I explained to the House yesterday, Mr. Speaker, Points 
West in fact was a consultant for Broe industries before the 
ethanol deal was conceived. Broe industries had no presence in 
Saskatchewan. My understanding is that Points West 
Consulting operated an office where they worked on this project 
for a year and a half. They billed Broe industries $164,000 of 
which I think about $25,000 went to third parties. They netted 
about $129,000 for a year and a half’s work by various people 
at various times. 
 
The member wants to cast aspersions on that. There was 
nothing untoward about it whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the facts 
are from information received through freedom of information. 
The NDP government is paying Points West Consulting more 
than $65,000 for political lobbying. And the minister just 
indicated that, yes, Broe industries hired Points West. Broe 
industries hired Points West to lobby on their behalf, lobby this 
government regarding an ethanol project in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me the taxpayers 
would agree with Broe industries paying Points West for the 
lobbying effort. The question, Mr. Speaker, is why are the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers on the hook for $65,000 to pay the 
NDP’s friends in Points West for lobbying the NDP upon 
behalf of Broe industries for this ethanol project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Investment Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the member has indicated . . . 
the member has put words in my mouth that I did not say. The 
member indicated that I said that Broe industries hired Points 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

West to lobby the government. I have never made that 
statement because that statement is not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Broe industries hired Points West Consulting to manage their 
ethanol project and their office in Saskatchewan which, as I 
said, Points West did for the period of a year and a half. Broe 
industries is entitled to contract with whichever party or 
corporation in Saskatchewan they wish to contract with, Mr. 
Speaker. And people in Saskatchewan are entitled to do 
business regardless of what their political affiliation may be. 
 
And by the way, I’m aware that there are people that worked for 
Points West Consulting of various political persuasions, 
including supporters of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Costs of Closing Rural Service Centres 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister . . . Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve heard this morning that the NDP is planning to 
close long-term care facilities in many communities across the 
province. And many communities are also worried the NDP is 
about to close more hospitals or reduce the number of acute 
care beds in those communities. 
 
Today is also the day when the NDP is slamming the door on 
rural service centres in 22 communities across Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, how much taxpayers’ money will be spent to shut 
down these 22 rural service centres? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
indeed today the rural . . . the extension services are being 
transitioned from 31 to 9. Mr. Speaker, we have done extensive 
work to try and make sure that we are providing the very best 
resources that we can for agricultural producers in this province. 
 
The analysis has been done. We see the use that was being 
made of those extension services. And we think that by this new 
structure where there are agrologists in each of the nine centres, 
and where there are eight agrologists plus a chief agrologist in 
the call centre, that we will be providing the kind of information 
that producers are looking for, and we will be building for the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite keep sniping at this 
program but as Kevin Hursch says in his article, they had no 
plan during the election for agriculture: they have put no plan 
forward for agriculture today. Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. 
We’re carrying it forward, and it will be successful for 
producers in this province. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Agriculture has to recognize that this is no rumour; 
this is in fact the closure of 22 service centres. He can call it 
what he likes. 
 
The town of Canora is one of the communities losing its rural 
service centre today. In Canora the NDP government leases the 
office space that houses the rural service centre from the town. 
In fact the rural service centre is located in the town hall. And 
the town of Canora has a lease contract for $17,000 per year 
through 2012. Mr. Speaker, the town of Canora expects to be 
paid in full for the leased space. That’s $17,000 per year for the 
next eight years — approximately $136,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm the government will pay 
the town of Canora in full for the lease? And will the minister 
tell us how much taxpayers’ money will be spent in total to buy 
out all the lease arrangements in the 22 communities that will 
lose their rural service centres today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the department will be working with all of the leaseholders, and 
in the end the estimate is that we will be saving over $2 million 
by this transition. But not only that, Mr. Speaker, we will be 
preparing for a future where there will be much more success in 
agriculture in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have heard from the members opposite 
that this government is attacking rural Saskatchewan. Well let 
me tell you, Mr. Speaker, what that is about. We are attacking 
rural Saskatchewan with money. We put over $500 per capita 
into rural Saskatchewan in this province — more than any other 
province. During a time of extreme crisis last year, Mr. 
Speaker, we put, over budget, $130 million into rural 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we are attacking also with 
programs that will build for a very successful agricultural future 
in this province. That’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Eastview 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Junor: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. The member for 
Saskatoon Eastview has requested leave for introductions. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, a constituent 
of mine, Sharon Mathiason, up in the west gallery. She’s here 
today because she just conducted a news conference in the 
Cumberland Gallery highlighting the deadly effects of 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

chiropractic neck manipulation. Sharon’s daughter, Laurie Jean, 
died following a chiropractic neck manipulation in February 
1998. Laurie Jean was 20 years old. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Sharon for her perseverance and tireless 
dedication in the fight to prevent any other person from 
suffering the devastating effects of chiropractic neck 
manipulation, and I ask all members of this Assembly to 
welcome Sharon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just before I 
begin my ministerial statement, I ask leave to introduce two 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, two women who are in the west gallery. One is 
Donna Brunskill, who is the executive director of the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association and the other is 
Karen Eisler, who is the membership coordinator of the same 
organization. And I ask all members to welcome them here to 
the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Regulations for Nurse Practitioners 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to rise 
today to advise my colleagues in the legislature that our 
government recently passed regulations that allow for the 
licensing of nurse practitioners. This measure furthers the 
government strategy to improve basic front-line health care 
services for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to a high-quality 
health care system which is accessible to all Saskatchewan 
residents, and one that is sustainable into the future within the 
resources that we have available. It is a health care system that 
is fundamentally strong and also one that is facing rapid change. 
Every day we are introduced to new health care technology and 
new ways of delivering services. Our government is responding 
by making changes in our health care system so that 
Saskatchewan residents receive the quality services they 
deserve. 
 
These regulations support The Registered Nurses Amendment 
Act, 2001, Mr. Speaker, allowing for a new way of delivering 
health care to rural, northern, and urban residents by expanding 
the scope of practice of registered nurses. 
 

Mr. Speaker, nurse practitioners are specialized registered 
nurses with advanced training who can diagnose and treat 
common illnesses and prescribe medication. As part of a team, 
they work with physicians and other health professionals in 
primary health care locations across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize the vital role that nurses play. 
They are the heart and soul of our health care system. They are 
committed and dedicated to the people who need their special 
care, expertise, and compassion. Anyone who has come in 
contact with the health system as a patient or in support of 
family or friends can attest to the important contribution that 
nurses make in delivering quality care. 
 
I believe that offering registered nurses greater career 
opportunities by expanding their scope of practice will 
encourage them to stay and work in Saskatchewan. This is 
especially important, Mr. Speaker, as we follow up with our 
action plan commitment of keeping and attracting health care 
providers to Saskatchewan, as well as our Throne Speech 
commitment of making our province ready for the next 
generation. Mr. Speaker, the future for nurses in Saskatchewan 
is truly wide open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank nurse practitioners for their vital 
contribution to nursing care in Saskatchewan and I want to 
extend a warm welcome to them as official members of the 
primary health care teams across the province. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the opposition critic for Health, 
the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure that 
I rise today in response to the ministerial statement and in doing 
so to welcome Donna and Karen to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that there are many things that we disagree 
with the government and many things that we surprisingly do 
agree with. And one of the things that we surprisingly or not so 
surprisingly agree with the government is the importance that 
we place on the role of nurses and primary health care teams 
across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it is important to recognize the many 
contributions that nurses make to the health care system in 
Saskatchewan. For years they have been right at the forefront of 
providing quality health care to Saskatchewan residents. And, 
Mr. Speaker, as of relatively recently nurses have been 
challenged to move up their scope of practice and move to a 
more important role in the health care system as nurse 
practitioners or nurse people that are in the forefront and 
operating much more independently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this concept was recognized when the legislation 
was changed to The Registered Nurses Amendment Act and 
I’m pleased to see that the government has followed through 
with the appropriate regulations to define appropriately the role 
of nurse practitioners in the province. 
 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

Mr. Speaker, this allows nurse practitioners and nurses to 
indeed work as more important contributing members to 
primary health care teams, to also even act a lot more 
independently in many instances in our communities. These 
opportunities for nurses in Saskatchewan are not restricted to 
rural or remote locations, but indeed have important roles even 
in an urban setting. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we very much supported these changes to The 
Registered Nurses Act when they were introduced and we very 
much support and want to make sure that they are able to 
operate at their full scope of practice. And so we very much 
support that these regulations are in place and we look forward 
to seeing the positive outcome of these nurses operating to their 
full scope of practice in the communities across Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased today to stand on behalf of the government and table 
responses to written questions no. 249 and 250. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 249 and 250 have 
been submitted. Why is the member from Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to proceed with 
private members’ Bills now and then revert to the 75-minute 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melfort has requested leave 
for the Assembly to proceed to private Bills first and then revert 
to the 75-minute debate. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 301 — The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The college at 
Hepburn, traditionally known as Hepburn Bible Institute, is in 
my constituency and I’ve known of that school for a long time. 
It’s been around I believe since the beginning of the previous 
century. It has served the Christian community in that area very 
well, in fact not only in that particular area but provincially and 
internationally. 
 
And in keeping with the times, they find the need there to go 
ahead and change their name somewhat to accommodate their 

business interests and the recognition that they want as a Bible 
college. And, Mr. Speaker, to that end I move Bill No. 301, the 
Bethany Bible College amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Martensville that Bill No. 301, The Bethany College 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill and referral to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Bills. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Fountain of Life 
School of Ministry Inc. Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Fountain of Life School of Ministry was founded in 1997 and 
since that time have enjoyed certification through the 
Government of Saskatchewan Department of Learning as a 
private vocational school. Their purpose, however, has been to 
train ministers of religion. 
 
When the school was formed in 1997, the national occupation 
code described a minister of religion as a vocational career that 
requires only two years of post-secondary training. Since that 
time the code has been changed to require that a minister of 
religion have a bachelor’s degree, and therefore the Fountain of 
Life School of Ministry is petitioning the government in order 
to confer degrees in religious studies and theology, thus 
allowing the school to conform with the national occupational 
code standards for this vocation. 
 
And therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 302, 
The Fountain of Life School of Ministry Inc. Act be now read a 
second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that Bill 203, The Fountain of Life School of 
Ministry Inc. Act be now read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill and referral to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Bills. 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan School Trustees’ 
Association Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
have within the fine riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre the 
headquarters for the Saskatchewan School Boards Association. 
Now of course they’ve been known for many, many years as 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association. They’ve 
recently changed their name and in terms of keeping their 
legislation up to date, they have come forward with a request 
pursuant thereto. 
 
As such, Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 303, The Saskatchewan 
School Trustees’ Association Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone east that Bill No. 303, The Saskatchewan School 
Trustees’ Association Amendment Act be now read a second 
time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. Is it the wish of the Assembly to adopt the 
Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill and referral to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly to 
move a motion regarding the absence of a member for a 
conference. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melfort has requested leave 
to move a motion with respect to the absence of a member for a 
conference. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. I recognize the 
member for Melfort. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence for a Member 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Regina Douglas Park, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the member from 
Cannington from Monday, May 3, 2004 to Friday, May 
21, 2004 inclusive, to attend a parliamentary visit in 
Westminster on behalf of this Assembly. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Regina Douglas Park: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 
Cannington from Monday, May 3, 2004, to Friday, May 
21, 2004 inclusive, to attend the parliamentary visit in 
Westminster on behalf of this Assembly. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Affirmation of Support for the Canadian Wheat Board 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. It is my great 
honour and pleasure today to rise on behalf of the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus to move a motion. I’ll read the motion 
so that my statement, my comments can . . . people will 
understand where I’m coming from. 
 
Later in my speech I will be moving: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its ongoing support for the 
Canadian Wheat Board and its historical mandate to 
conduct the orderly marketing of grain on behalf of 
Canadian farmers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am honoured because of my personal heritage, 
my grandparents who fought hard and were lifelong farmers 
and lifelong supporters of the Saskatchewan wheat board . . . or 
the Canadian Wheat Board. And it served them very well. 
 
I am proud to stand because my heritage includes my parents 
who farmed and were . . . and continue to support the Canadian 
Wheat Board, as do many other families. But more importantly, 
I want to stress this: I’m proud to speak for the future, which 
includes my daughter, my son-in-law, my grandchildren, who 
are in their third year of farming and who are proud supporters 
of the Canadian Wheat Board and who understand what this 
issue is all about — my grandchildren perhaps less so than the 
older ones in that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the wheat board . . . I just, I want to talk a bit 
about . . . The mission of the board is, and I quote: 
 

The . . . (Canadian Wheat Board) markets quality products 
and services to maximize returns to western Canadian 
grain producers. 

 
That’s their mission. This is what the wheat board is all about. 
They have goals to develop, to attract and develop markets 
worldwide. The member for Kindersley, I invite you to speak to 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

this motion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Good, and when it’s 
your turn I invite you to speak to it. You tell, you tell . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the member 
to make his remarks toward . . . to the Chair, please. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
What the wheat board is all about, Mr. Speaker, is so that 
agriculture producers can get the fairest return on their labour, 
on their investment. They invest their land, their time, their 
machinery, their fuel cost, their seed, and so on, to produce the 
best quality crops, grains in the world. And that’s indisputable. 
They produce, Canadian farmers produce the finest wheat and 
durum wheat. 
 
Incidentally on durum wheat, something I found out as I was 
researching this, the Canadian Wheat Board actually trades . . . 
Nearly two-thirds of the durum wheat in Canada is traded 
through the Canadian wheat . . . or in the world, rather. 
Two-thirds of the durum wheat through the world is traded 
through the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite don’t want to 
understand the wheat board. There’s no one so deaf as anyone 
who refuses to listen, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a real shame, 
because the wheat board is something that is in place. It is there 
to protect and to enhance life for rural Saskatchewan, many of 
whom are constituents of many of the members opposite. 
There’s none, I repeat, there’s no one so deaf, Mr. Speaker, as 
he who will not listen. 
 
The Australian Wheat Board conducted a little study. The 
Australian Wheat Board is set up . . . There are many 
similarities between the Australian Wheat Board and the 
Canadian Wheat Board. Single-desk marketing is one of the key 
elements of what the wheat board is all about, Mr. Speaker, 
much like . . . I’ll get into OPEC (Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries) in a bit, in a minute. But first, the 
Australian Wheat Board did a study on its 2000 crop year and 
they determined that the Australian Wheat Board returned to 
Australian farmers $13 a tonne more by having single-desk 
marketing as opposed to survival of the fittest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Australian Wheat Board and the Canadian 
Wheat Board have many similarities, as I say, in their structure. 
They have many similarities in how they operate, and they both 
believe in single-desk marketing. And as a result in Australia 
there was in 2000, $250 million more returned to Australian 
producers, or Australian farmers, as a result of the Australian 
Wheat Board. A similar picture could be painted in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d mentioned OPEC and I want to get back to 
that. The wheat board in many ways is similar to OPEC, the 
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, based mainly 
in the Middle East, but also in Venezuela. And what OPEC has 
decided to do, Mr. Speaker, what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. This is the 
75-minute debate. There’s usually room for six or seven people 
to speak on it and I’d like people to speak on it one at a time. 
 

I recognize the member for Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you. What OPEC has 
decided to do is they grade their oil. There’s various grades of 
oil because all oil isn’t equal, just like all wheat isn’t equal — is 
not equal, all barley is not equal, and all durum fits into various 
grades. So you grade it, you set a benchmark price. And the 
OPEC companies have agreed not to compete with each other 
on price for the same product. That’s an important distinction. 
So they have single-desk marketing. 
 
And the member for Kindersley will keep chirping and not 
listening. There’s much he could learn — maybe not from me 
but there’s much he could learn on the Canadian Wheat Board. 
He could actually listen to his own constituent who chairs the 
Canadian Wheat Board and obviously is a very, very firm 
supporter of single-desk marketing. 
 
In fact I heard, I heard that Ken Ritter, the Chair of the Wheat 
Board, being interviewed on the radio just the other day. And 
Mr. Ritter — the member for Kindersley’s constituent, Ken 
Ritter — says, you cannot, you simply cannot have single-desk 
marketing and open market at the same time. It just does not . . . 
you have one or the other but not both at the same time. 
 
And in fact the wheat board, Mr. Speaker, has done some very 
good advertising of late, advertising that many cattle producers 
can relate to. And I commend them on pointing out the reality 
about a wheat board that includes single-desk marketing versus 
a wheat board that does not. Because without single-desk 
marketing there’s very little reason to have a wheat board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I point out that over many years . . . Well let me 
back up. In 1998 the wheat board Act was amended and 10 of 
the directors are now directly elected by grain producers, 
directly. You must have a Canadian Wheat Board permit book 
before you can vote in this election, simple as that. Ten out of 
fifteen are directly elected, five are appointed by the federal 
government, which houses the responsibility for the Canadian 
Wheat Board Act — its legislation, if I might put it that way. 
And they have some responsibility to backstop if the bottom fell 
out of prices. 
 
But since 1998, over 80 per cent of the directors of the wheat 
board that have been elected by farmer/producers — over 80 
per cent of the directors elected — have stated in their election 
that they are supporters of single-desk marketing, and they are 
overwhelmingly supported, overwhelmingly supported. They 
have had instances where a director was elected on an opposite 
policy, and when he saw what the results were, that director 
flipped and became a believer in single-desk marketing and one 
of the staunchest supporters of the Canadian Wheat Board that 
they’ve ever had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to go to single-desk marketing as the opposition 
would have us do, pits farmer against farmer. It is simply put: if 
two farmers are vying for exactly the same market, they’re 
competing against each other. You either have . . . you either 
believe in single-desk marketing or you don’t, and I can see that 
one of the members does not, Mr. Speaker, by the actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this draws a definite line. Members on this side of 
the House know the value of single-desk marketing. We know 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

that when you can do a study and show that you can get $13 a 
tonne more into agriculture producer’s pocket, this is a valuable 
resource. We know that the Canadian Wheat Board has its 
expenses come out of and are paid for by farmers in the pool. 
We know that. So it’s not a subsidy. I want to say that. But we 
know that the Canadian Wheat Board puts money into the 
pockets of farmers. 
 
What do farmers need? I’ve yet to have a farmer come to the 
Legislative Chamber and say oh, we don’t need money. In all of 
my time being an elected member, I’ve yet to have a farmer — 
or anyone else, for that matter — come to the Legislative 
Chamber and say, oh don’t worry about a support program; 
we’ve got lots of money. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got the Canadian Wheat Board, 
which is one of the best methods of enhancing the income of 
grain producers in Saskatchewan and indeed in Western Canada 
— in Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta, and into the Peace 
in British Columbia. We already have the Canadian Wheat 
Board. We already know that this enhances the lives of 
Saskatchewan’s, in particular, producers. 
 
We have a situation where the Conservatives in Alberta have 
introduced — I shouldn’t say the Conservatives in Alberta, I 
should say a private member who happens to be a Conservative 
in Alberta — introduced a motion to do away with the Canadian 
Wheat Board. Now it’s a private member’s motion, I will say 
that. But it’s the ideology that is shared by far too many 
members on the opposite side of this House. It’s an ideology 
that is dangerous for Saskatchewan’s grain producers. 
 
Why in the world are they so determined to take $13 a tonne or 
. . . roughly, out of producers’ pockets? Why do they want to 
take that out of my son-in-law and my daughter’s pocket? It’s 
not like they’ve got too much money out there; I know that. 
Some, in fact . . . In fact, I’ll venture to say, it’s tougher farming 
today than when I grew up on a farm. It’s tougher to earn a 
living on the farm today than it was then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So why is it that members opposite are so determined to do 
away with the Canadian Wheat Board? Why is it, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re so determined to have this rugged individualism that 
pits farmer neighbour against farmer neighbour against farmer 
neighbour? 
 
And you know what? When you have that sort of an effort, 
farmer selling against farmer, one is going to win. Let’s assume 
I’m the smartest of the neighbours this year and I win and I sell 
my product. Just, just bear with me. Let’s assume that. Well 
then, what happens next year when my neighbour is more 
desperate and needs the cash and says, I’m going to drop the 
price, I’m going to get the jump on that other, that neighbour. 
He’s smarter than me that year, but we both lose because we’re 
in this endless drive to the bottom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We don’t need to drive to the bottom. We need to elevate 
ourselves above that. We need to support the Canadian Wheat 
Board. We have a proven product. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time is drawing nigh and I am most interested 
in hearing members opposite — particularly the member for 
Carrot River Valley who actually spoke at a Western Canadian 

separation meeting saying we should outlaw, should do away 
with the Canadian Wheat Board. And I’m interested in hearing 
other members also, where they stand on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my honour and my pleasure to move: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its ongoing support for the 
Canadian Wheat Board and its historical mandate to 
conduct the orderly marketing of grain on behalf of 
Canadian farmers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the member indicate the 
seconder to the motion. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the House. The hon. 
member for Meadow Lake is the seconder of the motion. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its ongoing support for the 
Canadian Wheat Board and its historical mandate to 
conduct the orderly marketing of grain on behalf of 
Canadian Farmers. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Meadow Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to second the motion, that 
being: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its ongoing support for the 
Canadian Wheat Board and its historical mandate to 
conduct the orderly marketing of grain on behalf of 
Canadian farmers. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, as I listen to the heckling from across 
the way, I find it kind of interesting. And I’ve made this 
observation, Mr. Speaker, over the last, oh, I don’t know, month 
or month and half, Mr. Speaker. It appears to me, Mr. Speaker, 
that the members opposite have some difficulty in accepting 
democracy. They have difficulty in accepting and understanding 
the process where, when the public in whatever constituency — 
whether it’s a constituency of Saskatchewan, or whether it’s 
sort of Western Canada, Mr. Speaker — when the electorate 
makes a decision, they have a difficult time accepting that 
decision. 
 
It appears that they still have not accepted the decision of the 
majority of the people of Saskatchewan in this last provincial 
election. And it seems to me it ties in very nicely into this 
debate, Mr. Speaker. Because by the amount of criticism that I 
hear from across the way, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that they 
have difficulty as well accepting the notion that, through a 
democratic process, the majority of producers also believe in 
the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker. 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

I encourage, I encourage them, Mr. Speaker, to put forth, 
continue to put forth, Mr. Speaker, their positions on this 
because that’s important to have a healthy debate. It really, truly 
is. 
 
But when the electorate through a democratic process have 
made a decision, Mr. Speaker, those members opposite should 
accept that. That needs to be continually challenged, but they 
should accept that and get on with life, Mr. Speaker. And in this 
particular debate with the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, 
it is absolutely clear that the electorate, the producers have 
clearly said that they want the maintenance, Mr. Speaker, of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, eight of the ten, or 80 per cent, of farmer-elected 
directors currently support the single-desk selling mandate of 
the Canadian Wheat Board. Mr. Speaker, here’s another 
statistic. Mr. Speaker, in the latest election of five Canadian 
Wheat Board members held in, in the election held in 2002, 
four of the five people elected, again 80 per cent, expressed 
their strong support for the single-desk selling mandate of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. And of the entire votes cast in the first 
round for all candidates running in the last election, those who 
publicly expressed their support for single-desk selling as 
indicated, Mr. Speaker, they received approximately 56 per cent 
of the vote, while those expressing support for the marketing 
choice only received 44 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s clear that Saskatchewan continues to 
support the continuation of the Canadian Wheat Board 
single-desk selling authority because we think that it increases 
— increases, Mr. Speaker — the returns to wheat and barley 
farmers and is supported by, as I’ve indicated, a clear majority 
of producers. And again, that should be respected by members 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, benchmarking research conducted by the 
department of agricultural economics at the University of 
Saskatchewan, indicates they . . . indicates Canadian farmers, 
FARMGATE wheat returns for 2000 and 2001 were $10.49 per 
tonne higher — I repeat higher — compared to the returns 
under market conditions without the Canadian Wheat Board’s 
single-desk selling. 
 
As a 10, as 10-year average, wheat and durum wheat production 
in Saskatchewan is 13.53 million tonnes. The annual value of 
the single desk to Saskatchewan producers is estimated at a 
whopping $142 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The single-desk selling authority enables the Canadian Wheat 
Board to have economic influence on behalf and to the benefit 
of producers with grain handling companies and the railways. 
Commercial agreements, Mr. Speaker, in place as part of the 
agreement on grain handling and transportation yielded, I am 
advised, savings of 11.2 million, Mr. Speaker, in the second 
quarter of ’03-04 crop year alone. 
 
These savings are distributed to farmers through the Pool 
accounts. They are in addition to the 7.9 million in savings that 
were generated in the first quarter of the year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Grain producers have clearly, I think, demonstrated their wish 
— and I’ve said this — to maintain the current single-desk 

marketing authority through the Canadian Wheat Board. And 
four of the five current directors, as I’ve indicated, were elected 
by producers in Saskatchewan. And eight of the ten directors 
elected by producers throughout the Canadian . . . throughout 
Western Canada support the single-desk selling. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, the operation of the Canadian Wheat 
Board has likely assisted — and I think this is an important 
piece to note, one that is a bit more difficult to measure — but 
has likely assisted in the expansion of the value-added activity 
in wheat and barley on the Prairies. And there is certainly a 
greater share of national milling activity . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Here we go. Well if the member would listen, 
here’s one of the examples, Mr. Speaker. There is many experts 
in the area, Mr. Speaker, who feel that there’s a much greater 
share of national milling activity in Western Canada compared 
to the northern tier states and to the Canadian barley malting 
activity as is concentrated in the Prairies. 
 
And I encourage the members opposite to debate that. And as I 
said, it’s not a perfect science. But generally experts in the area 
would agree that this is one of the value-added areas that has 
resulted as a direct result of single-desk marketing and the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at the number of challenges to the 
Canadian Wheat Board from out of the US (United States) by 
producers, it tells me something, Mr. Speaker. It says to me just 
. . . I’m not necessarily an old person, Mr. Speaker, but having 
. . . It just seems to me when people protest something, it has 
had an influence on their life. If you were of no significance, 
have no influence, generally people sort of ignore you. But 
there have been a huge number of challenges to the Canadian 
Wheat Board. It tells me that the Canadian Wheat Board has 
been successful in marketing their products and our products 
and Western Canadian producers’ products into the US. 
 
If they were unsuccessful in marketing those products, I don’t 
think you would hear much complaining out of the US, and you 
would have very few appeals. Fortunately for us, Mr. Speaker, I 
think we have been . . . I think we knew the results, but 
fortunately for us, the rulings have always been in support of 
the Canadian Wheat Board. And I suspect that there will be 
many more challenges to the Canadian Wheat Board. But it tells 
me, Mr. Speaker, that the Canadian Wheat Board is not 
insignificant. It tells me that they have been largely successful 
in the marketing of those products into the US. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go on a little bit into the recent 
discussions on the legislation that’s being proposed in Alberta, 
if I could. The legislation, as I understand it, does not propose 
to do away with the Canadian Wheat Board, but it talks about 
giving producers a choice. I will argue that ultimately it really 
does propose to do away with the Canadian Wheat Board 
because that’s ultimately what would happen through sort of a 
national choice. 
 
And I want to . . . Because I think it summarizes fairly well, I 
want to quote from a letter to the editor in the Leader-Post of 
April 29, just today, Mr. Speaker, from the current Chair of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, where he says . . . And I’m just going 
to pull out a couple of sections. It’s in reference to the Alberta 
Agriculture minister, Shirley McClellan. He says this: 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

At a time when many farmers are suffering from financial 
hardship, when governments are struggling to find funds 
to help them, when farmers are witnessing consolidation 
and concentration of power in . . . grain marketing system 
and disappearing margins, this announcement can only be 
greeted with surprise and disappointment. 
 
The current system for marketing wheat and barley in 
Western Canada includes an open domestic market for 
feed grains and a single-desk approach to selling grain in 
the export and human consumption markets. 
 
Farmers are smart businesspeople (he goes on and says), 
as McClellan herself has often acknowledged. Why have 
the majority of farmers voted in three consecutive . . . 
(Canadian Wheat Board) elections for directors who 
support this single-desk approach? They had the choice 
and they chose the single desk because a majority of them 
believe that in today’s globalized grain market the best 
way for Prairie farmers to thrive is to band together. 

 
That’s in free-market Alberta, Mr. Speaker, in free-market 
Alberta. And I could go on but I think that that very well 
summarizes, Mr. Speaker, what Alberta producers think about 
this. I think that Premier Klein, and the Agriculture minister 
will be surprised by the reaction of Alberta producers to this 
proposed legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see that I’m also getting close to the end here as 
well, but I want to talk about some of the things, if I could, Mr. 
Speaker, about what has also gone on in Alberta. You know, the 
Alberta government pushed for a continental barley market, Mr. 
Speaker. They kept barley out of the Canadian Wheat Board for 
a time. And I argued that was a bad choice because, in three 
months, barley prices dropped by one-third and, after 90 days, it 
was reinstated to the Canadian Wheat Board and quickly 
bounced back to its previous price. 
 
The Alberta government deregulated the hog industry because 
Peter Pocklington, Mr. Speaker, said that he could not compete 
with Alberta’s pork single desk — a bad choice. The Alberta 
hog price industry was a disaster for farmers there, Mr. Speaker, 
and only for 18 months in the past five years have hog farmers 
had profitable returns for slaughter hogs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Alberta government deregulated power, 
natural gas, and sold off Alberta government telephones. That 
was a disaster as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Regina Coronation Park, seconded by the member for Meadow 
Lake: 
 

That this Assembly affirm its ongoing support for the 
Canadian Wheat Board and its historical mandate to 
conduct the orderly marketing of grain on behalf of 
Canadian farmers. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Thunder Creek. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my great pleasure to 
enter into this debate over the monopoly powers of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
The member from Regina Coronation Park, in moving this 
motion — that member clearly not a farmer, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — compares the Canadian Wheat Board to OPEC. He 
correctly points out that OPEC has power in the marketplace 
because they control most of the oil exports in the world. But he 
fails to recognize that the Canadian Wheat Board represents 
only a very tiny proportion of exported wheat and barley in the 
world and an even tinier, much tinier proportion of the 
production, wheat and barley production in the world. 
 
He states incorrectly that the Alberta legislature is entering a 
Bill . . . entering into debate on a Bill to do away with the 
Canadian Wheat Board. Mr. Speaker, that is simply not true, 
and that member either knows or ought to know that it is not 
true. And that member and others on that side of this Hon. 
Assembly ought to show more interest in the truth. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake goes on to make wild claims 
about the benefit to Western Canada of the Canadian Wheat 
Board — numbers taken right out of propaganda of the wheat 
board. And I will be balancing his claims, I will be balancing 
his claims off of some facts during my discussion of this 
motion. 
 
Americans — Americans who deal in the private grain trade 
and understand the price discovery mechanisms at play in the 
private grain trade and understand how commodity exchanges 
work and how commodity exchanges arrive at those prices, 
those transparent prices of privately traded grains — do not 
trust the Canadian Wheat Board price-setting mechanism as 
being transparent or even reflective of any value whatsoever for 
Canadian grain. And they will continue to harass us in trade 
disputes as long as we cling to this system that is so out of step 
with free enterprise, with their system, and with the way the 
grain is marketed and priced in the rest of the world. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of my comments, I will be 
proposing an amendment to this motion, and that amendment 
will be seconded by the member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, farmers believe that there are many 
reasons why the Canadian Wheat Board is not delivering the 
best price and highest profit margin that they should be 
receiving for their grain. One of those reasons is the 
inefficiency of the organization. 
 
Mr. Don Baron — a former editor of the Winnipeg Free Press 
among other career accomplishments and author of the book, 
Canada’s Great Grain Robbery — states bureaucratic red tape 
is stealing the cash needed to make the industry viable. The 
poor structure, accountability, incentives and management have 
long since overpowered any benefits of the single-desk seller. 
Mr. Baron incidentally goes on to challenge the idea that there 
ever were any benefits to single-desk selling. But in any event, 
farmers pay for the administration and other deductions out of 
the Wheat Board’s stated price. 
 
According to the study entitled, The Economics of Single Desk 
Selling of Western Canadian Grain by Professors Colin Carter 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

and R.M.A. Loyns of the University of Manitoba, there are few 
incentives for the Canadian Wheat Board to reduce any of their 
costs. The Canadian Wheat Board’s financial liabilities are fully 
guaranteed by the federal government. It does not have a 
bottom line and at best as many political reference . . . 
Therefore the board does not pursue improvements in the 
industry and in the way that market forces would. 
 
Carter and Loyns document that because of this the following 
are extra costs that farmers must pay for single-desk selling. 
Cost item, wheat board administration, $1.80 a tonne for wheat 
and $1.75 extra for barley. For protein and grade giveaway, 
$2.85 a tonne for wheat. Delays in varietal development, $4 for 
wheat and $4 for barley a tonne. 
 
Free farm storage for excess malting barley, five fifty a tonne 
for barley. Excessive handling charges, $4 a tonne for wheat 
and $4 a tonne for barley. Overage, demurrage, extra freight 
and port congestion, $3 a tonne for wheat and $3.10 a tonne for 
barley. 
 
Excess cleaning, $2.35 a tonne for wheat and $2.80 a tonne for 
barley. Production inefficiency, $4 a tonne for wheat and $4 a 
tonne for barley. Delays in wheat board payments — this is 
interest costs to farmers — $4.10 a tonne for wheat and $3.35 a 
tonne for barley. 
 
Total extra costs per tonne because of the Canadian Wheat 
Board single-desk selling regime; $26.15 a tonne for wheat and 
$28.50 a tonne for barley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in other words farmers pay dearly 
for inefficiencies that a single-desk seller has no incentive to 
reduce. In a free market, because of competition, there is more 
incentive to reduce costs in order to gain economic advantage. 
 
The Canadian Wheat Board suffocates, the Canadian Wheat 
Board suffocates the western prairies. It nearly eliminates the 
domestic value-added industry. The Prairie Agricultural Digest 
states that Canada is the world’s largest exporter of durum 
wheat, yet it is a huge importer of pasta. There are no 
value-added pasta plants in the Prairies because if they want 
prairie wheat, they must buy it through the wheat board and 
lose the economic advantage of purchasing it locally. 
 
An example of this is the farmer-owned pasta plant facility that 
was to be built in southeastern Saskatchewan several years ago. 
Farmers sold shares and were prepared to buy locally grown 
wheat under contract and process it into pasta for export to the 
US similar to one of the large pasta plants — and very 
successful pasta plants — at Carrington, North Dakota. All that 
group needed was a Canadian Wheat Board exemption so they 
could legally buy their own grain. After weeks of waiting the 
decision was handed down — request denied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this would most likely cause the plant to move to 
North Dakota and surely it did. Now those same Saskatchewan 
farmers are buying shares in the facility at Carrington, North 
Dakota, and attempting to get a wheat board exemption to sell 
their wheat to that plant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the inaccuracies in the statements that the two 
members made in presenting this motion are incredible and 

reflect a total lack of understanding of the issue by anyone on 
that side of the floor. There clearly are no farmers over there, no 
one who has any knowledge of the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will not support that motion, and I tender this 
amendment to it. The amendment reads, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

That all words after Assembly be deleted and the 
following substituted: expresses its grave concern over the 
provincial government’s ongoing failure to provide any 
vision or leadership when it comes to the adoption or 
formulation of innovative agricultural policy in 
Saskatchewan or nationwide, such as options in marketing. 

 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek, seconded by the member for Kindersley: 
 

That all words after Assembly be deleted and the 
following substituted: express its grave concern over the 
provincial government’s ongoing failure to provide any 
vision or leadership when it comes to the adoption or 
formulation of innovative agriculture policy in 
Saskatchewan or nationwide, such as options in marketing. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will be, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — On a point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member please to make her point 
of order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m wondering where you 
would conclude that this amendment is in order in that it 
dramatically changes the intent of the resolution, where we are 
attempting to have a discussion, a private members’ discussion 
on the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member on a point of 
order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I recognize the member for 
Biggar . . . 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
speak to the point of order. This motion is speaking to 
agriculture, to marketing, and we feel that it is totally 
appropriate that this amendment be allowed because it’s part of 
the whole package that concerns the Canadian Wheat Board and 
the options of marketing. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I thank the member for 
her point of order and the member for speaking on it. 
 
As members know in seventy-five minute debate there 
generally is a great deal of latitude to debate issues that are of 
importance to the public. And upon reading this, the last phrase 
— such as options in marketing — and the fact that it does deal 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

with agriculture, that I would view that this amendment is in 
order and that the member’s point of order is not well taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for that 
wise ruling and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Anyways, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’m getting lectured now by the member from 
Regina South. And as we’re discussing the Canadian Wheat 
Board, much of what’s come across from the other side has 
been nonsensical today. So where to start, Mr. Speaker? 
 
My family has farmed in this province since before the province 
was founded. The farm that I live on with my wife and family 
will be 100 years old next year. My sons are the sixth 
generation living in the same house, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
is my business. I understand it. 
 
There are problems with the Canadian Wheat Board. We have 
never, we have never said that we want the Canadian Wheat 
Board destroyed. I know Ken Ritter. I’ve known him my whole 
life. I know the member from Regina South has, also knows 
Mr. Ritter. And Mr. Ritter ran on a ticket on opening up 
marketing options. He became the chairman of the wheat board 
— a board that is instituted by the federal government, that has 
five appointed members, that at the end of the day is under the 
federal government’s thumb. And changes have been made. 
 
Here is what the problem is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The problem 
is essentially this. We exist in, we exist, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
an industry that is not allowed to market their own products. No 
one else in no other industry has these restrictions put on them. 
Ford makes a car. Ford decides how much the car should be 
sold for. Ford decides who gets to sell their car, how they 
advertise it. That’s the end of the question, and the buyer pays 
the price. 
 
At the end of the day, the grain grown on my farm, no. 1 
Canadian durum, fifteen five protein right across the board last 
year . . . And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that means 
it is the highest protein content. For the members opposite, 
that’s rated by the Canadian Grains Commission. But we had 
stuff on our farm last year at 17.7 per cent. There should be, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a niche market just for that pasta, for the pasta 
produced out of that for high-end athletes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
If I were to do that, if I were to take that own grain out of my 
granary, break it up, put some water on it, chop it up, put it in a 
box and call it couscous, I would be a criminal, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is wrong. 
 
The member opposite from Regina Coronation Park made this 
absurd, absurd statement that there is a parallel between the 
CWB (Canadian Wheat Board) and OPEC. Canada produces 1 
per cent of the world’s grains, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We control 
21 percent of the world’s export market. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1946 we controlled 50 per cent of the 
world export market. So how’s the CWB been doing? They’ve 
lost nearly 30 per cent of world export market over the last 50 
years. It gets worse and worse and worse. And what do we have 
to show for it? They send me more calendars every year. This is 
the reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Now do I think everything about the wheat board is wrong? 
Absolutely not. There are some positives to it. Number one, I 
get to be paid. I know that it is guaranteed by the Government 
of Canada. Number two, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that the 
situation in trading into Asia with the Canadian Wheat Board 
sometimes has some advantages because of cultural differences. 
Asian countries often like to deal with a government institution. 
There are advantages there. Does it mean it has to be a 
single-desk seller? Absolutely not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What also happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I go to sign a 
contract for the grain — and this is what members opposite just 
do not understand — I take 100 tonnes of durum and I contract 
it to the Canadian Wheat Board. That contract, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I must honour — 85 per cent delivery or I pay 
penalties on . . . However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the Canadian 
Wheat Board doesn’t call for that contract, I don’t get paid. 
 
So in 2000, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I had a very good crop 
on my farm, only 60 per cent of my durum was sold. So I’m left 
at the end of the year locked into a system where 40 per cent of 
my crop cannot be used. This year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
producing the best durum in the world — no. 1, fifteen five 
protein — and they’re likely only going to take 70 per cent of 
that production, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now if you put that in the course of over four years, you’ve had 
almost a year of production that you can’t sell. This is a large, 
large problem to the crisis facing farm families today. Because 
orderly marketing is a failure. 
 
There’s a greater reason for this failure too, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. When we hire our traders to sell our grain, their 
salaries are capped at around $100,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
When you start to trade grain for Cargill, you start at half a 
million US. Our traders don’t do a good enough job. My farm, 
my family deserves the best traders in the world, done 
systematically. I use the best accountants; I use the best 
lawyers. I have a right to be able to sell my product wherever I 
want. 
 
Members opposite, they like the Canadian Wheat Board 
because of the nature of control. And we should remember the 
Canadian Wheat Board was introduced by a Conservative 
government in the 1930s. 
 
The Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was a 
voluntary organization until the Second World War. During the 
Second World War, for reasons of national security, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it became a single-desk selling agent and at 
that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was conglomerated that we 
couldn’t sell on an open market. 
 
We need to move back to the pre-World War II situation. In 
1919, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my great-grandfather on the free 
market netted $45,000. That’s much greater, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, than many of my constituents made last year, and that 
was 1919. He had a free . . . And that was because of the end of 
the First World War and there was a shortage in grain. 
 
We need those opportunities again. We need those 
opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not that the wheat board 
should be abandoned. Members from my rural municipalities 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

tell me we have positives about the wheat board and I support 
those. 
 
What we do need . . . I hear the member from Athabasca 
yipping from his seat and wonder if he even has a clue of what 
durum wheat is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It gets down to fundamentals about freedom. My family’s been 
here for 100 years. We’ve grown grain every year on that farm. 
We plant every year. And at the end of the day, we’re not 
allowed to sell our product the way that we see fit. And that’s 
wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And if the Canadian Wheat Board gave me the best price for 
my product, I would support them because that would be a good 
business decision. That’s not the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Sometimes, as in this year, the crop year is 75 per cent over. 
The crop has only had 70 per cent movement and the payout of 
that has only been 60 per cent. This is the reason for a crisis in 
agriculture. 
 
Why should we have to wait a year and a half to get our money 
for a product that when I move a non-board grain, I can get my 
full cheque in two weeks, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite don’t have a clue 
about what the future of agriculture holds. There are only two 
aspects to making money in agriculture — how much you 
produce and what you get for it. That’s the end result. There are 
no other variables. 
 
For years and years and years, we have been forced, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to produce more for less. We need to be in control of 
our own markets so at the end of the day we can capture the 
end-use market, the 500 per cent markup in the grocery store 
that is sold there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from what we get. We 
get 5 to 7 per cent of the actual price of food. We need canning 
factories in Kindersley. We need pasta plants in Swift Current. 
 
And what do these members opposite say? Well if the 
government can’t own it, if the government can’t be in control 
of it, we don’t want it. And that’s why systemically they have 
managing the demise of rural Saskatchewan. That’s why in my 
rural municipality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 17 farmers 
that are under 40 years old. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I expanded my farm 10 quarters this 
spring; I know what I’m talking about. The members opposite 
are no longer farming. They don’t understand it, they don’t get 
it. 
 
Eighty per cent of the land in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is farmed by 20 per cent of the farmers. We have the 
situation where we are getting into fourth and fifth generation 
farms to create wealth here. And the only way to create wealth 
is to expand and capture end-use market, and we cannot do that 
through the Canadian Wheat Board; we cannot do that through 
a single-desk selling agency. 
 
I hope the wheat board is around for years to come. Should they 
have a monopoly? Absolutely not. If I wanted to choose to sell 
my grain through the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and own shares 
in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and get returns through the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, that should be up to me. It shouldn’t 
be left up to a federal government that moves grain through 
Canadian Steamship Lines and Paul Martin who’s robbed us for 
years and years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I will be speaking against the motion in favour of the 
amendment. And I would windup by saying, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, these members opposite should do their homework. 
They don’t speak for farmers. They are managing our demise. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With leave, and thanks to the Minister of 
Agriculture, to introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. I recognize the 
Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, some visitors in your gallery who are 
from Saskatoon who I have known, and several members have 
known, for some time. 
 
And they are Maureen Fryett, sitting in your gallery, who I 
believe still works for the Service Employees’ International 
Union. And behind Maureen is Barrie Miller, who is a Crown 
prosecutor in Saskatoon. And with him is their son. And I’m 
afraid I don’t know their son’s name, but I’m sure he’s taking 
an interest in this very lively debate in the Legislative Assembly 
and his parents are advising him as to the goings-on in here, and 
I’m sure it’s very educational. 
 
And I’d like other members to join me in welcoming these 
visitors here today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Affirmation of Support for the Canadian Wheat Board 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
happy to have an opportunity to join in this debate on the 
Canadian Wheat Board. And I want to start off by saying that 
some of the points that have been made by the members 
opposite are legitimate points in terms of the debate and the 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

questions that are being struggled with by producers across our 
prairies. 
 
We certainly want to see value-added developments in the 
Prairies and we want to do that in ways that are sustainable. We 
want to see developments that will really work for the Prairies. 
There’s been a lot of analysis, a lot of discussion made over the 
years around these issues and there is no clear conclusion that 
undermining the wheat board’s mandate for single-desk selling 
will solve the problem. 
 
And I want to harken back to a time earlier when we heard that 
what would make all the difference in the world for value-add 
in Saskatchewan would be if we just got rid of the Crow rate. 
That would really solve the problem and we would see a lot 
more value-add. Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the . . . There were 
many producers in the province that were pushing for that. 
There were many producers in the province who were saying 
don’t do it; it will cost us in the end. 
 
Well the most conservative analysis these days would say that it 
costs us about $300 million a year. That’s what it takes out of 
producers’ pockets in this province, Mr. Speaker. And on top of 
that, Mr. Speaker, it has added increased costs for transportation 
in the province with the requirement to fix roads. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we recognize that those . . some people see solutions 
in a quick fix — if you’ll just do this, that’s going to make all 
the difference in the world. 
 
We have in place in the Prairies, with the Canadian Wheat 
Board, a democratic structure that producers have voted their 
board delegates in for years now and those delegates have 
brought with them a variety of different gifts and perspectives. 
 
And two of the members that I would like to refer to are very 
high-profile members. Indeed, Ken Ritter, who is Chair of the 
board, came into this board saying that well, we should have 
options; we shouldn’t be stuck into single desk. And when he 
got into the midst of it, he began to see the advantages that the 
wheat board actually brought for producers. And he began to 
see how they could work together, keeping those advantages, 
but by making some changes to the board, providing more 
options, that the board began to change. 
 
I would also like to reference one of my friends and I would say 
at least an acquaintance of the member from Thunder Creek, 
who was also very adamant that the board, wheat board was 
causing all kinds of problems for producers in Saskatchewan; it 
was putting them at a disadvantage. I would like to speak very 
briefly about Rod Flaman who was in high school with the 
member from Thunder Creek and myself, and was adamant that 
the wheat board should be just simply gotten rid of. 
 
Well Mr. Flaman got involved. He put his name forward to run 
as a director. He was advocating for dual desk. And I tell you 
this is a very intelligent man who has worked hard to 
understand the systems and brought the best of his background 
into the arguments. 
 
He got in as a director of the wheat board and he began again, 
as with Mr. Ritter, to learn the broader functions of the board — 
how they work to gain an advantage for Saskatchewan and 
prairie producers; the kind of market research and intelligence 

that they gain as they look throughout the world and see what’s 
happening in the markets. And they bring that to bear in terms 
of branding the products that we have in this province and 
making sure that with those brands they are into the premium 
markets and getting the very best prices possible for producers 
on the Prairies. 
 
With that new understanding and new vision, I have to 
comment on the courage of Mr. Flaman that he came back to all 
those people that he had been working with for the demise, or at 
least for options, came back and he began to say to his friends 
that he had worked with, we were wrong, we were wrong; this 
Canadian Wheat Board really does work for our benefit. 
 
Well how does it do that, Mr. Speaker? Well there are a number 
. . . there have been a number of analyses done that I think, yes, 
they are disputed. They’re disputed by people across the 
country. But I just want to quote a few of the facts here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The annual value, the annual value of single desk to 
Saskatchewan producers is estimated at approximately $142 
million. This has been verified over many years with different 
studies. Commercial agreements on grain handling and 
transportation yielded savings of 11.2 million in the second 
quarter of the ’03-04 crop year. This in addition to 7.9 million 
savings that were generated in the first quarter of the year. 
 
In 1997, Schmitz, Gray, Schmitz, and Storey, their study 
showed that benefits to barley producers of $72 million 
annually over a 10-year period — that’s 72 million annually of 
benefit to barley producers — stemming from the CWB 
single-desk selling. 
 
In ’96 the Kraft, Furtan, Tyrchniewicz study of the CWB noted 
that they generated benefits for prairie wheat producers of 375 
million per year — that is 18 and . . . $18.88 per tonne. By the 
CWB extraction, a premium for consistency, quality, and by 
reducing costs for producers through shared risk management 
with the federal government, they were able to get these kind of 
results for producers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think some of the issues that people raise 
around options, how do we get the best support for value-added 
in this province — a very, very important question. And I know 
that the directors of the wheat board have been working very 
hard to find ways of doing that. 
 
And they have . . . As the member for Meadow Lake alluded to, 
they have managed to encourage the development of 
value-added. We have more milling, more malting in 
Saskatchewan, in the Prairies, than what we see in our 
counterpart northern United States. Why is that? Well it is 
because of the effect of the policies that the wheat board has 
developed and implemented in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I want to take a broader look as well. One of the realities 
that we have faced continually has been an attack by the 
Americans on the Canadian Wheat Board. Why is that, Mr. 
Speaker? If this wheat board is not providing an advantage to 
our producers, if it is not giving them something better, why is 
it that American producers would continue to attack the wheat 
board year after year after year? It is because, Mr. Speaker, they 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

are providing an advantage to the producers in this province. 
 
I also want to look at the broader world because the world is 
indeed changing. There are countries that simply for many, 
many decades were importing wheat, barley, durum. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there have been many, many changes in their 
production methods. There have been changes in their ability to 
ship. And so we’re seeing a really changing market out there in 
the world, and in that changing market we need to have every 
advantage for our producers that we can possibly get. 
 
Now who is one of the key players in these developing markets, 
Mr. Speaker? One of those who is competing with Canada — is 
making inroads into the markets — is Australia. And how is 
Australia, this nation that is making such inroads into the 
markets, how are they choosing to market their grain? Is it on 
an open market system? No, Australia is also using a wheat 
board. 
 
The Australian Wheat Board is producing premiums for their 
producers and bringing back in more returns for their producers 
than they would on the open market. They are marketing into 
places, Mr. Speaker, that we have been marketing into, and it is 
because they are using some similar processes that are very 
effective in terms of their marketing. 
 
That said, I also want to point to some of the advantages that we 
have seen over these past years in terms of marketing itself. We 
have seen the wheat board and the marketing side of that go 
into markets in the world, branding our wheat as some of the 
best wheat in the world for producing bread and gaining a 
premium price on that. They have sold, they have sold malting 
barley into China. And that malting barley now in one of their 
best years over there, the Tsingtao beer, because of the quality 
of the barley that we have and the branding that has been made, 
50 per cent of the make-up of that, of that beer comes from 
Canadian barley, marketed by the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the folks who are working for this board are 
making inroads. They are bringing premiums for producers in 
the Prairies, and we do not want to see this undermined. Let the 
producers vote. Keep Alberta out of this. Let the producers vote 
and decide what kind of system they want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I speak against the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to enter into this debate this morning concerning the 
Canadian Wheat Board and marketing and, and options. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the point of order . . . that the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana really speaks to the mindset 
and the thinking of the NDP government. It’s a very narrow 
view, a narrow view of, of farming in this province, a narrow 
view of agriculture. And the NDP haven’t evolved with time in 
their thinking. 
 
And I’d just like to go into a bit of history of, of agriculture and 
the wheat board, Mr. Speaker. Back in the ’20s there was a 

situation where the producers in Western Canada were, quite 
frankly, being shafted by the railways, by the grain companies, 
and the line companies. And it was a very, very serious 
situation. This evolved into the implementation of the Canadian 
Wheat Board and, and the Canadian Wheat Board did address 
those concerns at that time. 
 
But since then the world has changed. The marketing options 
have changed in the world. The people in agriculture have 
evolved. Agriculture has evolved to a great extent. But the NDP 
are still stuck, not in the ’40s and ’50s — they’re still stuck in 
the 1920s, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And as we’ve seen, the changes 
have taken place. Now agriculture and the agribusiness industry 
have evolved into many other crops, the canolas, the lentils; 
have diversified into livestock enterprises. 
 
And, quite frankly, these people have voted, concerning the 
Canadian Wheat Board, with their feet. They’ve given up their 
permit books. They don’t rely on the Canadian Wheat Board at 
all because they’re growing crops or they’ve diversified into 
agriculture where the Canadian Wheat Board does not come 
into effect. 
 
So when the members on the government side talk about the 
overwhelming support for the Canadian Wheat Board, it’s not 
true, Mr. Speaker, because only people with permit books are 
. . . have the, have the ability to vote concerning Canadian 
Wheat Board. And as I’ve mentioned already, the agribusiness, 
farmers across Western Canada have already voted by changing 
their policies and their . . . on their farms and their crop 
rotations and their production in their own operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the question this speaks to though is rural 
revitalization. That is the issue that we must look at everything 
. . . the context we must look at everything including the 
Canadian Wheat Board. Mr. Speaker, as we have seen that as 
the wheat prices have dropped over the years, there . . . that is 
not the way that the agriculture is going to evolve in this 
province. 
 
I can only look back to the former minister of Agriculture in the 
Blakeney government and his comments were to livestock 
producers was that we will grow the product and we’ll ship it. 
Well unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, those days are gone. We can’t 
just grow it and ship it any more. What we must do is grow it, 
we must process it, we must package it, and we must do all this 
in Saskatchewan, in Western Canada, so that we produce the 
jobs. More taxpayers in this province, more businesses, more 
agribusiness services in the province by not just growing it and 
shipping it, but to increasing the value of these products in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the whole debate 
around the pasta plant and the durum production, there’s an 
example where the Canadian Wheat Board put a stop to a 
business that was wanting to be put up in Saskatchewan. And 
because of the Canadian Wheat Board interference, this pasta 
plant was not constructed in Saskatchewan. This pasta plant did 
not hire employees from Saskatchewan to work in this pasta 
plant and that is really the issue around the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
But what the Saskatchewan Party policy is, is that we don’t 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

want to get rid of the Canadian Wheat Board. We just want the 
producers of this province to have that option — the choice — 
the voluntary choice of either selling through the Canadian 
Wheat Board or selling it on their own. And the producers of 
this province have the great experience and expertise in selling 
their products, non-board, as I’ve mentioned — the canola, the 
lentils, the peas, livestock, cattle, hogs. And so it’s not that the 
producers of this province don’t know how to market their 
products; it’s a fact that the Canadian Wheat Board will not 
allow them to do it. 
 
And I think if the Canadian Wheat Board was opened up to a 
voluntary situation, I believe that the Canadian Wheat Board 
would continue to be a very viable marketing tool for the 
producers in Western Canada, but it would be one option for the 
producer to sell to the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
If the supporters of the single marketing . . . single-desk 
marketing are so strong in favour of the Canadian Wheat Board, 
open it up to a voluntary marketing choice. Let the Canadian 
Wheat Board compete with other options out there. And I 
believe the Canadian Wheat Board will do a very good job 
under that competitive system. 
 
I also believe that it will open up options for the producers of 
products to make decisions based on their own land, on their 
own expertise, their own farming situation, and also base their 
production decisions based on where they can get the best 
dollar. And as I said before, that choice should be given to the 
producers of Saskatchewan. 
 
You look around, the members on the opposite side talk about 
other jurisdictions — Australia. Well let’s just look in Canada. 
The Ontario Wheat Marketing Board, it’s a voluntary board. It 
does a very good job. It’s one player in the choice that 
producers have. And the Ontario marketing board does a very 
good. The producers in Ontario can make their own decisions 
based on their own circumstances in the marketplace, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And when we look at other areas of production, organic 
producers, and again the Canadian Wheat Board has really a 
detrimental effect on the growth of organic industry, livestock 
industry, and diversifying into other areas in the province. And 
I believe the government has to take a real close look in their 
plans for revitalization, not just give lip service to revitalization 
but make substantial changes in the policies that they talk about. 
And I think the Canadian Wheat Board being allowed to be one 
option for marketing for producers is one that they should look 
at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. We 
will now enter into a 10-minute question/comment period. I 
recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the member for Regina Coronation Park. 
 
I happen to know that the member grew up on a farm, which is 
about six miles from my farm. And I remember when he lived 
on the farm, it was primarily wheat board crops that were 

grown. His father and his colleagues grew spring wheat, durum, 
barley, a little bit of flax, which is an off-board crop. 
 
But today, not only on that farm but on just about every farm in 
that community, the wheat board crops are the last priority for 
farmers. They will seed lentils; they will seed mustard; they will 
seed canola; they will seed peas; they will seed barley for sale 
on the open market or in local feed lots — anything but durum 
and wheat. And they wish they could grow more, but it’s just 
not economically viable to grow wheat and durum and board 
crops like it was when he was growing up. 
 
That’s the real world today. So my question to the member is: 
why would he propose that there not be changes and more 
options to marketing grains, given the change in the farming 
patterns and cropping practices in the province? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank my former neighbour, as we 
grew up on farms that fenceline-bordered each other. Mr. 
Speaker, the reality is that Saskatchewan’s farmers have done a 
terrific job in the main of diversifying the crops that they 
produce and so on. 
 
Many of the newer crops that are being grown now simply 
weren’t even open as an option. I recall as we were growing up, 
canola being a new crop developed at the University of 
Saskatchewan. And now you look at the important role that our 
Saskatchewan canola plays, where we’re the biggest producer 
of canola in the world. I think it’s amazing. 
 
And canola is a non-board crop, Mr. Speaker. That’s absolutely 
accurate. There are non-board and there are board crops. You 
either believe in single-desk marketing or an open market with 
respect to the board crops. And I’m curious which the members 
opposite believe in. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
is to the member from Biggar. My question to the member is: 
do you represent the constituents of Biggar? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I just remind members to put their 
comments to the Chair. I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well I thank the member from Nutana for 
asking that question. I certainly do represent the constituents 
from Biggar. I was elected by the constituents of Biggar, and I 
was actually re-elected. And I originally was elected by the 
members from . . . the constituents of Redberry Lake. And I 
believe I represent the constituents of Biggar far better than the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana and the members from the 
NDP government who quite frankly have no idea about 
agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — The member from Nutana, as I said before, 
has a very, very narrow view of agriculture. She’s living in, 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

literally in the ’20s and the ’30s and ’40s and ’50s, and the 
world has changed. And this NDP government has not and will 
not change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
member from Regina Coronation Park. Since he introduced the 
amendment, he also talked about the Australian Wheat Board 
and what they make. He has a ringing endorsement for the 
wheat board. He should have his fingertips . . . This is a 
question I get asked lots: what does it cost exactly to farmers 
. . . a bushel, to sell a bushel of wheat or a bushel of durum? He 
should have that at his fingertips since he has a ringing 
endorsement of the wheat board. 
 
I’ve asked my wheat board representative, and he won’t tell me. 
So I was just hoping that the member opposite would have that 
information on there because that affects, out in my area, the 
way people view the wheat board. Basically they don’t know 
what it costs them personally to sell a bushel. Is it five cents? Is 
it $1, $2, fifty cents, whatever? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am the member from 
Regina Coronation Park. It seems to me there’s lots of members 
across the way that represent rural constituencies and should 
have those numbers absolutely at your fingertips. You tell us 
what the costs are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to . . . I find it rather amusing that so 
many members opposite were born on third and think they hit a 
triple. Mr. Speaker, how is it, how is it that we heard in the 
debate a member opposite saying, oh, wheat board traders are 
restricted. Their salary’s restricted to about $100,000 a year. 
And that member bragged about the Cargill traders starting at 
half a billion dollars a year. How . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Half a million. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Half a million, not half a billion. Thank you. But 
how is it that you can go from 100,000 to $500,000 a year and 
somehow think that paying a trader $500,000 a year is saving 
money? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To the member from Biggar: given that 
the member from Biggar just indicated that he certainly does 
represent the views of his constituents, how does he explain the, 
how does he explain the result in the last Canadian Wheat 
Board advisory elections where a single-desk marketing 
representative was voted for by . . . freely voted for by the 

constituents of Biggar? 
 
They support single-desk marketing. He says dual marketing. 
How does he square his previous answer with his remarks 
during this debate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to thank the member for that question. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ran the last election on allowing 
the . . . (inaudible) . . . a choice in marketing in the Canadian 
Wheat Board, and I was re-elected. And I do represent the 
constituents of Biggar. 
 
The point is, what does the members on the government side 
say to people in southern Saskatchewan who wanted a pasta 
plant and were denied by the Canadian Wheat Board to 
construct and build a pasta plant? And what do they say to those 
people that were going to be employed at that pasta plant and 
the producers of durum in that area? They answer to those 
people that they didn’t care about them, and they will not 
change their policies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, I represent a 
constituency who have farmers who are very keenly interested 
in the motion that we are debating here today. And we have 
farmers on both sides of the issue, and they hold very strong 
opinions. But one opinion that all of them agree on is that if 
there are changes to be made in marketing systems for any 
grains in this country . . . is that the farmers themselves should 
be making those choices. 
 
And my question is to the Minister of Agriculture. Does he 
agree that any future changes be made by the farmers 
themselves rather than having other interest groups such as 
chamber of commerces or federal, provincial governments 
dictating those changes? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I thank the member for the question. I 
think it’s a very good question, and in fact, in fact that is our 
position — that the producers should be making the decision. 
And we have made it clear in our discussions with Alberta that 
we think they should just, as a legislature, back out of this and 
let the producers make the decision. 
 
We have also, Mr. Speaker, we have also seen that the 
producers have made a number of changes within the Canadian 
Wheat Board, and those changes have made it possible for add 
value developments in this province, including the development 
of pasta plants. And there is a process by which producers can 
be engaged in those developments. 
 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

We would like to see, Mr. Speaker, more and more of those 
developments and so would the Canadian Wheat Board. And 
the directors have continued to work to try and make sure that 
the options are there within the single-desk selling that will 
allow for those developments to take place. 
 
So we do believe that the producers should be the ones who are 
making the decision ultimately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Biggar. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is: does the member from Biggar support a single-desk 
marketing system if in fact his constituents again vote for 
single-desk marketing system? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ll thank the 
member for the question. That is a good point. Who gets to vote 
in the Canadian Wheat Board elections? 
 
As I’ve said in my statement that so many people, producers, 
that do not carry Canadian Wheat Board permit books, they 
have voted. They have voted with their feet. They have voted 
against the Canadian Wheat Board. They sell off-board 
products. They have diversified into agriculture. And Mr. 
Speaker, if these people are allowed to have a choice in 
marketing, I am sure that they will accept that wholeheartedly. 
They . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you. The 75-minute debate has 
expired. The next order of business is private members’ 
motions, public Bills and orders. Order. Order. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Motion No. 2 — Proposed Inquiry on 
Health Care Facilities 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise this afternoon to speak to this motion that is a priority 
for the official opposition, given the current state and the 
proposed state of the health care system in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, right across Saskatchewan, people are again 
expressing their concerns and their consternation about what is 
proposed in this health care department, in the budget coming 
out of the recent tabled budget documents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take some opportunity to recount 
some of the NDP’s record in this regard that is more than a just 
a little concerning. Back at the beginning of the 1990s, then 
minister of Health, Simard, came up with a plan to change and 
reform the health care system in Saskatchewan. This had come 
as a result of the election and as a result of in the late 1980s the 

Murray Commission travelling around the province and having 
hearings right across the province, and developing a model for 
where health care could be improved in Saskatchewan. And at 
the time the Murray Commission did a tremendous amount of 
work in conducting their investigation right across the province. 
 
But of course this NDP government, not willing to look at 
something that was done in a very comprehensive and complete 
way when they formed government, had to come up with their 
own system that was based on an inability of them to really 
understand the impact of decisions they were about to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they looked at the system in health care and they 
said, on some kind of philosophical-ideological way, on some 
kind of a way that was based out of senior bureaucracy in the 
Health department here in Regina making the determination 
that Saskatchewan had too many hospitals and too many health 
care facilities, that when they looked at it on paper, it was 
obvious, they said, that this was not going to do and this would 
not be appropriate for the future. 
 
And instead of looking at the Murray Commission report that 
was tabled at the end of the 1980s that had done a very 
thorough and comprehensive assessment of the health care 
system in Saskatchewan, where they had actually done a very 
good job of travelling around the province, where they had done 
a very good job of having broad representation on the Murray 
Commission who had done a very good job of making sure that 
there were tremendous technical and medical and professional 
advisors to make sure that all of this was looked at in a very 
comprehensive way, they . . . Instead of dealing with it that 
way, they just simply got into this ideological kind of a little 
box that they get into and sat down and said, we’ve got to close 
hospitals. 
 
And what they did is they refused to look at the professional 
proposal that was made in the Murray Commission, but they 
also refused to have any empathy or understanding of what the 
implications to communities were going to be as a result of their 
decisions. And so they closed 52 hospitals. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we can see the devastation that resulted. 
 
And you know what’s really kind of ironic is that at the time 
they said, we need to do this in order to make the health care 
system better. And it was pretty hard to disagree with it at the 
time because nobody knew exactly what the result was going to 
be. 
 
It certainly was a major departure between . . . from the 
professional assessment of the Murray Commission. But people 
actually had to say, we know this is going to be very 
devastating for our community. We don’t know where the 
people that counted on the health care services in our 
community are going to go to receive the services in the future. 
 
But one of the things that actually protected communities a little 
bit is community centres and health facilities were in reasonable 
proximity one to another. And when closures occurred in one 
community, it was at least theoretically possible for the 
neighbouring community to pick up some of the burden that 
was inflicted on their neighbour by closure or conversion of 
their facility. 
 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this government inflicted on the people of 
Saskatchewan in the early ’90s the closure of 52 hospitals 
across rural Saskatchewan or their conversion to so-called 
wellness clinics. But at the end of the day, it resulted in fewer 
acute care and long-term beds to deliver services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you do that kind of a thing, when you 
close 62 . . . or 52 hospitals and all the beds and programs 
associated with it, you have an awful lot of nursing 
professionals that are without a job. They were providing 
service in those communities and they were without jobs. 
 
And so all of a sudden there began the process of bumping and 
seniority management. And so what it did is created an 
environment where there was absolutely no potential for young 
nurses to graduate and receive jobs in Saskatchewan. In fact 
many of the younger nurses who didn’t have the seniority at the 
time were forced to leave the province, to leave the country, and 
try to establish their careers in another jurisdiction. 
 
So not only did we lose every opportunity for young nurses to 
graduate from the programs to go and have a job in 
Saskatchewan, we actually had to let go some 600 nurses from 
the system who were surplus, if you like, as a result of all these 
closures. And then the government in their wisdom said oh, 
oops now we’ve created a problem; we’ve got this surplus of 
nurses and we have no jobs for them because we’ve closed all 
these institutions. 
 
So now these rocket scientists and health care geniuses said, 
now that we’ve done this, in order to cope with the situation we 
created, now we got to gut the training programs because 
obviously we don’t need nurses if we have no jobs for them. So 
these geniuses in the Department of Health then decided, oh 
now we got to follow up on one bad decision and we’re going 
to compound it by making another bad decision, and we’re 
going to make sure that the training programs for doctors and 
nurses and health care professionals are diminished almost to 
the point of extinction. And so that’s what they did subsequent 
to their first decision. 
 
And we try to understand of how these decisions, one leading to 
another in a comedy of errors and tragedy, has actually ended 
up to the situation where we are today. So we end up with a 
situation — we close the institutions; we close the beds; we 
remove the access to communities across Saskatchewan from 
these facilities. 
 
And it isn’t just communities in rural Saskatchewan. They 
closed the Plains Health Centre here in Regina which was one 
of the most important tertiary centres for southern 
Saskatchewan. They shut it down. And they said, oh don’t 
worry. That’s no problem. We don’t need it. Our statistics — 
our bean-counters — have come up with the facts and figures 
that said we’re all going to live well, we’re going to live longer, 
and we’re not going to need this sort of help. You know it was 
sort of . . . (inaudible) . . . the day, you know, get well, stay 
well, or farewell because that was your choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where have you heard something like that 
recently? It’s the same old mantra coming over and over again: 
stay well, be healthy, and then die quickly. What’s changed, 
Mr. Speaker? Not an awful lot. There’s been some people 

changed. There’s names changed in these governments, but the 
attitude remains essentially constant. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we ended up with a situation where we 
started to close institutions in communities, then we started 
cutting back on the training and the education of health care 
professionals. So here is the great wellness plan. Once, I think, 
that she saw the mess that she created, Ms. Simard left the 
portfolio — in fact left government. I think she at least finally 
realized that things were difficult. 
 
And let me, while I’m on the topic, let’s sort of let’s trace the 
history. Then this individual came back in SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) and was in 
charge of negotiating contracts resulting in almost every single 
time with a health care strike in the province. And then what 
happens? She leaves SAHO and goes to BC (British Columbia), 
and guess what’s going on in BC now? A health care strike. 
 
You know, somebody should wake up and say, I don’t know if 
this is a good idea — that this person has sort of got a track 
record going that maybe should be looked at. But they continue 
to do the mantra saying, we try to think that we know what 
we’re doing in this whole health care field. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we coped with all of these problems 
going through the 1990s. And one time after another, it became 
increasingly, increasingly apparent that something was wrong 
with the system. We were coping with the fact that we went . . . 
because of the reaction to the decision to close beds and then 
the gutting of training programs. 
 
All of a sudden somebody woke up overnight and realized that 
some of the health care professionals left with the seniority to 
be in the system were aging, and they were coming to 
retirement stages and so they were leaving the system. And all 
of a sudden someone looked around and said, oh my gosh, we 
don’t have anybody graduating from education programs. 
Where in the world are we going to get people to operate the 
existing facilities? So then there was a mad scramble to try to 
start increasing the education training seats. 
 
At the same time this was going on — the fore planning that 
somebody should have known what was going on — I think the 
SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) 
correctly identified that the challenges of the nursing profession 
were getting more and more acute and severe. And they made 
the decision rightly — and I support the decision — to move 
from a two-year program for a registered nurse to a four-year 
baccalaureate degree in order to be a nurse. So for two years 
you virtually then ended up with no graduates coming out 
because the program got extended almost two years from a 
two-year diploma program to a degree program. 
 
So to make matters even worse, these people who are supposed 
to be looking forward into the needs of the health care system 
ended up with a situation where they more acutely exacerbated 
the problem of the shortage of nurses, firstly by gutting the 
training program and then not realizing that they were moving 
to a four-year program and that would create further delay in 
graduates. 
 
And so the system went from being this surplus that they 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

created by gutting the health care provision facilities to one 
where it was obvious that we were going to be in an increasing 
shortage of health care professionals. 
 
Now they didn’t only do this at the nursing level. They did it on 
the technologists, the radiologists, the lab techs. They did it to 
the College of Medicine. Right across the piece there were 
cutbacks. And so, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to take a look at how 
we are now moving forward into the current period of time. 
 
You know, it was interesting. In 2000-2001, Mr. Romanow, the 
premier at the time, asked Mr. Ken Fyke, a health care adviser, 
to do an analysis and to do a report on what was required in the 
health care system in Saskatchewan. And Mr. Fyke made his 
report where he suggested that there should be further closures 
of small hospitals in Saskatchewan, that there should be 
secondary and tertiary centres, but that in his opinion it didn’t 
make any sense to have the health care acute care facilities in 
rural Saskatchewan to the extent that was existing at the time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the tabling of the Fyke report in 
2001, I believe, or the fall of 2000, Mr. Romanow actually 
convened the House committee on health to hold public 
hearings here in the Chamber. And so those hearings went on in 
the Chamber and the people of Saskatchewan, the Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, the government and the official opposition, had 
representations from across Saskatchewan, from every corner of 
this province, from many of the professional health care 
delivery agencies, to deliver what their opinion was on the Ken 
Fyke report. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of those hearings the Government 
of Saskatchewan came out with another plan that they called the 
action plan. And I would like to quote some of the points of the 
action plan. And one of the first one that comes off is the 
government’s response to what they heard, Mr. Speaker — 
make this very clear — and it said a province-wide network of 
hospitals, no closures or conversions of hospitals. That’s what 
they said. 
 
And at the time, I remember the current Premier was questioned 
about the fact, why did his government decide after listening to 
the people that there was going to be an exemption to the way 
things were going to be conducted as a result of the Fyke’s 
recommendation. 
 
And the Premier said something to the effect that, we’ve looked 
at this very carefully and closely and we’ve analyzed the 
situation, and we recognize that there is no financial benefit, 
there is no benefit to the health care system for any further 
closures or conversions. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the system went forward recognizing that 
this was going to be non-productive to close hospitals and 
facilities as the Fyke Commission had recommended. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the logic is absolutely reasonable. If you’re 
going to close the facilities that exist now after the 52 closures 
that this province has experienced a decade ago, if you’re going 
to further close facilities, if you’re further going to close 
long-term care facilities, where in the world are these people 
going to go? 
 
Throughout the 1990s, what happened in many ways in the ’90s 

a lot of facilities were closed which were long-term care 
facilities that were lighter care facilities. They were level 2 and 
3 facilities where people had some level of support that was 
needed, and they would actually choose to go into long-term 
care because that was the best alternative for their circumstance. 
 
Through the 1990s, that became increasingly difficult to do as 
the government closed these facilities. They then, in exchange 
for that, started to increase the criteria for eligibility for 
individuals to go into the facilities. And so as a result of the 
decisions coming out of the ’90s, at the present time people 
who are in long-term care institutions across the province are 
certainly far more severely in need of care than what they were 
in the 1990s. 
 
And so it begs the question, if we’re going to have people move 
away from these facilities, where are they going to go? And the 
statistics that we see — by and large across the province in the 
communities that are very worried about the future of their 
facilities — is that the demographics of the province is an aging 
population. There are more and more people who are going to 
get to the age where they require the use of these facilities. And 
more and more people are having to try to live at home 
independently with the support of home care as long as they 
can, but they’re going to need the support of these kinds of 
facilities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know when my mother needed the help and 
support — she lived a healthy life by and large until the last 
couple of years of her life — but when she came to the time of 
her life that she needed to seriously consider long-term care 
support, it was a very difficult decision for her. It was very 
difficult for the family to have the conversations with their 
mother who had been independent and a vibrant, independent 
individual for so many years, to realize that their health 
situation had deteriorated to a situation and condition that they 
needed the long-term care support that an institution would 
provide. 
 
And she was even very reluctant to go into a facility in her 
hometown community, because she didn’t want to leave her 
home — the home that her and dad had built and she had lived 
in most of her adult life. She was reluctant to leave that 
situation even to go to a facility in her hometown where she had 
friends, where she’d actually worked years before as a 
personnel in the facility. So she knew the facility, she knew the 
people, she understood many of them were her friends and 
neighbours, but she still was reluctant to go. 
 
And many of our parents are in exactly the same situation. You 
hear it all the time for people who have parents in that situation; 
it’s a very traumatic and challenging situation to be in when 
your parents get to the stage when everyone recognizes they 
need that help. And they reluctantly support, they reluctantly 
agree to maybe consider going to an institution that can help 
them in their own community because that’s what they’re 
familiar with. These are very trying, very challenging, very 
difficult times for our seniors. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when those times are not available, 
or those institutions are not available in their own community, 
it’s absolutely terrifying for them to have to go to a bigger 
regional centre or to a tertiary centre, and it provides a very 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

difficult time in many instances where the support base of 
children and family and friends are in their local communities. 
It provides a very huge challenge for families then to travel 
some distance to the regional centre or whatever to visit and 
care for their parent that has to require the support of a 
long-term care home. 
 
So there’s many issues involved with this whole situation that 
are different than what you just look at as statistical spreadsheet 
in the Department of Health by senior bureaucrats. You’ve got 
to have some consideration and empathy for the circumstances 
of the families, for the children and the parents that are facing 
these challenges across Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our concern is, is that 
this decision as outlined in the budget is going to be made in 
isolation. It’s going to be made by the Department of Health; 
it’s going to be made by senior bureaucrats who are making 
decisions in isolation of the communities where these decisions 
are going to be affected. And so, Mr. Speaker, we have said that 
we think that it is absolutely critical before we get into this 
situation that we don’t repeat the mistakes of yesterday. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s really interesting, and I noticed in 
a Leader-Post article dated November 14, 2003, Mr. Romanow 
was interviewed about coming out of his role as the Health Care 
Commissioner that gave the Romanow report about the state of 
health in Canada. He was interviewed on November 14, 2003 in 
the Leader-Post. And in this interview, Mr. Romanow even 
admitted that his government, the government of which he was 
the premier of the day in the 1990s, made huge mistake when it 
came to changes to health care. 
 
In his interview in the Leader-Post on November 14, Mr. 
Romanow, and the Leader-Post says, and I quote: 
 

. . . has admitted the deep cuts to provincial health-care 
services in the 1990s were a mistake. 
 
Romanow also admitted that his government was wrong to 
slash enrollments in nurse training programs. 
 

He also said, and I quote, that the NDP: 
 

. . . pushed the costs out of . . . government’s pockets and 
right into the pockets of farmers and business people and 
nurses (Mr. Deputy Speaker) . . .  

 
He also said that the drastic reduction in the prescription drug 
plan at that time made it no longer a, quote, “universal” 
program. Mr. Romanow said, and I quote: 
 

“I don’t take any pride in (it) . . . but . . . now (it’s) reduced 
to basically those at the very bottom end of . . . (the) scale, 
the very poorest,” . . .  

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Romanow admitted in an interview that the 
decisions that they made in the 1990s — this NDP government 
made in the ’90s — the decisions that were made when Mr. 
Romanow was the premier of the province, the decisions that 
were made when Mr. Romanow was the leader of this NDP 
Party, were a huge mistake that pushed the problems onto the 
poorest and the most least able to cope with the system. 

Mr. Speaker, this is an incredible admission from a man who 
has at least had the courage to look at the system, to look in 
retrospect at the decisions that were made, and admit that he 
made a mistake and that his government was wrong. And he did 
that on the public record, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of that, it’s just absolutely amazing that it 
seems as if this government — this NDP government, in 
absence of a plan that can potentially address these issues and 
consider them in their full context — is now proposing in this 
budget to have further reductions and conversions of long-term 
care and acute care beds in the province of Saskatchewan. 
That’s incredible, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I don’t know why it is or how it is that this government cannot 
understand that mistakes were made and if you’re going to 
avoid those mistakes, you better consult with the people who 
are going to be affected by these decisions before you make the 
mistakes — not after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we feel so strongly that we need to put 
a motion on the table that hopefully the government will 
seriously consider and say, before we make these closures and 
conversions that we are going to create an opportunity, that 
we’re going to commit to going to those communities that are 
affected; we’re going to go to those communities and we’re 
going to listen to the people; we’re going to listen to what 
impact the proposed changes are going to have on the 
community; we’re going to listen to what impact the changes 
are going to have on the seniors of our community; we’re going 
to listen to the community leaders as they tell us what the 
demographic statistics of their community are; how many 
seniors are there that are going to, in very short order, require 
long-term care services; what is the future of the community if 
these facilities are closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we keep saying in this province that if we’re going 
to grow the province, we’ve got to create the infrastructure and 
the support mechanisms so people will want to live and locate 
and establish successful businesses or farming operations or 
whatever in our rural communities. How in the world are we 
going to attract a family from out of country or out of province 
and other jurisdictions to come to our rural communities if 
there’s no health care infrastructure there? How in the world are 
we going to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It seems impossible 
for me to consider how that could happen. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe that it is absolutely critical for 
the people of this province to have an opportunity to be listened 
to about the impact of these changes to their communities 
before they happen. Not in reaction to, not after the decision is 
irrevocably made, but before it happens. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
now have a very appropriate facility, if you like, in our standing 
field committees of this legislature to have this information 
brought forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these policy field committees, when this House 
adjourns, have the ability without special permission of the 
House to follow direction of this House and conduct meetings 
in communities that are going to be affected by these changes 
and closures, to listen to the people — to listen to the people 
who have parents in these institutions; to listen to the people 
themselves that need the services of these institutions; to listen 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2004 

to community leaders and to listen to health care professionals 
about what services are being provided so everything can be 
evaluated and judged in the total context. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, this is critical to the future changes of 
health care, that the people of this province are engaged and 
understand what the process is and what the direction is going 
to be. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion, seconded 
by the member from Wood River, that reads as follows: 
 

That pursuant to rule 133(1), the Standing Committee on 
Human Services shall hold an inquiry and make 
recommendations regarding the future of health care 
facilities throughout Saskatchewan and that the committee 
shall: 

a) obtain from the Department of Health a 
comprehensive list of all health care facilities scheduled 
for closures or conversions; 
b) hold public meetings away from the seat of 
government in order that the fullest representations may 
be received without duly inconveniencing those desiring 
to be heard; 
c) hold at least one public meeting in each community 
with a health care facility scheduled to be closed or 
converted; 
d) have the authority to send for persons, papers, and 
records, and to examine witnesses under oath; 
(e) have the authority to receive representations from 
interested parties and individuals; and 
(f) have the authority to engage such advisors and 
assistants as are required for the purpose of the inquiry. 
 

And, that this Assembly strongly urges the government to 
place a moratorium on all health care facility closures and 
conversions until such time as this inquiry has been 
completed and a substantive report presented to the 
Assembly pursuant to rule 133(4). 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from Wood 
River. 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Wood River, will members take it 
as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s a 
pleasure for me to get up and speak to this motion, and I’m very 
happy to be a seconder for this particular motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to comment on the motion itself. And 
I think in light of what’s happened in this budget, and where 
this NDP government is going with health care and their 
announced closures in health care, I think it’s only fitting that 
this motion be honoured and agreed to by the government. I 
mean it’s the least the government could do in their plans of 
again decimating the health services in this province. 
 

So as per the motion, Mr. Speaker, one of the key issues right 
now out in the province, throughout the province, including the 
cities, is what health facilities are scheduled for closure or 
conversion. This is very typical of the NDP’s mediscare 
program. They really, really like to have people afraid of the 
health care system. And here’s another system where . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature, 
Gord Nystuen, the former deputy minister of Agriculture, Food 
and Rural Revitalization, who has taken on the new task of 
acting as the Premier’s chief of staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe Mr. Nystuen has been formally 
introduced to the legislature, and I wanted the opportunity for 
all members to welcome him to our building. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Proposed Inquiry on Health Care Facilities 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, a list of health care facilities that 
are scheduled to be closed or converted. I think that is only fair 
to the people of this province that if this government — which 
they have already said they’re going to do is close health care 
facilities and convert health care facilities — it’s only fair to the 
people of the province to let them know. And by letting them 
know, Mr. Speaker, it takes away this fear factor. 
 
And I use this fear factor because that is extremely typical of 
how this NDP government operates. They want the people of 
this province to be in constant fear. It’s a mediscare . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The numbers of the legislature have 
dropped below quorum and I’d call quorum. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the Sergeant-at-Arms please secure 
the doors so we can check for the quorum. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, point of order? 
 
The Speaker: — I can only entertain one point of order at a 



April 30, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

time but . . . 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, when you ordered that doors 
were secured, the hon. member forced his way in after you 
ordered that. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I’ve just simply ordered the doors 
to be secured and it’s not always easy to communicate out to 
the other members. I would just . . . I’d just have to rely on the 
Sergeant-at-Arms to have done his job properly. 
 
I would direct now the Clerk to take a count for the quorum. 
 
Excuse me if we’re a little rusty on this, because we haven’t had 
this for a while. But would all the members please rise and as 
their names are called, then they would please be seated. 
 
Van Mulligen Atkinson Nilson 
Harper Elhard Draude 
Hermanson Wakefield Gantefoer 
Bakken Huyghebaert Hart 
Kirsch   
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, including yourself there are 15 
members present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — There being a quorum present, debate 
resumes on the motion. I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to get up and continue my discussion on the motion. 
Again as I was talking, Mr. Speaker, the mediscare program of 
the NDP government is working again on the people of 
Saskatchewan. The . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please, members. I would just 
ask the Clerk once again to give us a record of the count. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, there was an error in the count. 
There are 14 members present including yourself. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Pursuant to rule 6, if 
there not being a quorum, it is the duty of the Speaker then to 
adjourn the House until such time that the House may resume 
and to record the names of the members present, and that has 
been done. 
 
So this House therefore stands adjourned until Monday at 10 
a.m., at 1:30 p.m. Sorry. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:53. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................830 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................830 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................830 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................830 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................830 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................830 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................837 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................838 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................847 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................856 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Presentation to Senate Committee  
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................830 
 Third Annual Bell Walk for Kids 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................831 
 High-speed Internet Service 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................831 
 Credit Unions 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................831 
 Closing of Rural Service Centres 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................832 
 Saskatoon Principal Named Canada’s Best 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................832 
 Addressing Disabilities Issues Conference 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................832 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Motion for Moratorium on Health Facility Closures 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................833 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................833 
 Public Consultation on Health Facilities 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................834 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................834 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................834 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................834 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................835 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................835 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................836 
 Expenditures for Proposed Ethanol Plant 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................836 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................836 
 Costs of Closing Rural Service Centres 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................837 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................837 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Regulations for Nurse Practitioners 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................838 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................838 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................839 



 

PRIVATE BILLS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2004 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................839 
 Bill No. 302 — The Fountain of Life School of Ministry Inc. Act 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................839 
 Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association Amendment Act, 2004 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................840 
MOTIONS 
 Leave of Absence for a Member 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................840 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Affirmation of Support for the Canadian Wheat Board 
  Trew ...................................................................................................................................................................................840, 850 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................842 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................844 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................845 
  Atkinson (point of order) .........................................................................................................................................................845 
  Weekes (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................845 
  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) ......................................................................................................................................845 
  Wartman............................................................................................................................................................................847, 851 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................849 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................850 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................850 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................852 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Proposed Inquiry on Health Care Facilities 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................852 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................856 
  Atkinson (quorum) ...................................................................................................................................................................856 
  Gantefoer (point of order)........................................................................................................................................................856 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


