















































Hansard: April 27, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 26A  TUESDAY, APRIL 27, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 781 
 April 27, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over the 
last year and a half or so, I’ve presented numerous petitions on 
behalf of constituents in the Cypress Hills area concerning 
Crown grazing leases. And even though some attempt has been 
made to satisfy their concerns, I have many more to present. 
And if I may do so, I’ll do it now. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from the 
community of Lancer. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people from the Porcupine area who are 
really concerned about the longevity of their health facility. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Porcupine Caragana 
Hospital is not closed or further downsized. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Porcupine 
Plain. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from residents of the Rosetown-Elrose constituency signed by 
people who are concerned the recent changes to the crop 
insurance program will result in large premium increases for 
insured farmers while overall coverage is reduced. Mr. Speaker, 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Loreburn, Beechy, and Milden. And I’m 
pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of farmers in the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who are concerned about the changes to 
crop insurance. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Trossachs, 
Colgate, and Radville. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens who are extremely 
concerned about the word in the budget that long-term care 
facilities are due to be closed in Saskatchewan. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Lafleche and district 
health centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Lafleche, 
Limerick, Glentworth, and as far away as Edmonton. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here, 
citizens calling on to repair and resurface Highway 15: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of Highway 
15 be repaired and resurfaced immediately so as to remove 
the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this vital 
road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

Signed by the good citizens from Semans, Cudworth, and 
Nokomis. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from constituents against the closure of Biggar’s rural service 
centre and Environment office. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reverse their decision to close the 
rural service centre and Environment office in Biggar. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens from west central Saskatchewan 
concerned with the Unity seniors’ lodge project. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 
of Unity, and as well as Provost, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the closure of the rural service 
centre and Environment office in Biggar. 

 
And addendums to previously received petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 48, 69, 72, 97, and 115. 
 
Clerk: — The following petitions for private Bills are hereby 
read and received: 
 

Of the Bethany Bible Institute in the province of 
Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to amend its Act of 
incorporation; 

 
Of the Fountain of Life School of Ministry in the province 
of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to provide authority 

to grant religious and theology degrees; and 
 
Of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association in the 
province, praying for an Act to amend its Act of 
incorporation. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 31 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: In 2003 how much did the 
WCB spend on promotional items designed to promote or 
otherwise publicize the Workers’ Compensation Board? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for 2002 and 2001. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 31 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: Will farm fuel purchased 
from a card lock centre under 200 litres still be eligible for 
the farm fuel rebate program, and if not why not? Are 
there any exemptions relative to volume purchase 
available? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 31 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: Could you provide the number 
of full and part-time and contract staff in each employment 
category at the Imperial health centre? 

 
While I’m on my feet I also have a similar question dealing 
with Davidson, Nokomis, Watrous, and Wynyard. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there are two guests in your gallery that I would like to 
introduce to you and to the members of this legislature through 
you. They are members of our pre-eminent masters rowing 
team — Joe Vanderleest and Alan McIntyre. 
 
And I will say more to them later. Are there three members up 
there of the team? Just two, aren’t there? Oh three, I’m sorry. 
And I will have to get the third name later; I don’t have that 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

with me, Mr. Speaker. But they . . . I will say more about them 
later, and I just want to let people know that they brought home 
a bronze medal to Saskatchewan and are a tremendous group of 
paddlers. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
House, three people who are very important to me. Seated in 
your gallery is my wife, Carol. Accompanying her today is her 
sister, Elizabeth, and her husband and my best friend, Larry 
Surcon — formerly from Yorkton, most recently new residents 
of Sturgis, Saskatchewan. 
 
And they’ve been in town for a few days here on business, and 
last night they had . . . or yesterday in fact, all day, they had the 
opportunity of attending the graduation ceremonies for the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) troop no. 23. And one 
of the 34 troopers that graduated was our nephew Rod 
Rudenski. And Rod is now stationed at Craik, Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think wise words of wisdom to all of my 
colleagues — if you’re travelling up and down Highway No. 11 
and you’re speeding, you don’t want to do it around Craik 
because you just might get to meet Rodney also. 
 
So I just had to welcome my guests here, and I ask all the 
members to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
Assembly, 52 very, very important students from W.F. Ready 
School in my constituency. They’re accompanied today by their 
teachers, Gloria Pickard, Carol Grant; and two chaperones, 
Sheila Harlos and Darcy Kunz. 
 
They’re very fine students in the new area of my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’ll have a chance to meet with them a little 
later on today and hopefully over the summer or over the . . . 
during the fall — pardon me — visit their school as well. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to members of the Assembly, someone sitting 
in the west gallery — Greg Eyre, who is a business agent with 
the United Food and Commercial Workers, the union that I used 
to belong to and spent a great deal of time on the executive 
board. And Greg is accompanied by a colleague who is . . . I 
haven’t had the opportunity or the pleasure to meet her yet. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, I must say United Food and Commercial 
Workers does a great deal of work to involve young people, 
have them active not only in their workplace but in their 
community. It speaks well to the union movement and the 
people that they seek to involve, to make this a better place for 
all of us to live. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members please welcome 
our guests in the gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
House, two residents of Prince Albert who have been very 
active in our community for I think even longer than I’ve lived 
in Prince Albert — Fred and Olga Routley. Fred is a retired 
educator. He and Olga have taken very much interest in the 
well-being of their province and of their community, and 
they’ve been active in community life and in politics. And I 
want to welcome them here to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I might also add, Fred and Olga chose to live in an area of 
Prince Albert where the province had a difficult time making up 
its mind whether they should reside in Prince Albert Carlton or 
Prince Albert Northcote. So both you, Mr. Speaker, and I have 
had the privilege of having them as our constituents back and 
forth over the years. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Yorkton on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Leave to make a statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Yorkton has requested leave 
to make a personal statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Personal Thanks 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to the members of the Assembly for giving me a 
moment to make a personal statement. 
 
I want to say first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, that I am very, 
very grateful — grateful to have the opportunity to return to the 
Assembly again and to assume some of my responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one never knows what challenges may be before 
us as we make our way through life, and the past ten weeks my 
family and I have faced some of the most trying times ever — 
experiences that you hear about others going through and never 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

really fully understanding the impact until they personally 
affect you or your other family members. 
 
We were able to make our way through these very difficult 
times because of several factors. First, Mr. Speaker, our health 
care system here in Saskatchewan was able to do some things 
for me, as they have done for other cancer patients like me, in 
the fashion that I had no understanding of. And today I am one 
of thousands who have been served by exceptional men and 
women in our hospitals and in our cancer clinics. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to thank all of the 
health professionals at the Regina General Hospital, the Pasqua 
Hospital, at the Yorkton regional hospital, and at the Allan Blair 
cancer clinic. Their expertise and care have given me a future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I am working away, responding to hundreds 
and hundreds and hundreds of people who sent me cards and 
e-mails and phoned me to wish me well and to offer me a 
thought of their prayer. I am someone, Mr. Speaker, who 
believes that my road to recovery was helped through the power 
of those well wishes and of those prayers. And I am humbled by 
the number of people who have touched our lives, and I want to 
thank them very, very much for including us in their prayers. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I want to thank the members of this 
Assembly — to my government caucus for your support and 
your encouragement to me and to my family; and for taking on 
all of those additional responsibilities and sacrifices which 
come when a member of your political family can’t be there; 
and for assuming all of those responsibilities absolutely 
unconditionally. One could not ask for an extended family that 
could be more caring. And let me have it on the record, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is not a recommended approach to skip a 
budget or to lose weight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My words of thanks to the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
and your caucus — your sincere words of encouragement, 
support, and personal visits were very welcomed. I know that 
you fully understand the meaning of a loss of a colleague, also 
working under adversity when illness is within your own 
political family. I know that, I know that you have said to me in 
your card on many occasions that you’ve written me that I have 
previous . . . I have some previous debt to settle with some of 
you, and I would say to you that I will. But remember that there 
are some that I too will be expecting to collect on. 
 
And thank you to Mr. Karwacki for including me in his 
thoughts and offering his support in whatever fashion we saw 
fit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the media — I wish to extend our family 
gratitude for providing us with the room we requested to deal 
with our matters privately and to respect the time we needed 
throughout the recovery. And thank you very much for those 
glowing words of recognition. It’s not often that one can read 
his own obituary when he’s still alive. I’ve kept all of the 
printed and recorded messages just in case you should have a 
memory lapse sometimes in the future. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, to my family — there is no greater 

bond than the love of your children, your partner, and your 
parents and your siblings. The fact is that nothing else matters 
except the hope that we can continue together in life. And today 
we have the opportunity to do so, and I want to thank them very 
deeply for standing with me and helping me look forward 
ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to thank my Premier for placing 
my health before all other priorities; for providing an avenue for 
me to remain connected without expectation as well as to go 
forward recognizing that there still must be some flexibility in 
the days and weeks ahead as my energy battery still requires a 
bit more charging and monitoring in order to assume the full 
responsibilities of being an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) and serving in cabinet. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful to be back in the 
Assembly under your watchful guidance in this House and to 
stand shoulder to shoulder with all of my legislative colleagues. 
 
I received in all of those many notes I got, Mr. Speaker, a few 
lines that I want to share with you from someone whom I’ve not 
met. And they said this: 
 

Sometimes struggles are exactly what we need in our lives. 
If we were allowed to go through our lives without any 
obstacles, it would cripple us. When we ask for strength, 
we are given difficulties to make us strong. And when we 
ask for wisdom, we get problems to solve. And when we 
ask for prosperity, we got a brain and brawn to work. And 
when we ask for courage, we got dangers to overcome. 
And when I asked for favours, I was given an opportunity 
and received nothing I wanted. I got everything I needed. 

 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I’m given an opportunity. And with all of 
you, I’ve got everything I need. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And why is the member from Swift Current 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to make a statement of 
a personal nature. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 
leave to make a statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
members on this side of the House, we want to say very, very 
clearly, welcome back, Clay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many members on this side of the House have 
communicated to Clay or to the Deputy Premier our warmest 
wishes and the fact that he was certainly in our prayers. I had 
the chance to do that. And I indicated, though, Mr. Speaker, 
quite clearly that he would be having a number of weeks where 
he would no doubt be going through some challenges, but he’d 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

also have some downtime and that we fully expected him to 
utilize that downtime to come up with some pretty good 
one-liners for this place. And so now we’re going to be able to 
. . . we welcome the opportunity to put that to the test. 
 
We in this caucus have been through some situations, some 
challenges, some dark times in the last number of years, and 
we’re just grateful that the member for Yorkton is back here. 
And we want to wish him continued success and continued 
good health and recovery, and look forward to the opportunity 
to debate and discuss and visit with him here in the Legislative 
Assembly and elsewhere. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Bronze Medal at Dragon Boat World Championship 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, more than 2,000 years 
ago a team sport known as dragon boat racing originated in 
China. Today this sport has become a popular summer tradition 
in Saskatchewan, drawing large crowds in both Saskatoon and 
Regina. One Regina dragon boat team, nicknamed Pond Scum, 
recently captured a bronze medal at the International Dragon 
Boat Federation’s annual world championship in Cape Town, 
South Africa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pond Scum is also known as the Wascana Canoe 
Club . . . placed third in the grand final of the senior, open, 
200-metre event. The senior category is for participants 40 
years and over and featured crews from Italy, Switzerland, and 
Germany. Pond Scum also made the grand final in the senior 
mixed 200- and 420-metre events, placing fifth overall in each 
category. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2004 world championship was divided into 
premier, senior, and breast cancer survivor divisions and 
featured 45 clubs, including 1,700 professional and amateur 
paddlers from 13 different countries. Not only did the Regina 
crew participate at the world championship, but it also 
volunteered with the organizing committee of the festival — 
arranging practice times for teams, putting together materials 
for team packages, helping with registration, and assisting with 
dismantling of the boats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the team captains of Pond Scum are Mary 
Anderson and Al McIntyre from Regina. Congratulations to 
them and their crew members on their accomplishments. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the third member who is with us in the gallery is 
Brian Kiers. 
 
And so we welcome all of them, and we wish them all the best 
of luck in future competitions and thank them for representing 
Saskatchewan so adequately in South Africa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Fire Hall in Rural Municipality of Three Lakes 
 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
announce the grand opening of the new RM (rural municipality) 
of Three Lakes fire hall. This is quite accomplishment 
considering the biggest town in the RM is Middle Lake, 
population 300. The fire hall is a large, and I mean large for 
Middle Lake standard, with two truck bays. It has been in the 
works for a number of years, and Saturday marked its 
completion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when communities are dealing with decrease in 
population and the tough economic times, this is a bold step by 
the people of Middle Lake, Pilger, St. Benedict, Bethany 
Pioneer Village, Lucien Lake Regional Park, and the RM of 
Three Lakes. 
 
The people of these communities have decided that if they 
intend to grow their population and protect their families, they 
must have adequate fire protection. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 
members to give a resounding good luck and best wishes to the 
RM of Three Lakes and their fire department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Child Care Saskatchewan Spaces Increased by 200 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this government has 
made a commitment to support children and young families. 
And as part of that commitment through Child Care 
Saskatchewan we are boosting the number of child care spaces 
available in Saskatchewan by 200. 
 
Child Care Saskatchewan is the largest child care expansion in 
our province’s history. By March 2005, it will bring the total 
number of licensed child care spaces to more than 8,000. Mr. 
Speaker, our vision is for all Saskatchewan parents who work or 
go to school to have access to high-quality, early learning and 
care services for their children. 
 
You know, 30 of the new spaces announced yesterday are 
opening in Argyle Child Care Centre in the constituency of 
Regina Coronation Park. A young parent said so much of that 
announcement yesterday, when he spoke about how the 
availability of quality daycare allowed both him and his wife to 
continue with their educations even as they raised a family. This 
is exactly what this vision is all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget includes $600,000 to develop 
this phase of Child Care Saskatchewan. Over the next two 
years, we will be developing over 500 more spaces. This 
investment in Saskatchewan children and families is a clear 
indication of the focus and priorities of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan children truly are our most precious 
resource. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

Volunteer Recognition Awards Banquet 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Southeast Saskatchewan Association for Culture, Recreation 
and Sport held its volunteer recognition awards banquet in 
Weyburn this past Sunday. Mr. Speaker, the volunteer 
recognition awards program has been going on for nearly 20 
years, recognizing the contributions of volunteers and 
participants in the nine different categories across Zone 1. 
 
And I’d like to list a few, especially those that have come from 
the Moosomin constituency. In heritage, Alvin Cunningham of 
Kipling was recognized; in culture, Dianne McLeod of 
Langbank; recreation, Joanne O’Sullivan of Kipling; coach, 
Barb Swallow of Maryfield; athlete, Janelle Lemon of 
Maryfield, who was on Canada’s junior women’s curling 
championship team, world curling championship team last year. 
And official, Colin Williamson of Rocanville. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this recognition is very special for Colin Williamson 
as last fall, due to a medical problem, Colin had to hang up his 
skates as he was unable to in fact for a while, Mr. Speaker, 
speak or walk. Today through rehabilitation he has certainly 
come a long ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Southeast Saskatchewan 
Association for Culture, Recreation and Sport for the great 
effort they go to in recognizing the efforts of volunteers across 
our area and certainly throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a job well done, and congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 

 
Clayton Gerein Wins Gold 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce today 
that a resident who lives in Regina Wascana Plains recently 
captured the gold medal in the men’s quadriplegic wheelchair 
race at the Boston Marathon. 
 
Clayton Gerein of Pilot Butte finished with a time of 1 hour, 55 
minutes, and 14 seconds. This outstanding performance earned 
him a spot on the Canadian team for this summer’s Paralympic 
Games in Athens, Greece, and is all the more impressive 
because it was accomplished in temperatures approaching 30 
degrees Celsius. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Gerein’s record of athletic achievements is 
impressive. He holds several gold medals from the Paralympic 
Games, two silver medals from the IPC (International 
Paralympic Committee) World Championships, and has set 
Canadian and world records in the 1,500-, 5,000-, and 
10,000-metre races. In 2003 he placed first in two events at the 
Can-Am Games, and he is an 11-time winner of the Peach Tree 
Road Race in Atlanta, Georgia. 
 
Mr. Gerein believes in pushing himself to the limit. Not only is 
he an outstanding athlete, but he’s also actively involved in his 
community as a volunteer for several athletic organizations that 
assist people living with disabilities. Pilot Butte is very proud 
and boasts a sign going into their town saying, home of Clayton 

Gerein. And often I’ve seen him wheeling along the roadway 
keeping in shape. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating Clayton Gerein on his accomplishments and 
acknowledge his commitment and dedication to his sport. We 
wish him good luck in this summer’s Paralympic Games in 
Athens and in future competitions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Fire Hall Opening in Warman 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Saturday I had the privilege of attending a fire hall opening in 
the community of Warman. That fire hall has been in the 
planning, I believe, for 10 years. And they’ve put some 
excellent plans together. They have fund raised and I think the 
cost to the facility was between 7 and $800,000. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The other interesting thing about the fire hall and the system 
that they have is that they work very closely together with the 
ambulance service as well, as far as handing out the calls and 
those sorts of things. 
 
So it was an exciting, an exciting time for the community of 
Warman. They’ve got a beautiful tower in there. They have 
training rooms. And it’s probably one of the more modern 
facilities for a community of that size. 
 
The other thing that made that necessary in the community of 
Warman was that it’s a very fast-growing community. I think 
it’s the fastest growing community in that category in the 
province. This year, for example, they’ve already sold 80 lots, 
residential lots, for building this year. And that’s marvellous 
growth. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it speaks very well of what you can do in an 
area and a community that’s never been tainted by an NDP 
(New Democratic Party) representative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

SaskPower Poster Contest 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is increasing 
awareness about the impact of climate change among our young 
people. 
 
Recently SaskPower announced the winners of its third annual 
Energy & Our Environment Poster Contest. This year’s winners 
are Read Smith from Drake Elementary School, Megan Hrytzak 
from Kelvington High School, Amanda Clark from Dr. Isman 
Elementary School in Wolseley, and Robyn Fortier from 
Hardcastle School in Edam. 
 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

Mr. Speaker, more than 500 poster entries were received from 
grade 5 and 6 students, from more than 40 schools across the 
province. Our young people think environmental issues are 
important, Mr. Speaker, and the number of students who chose 
to participate in this contest demonstrates that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ingenuity captured in these posters shows all 
of us can learn from our young people when it comes to 
addressing climate change. This is an important initiative, Mr. 
Speaker, one that provides an opportunity for young people to 
really think about their impact on the environment. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the four winners 
— Read, Megan, Amanda, and Robyn — for their 
award-winning posters. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Comments by Minister of Justice 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has now injected himself 
right into the middle of a criminal trial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice is, through the director of 
public prosecutions, supposed to provide unbiased and an 
impartial management of our criminal justice system. How can 
he do that when we takes it upon himself to comment and 
debate upon trials in the newspaper? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what actions is the Premier going to take in this 
matter? Will the Premier fire his Minister of Justice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, in March of this year the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast rose in this Chamber and 
demanded that I interfere with an independent body, the Legal 
Aid Commission of Saskatchewan, demanded that I do so, and 
outside this House said, well yes, I realize it’s independent but I 
think he should interfere anyways. 
 
Now he’s requiring or demanding that the Attorney General 
resign because he had the temerity to criticize a newspaper 
article. 
 
I don’t think I would advise, you know, with all due respect, the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan to take advice on the 
conduct of an Attorney General from the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Minister of 
Justice have an obligation to ensure that every department, 

agency, and every Crown prosecutor acts within the confines of 
the law. 
 
We commented publicly and asked them to ensure that the 
Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission acted within the confines 
of the law and followed the provisions of The Labour Standards 
Act. 
 
Now in this situation, the Minister of Justice is commenting on 
the credibility of witnesses, and he’s commenting on the level 
of co-operation police received from witnesses, and he’s 
discussing the actions of the police during the investigation. 
These, Mr. Speaker, are all part of an ongoing criminal 
investigation and criminal trial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has turned this criminal 
trial into a soap opera. The Minister of Justice should not be 
saying anything about a case that is before the courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: how can the people in 
this province expect to receive a fair trial? How can we expect 
to maintain integrity and confidence in our justice system? Will 
the Minister of Justice step down? Will the Premier call for his 
resignation and direct the minister not to meddle in cases that 
are before the courts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the member should read 
the letter carefully. There is no comment on the credibility of 
witnesses in the letter. 
 
In February, around February 12 of this year, the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast requested, required, demanded that the 
Attorney General deprive parties in an action to their right to 
appeal, suggested that other parties be deprived of the right of 
the balance of their trial, that parties in another trial be deprived 
of their right to trial, and that all the matters of damages — 
even where liability hadn’t been determined yet, Mr. Speaker 
— go before some tribunal, appointed by the Attorney General, 
I suppose. 
 
And now the member rises and criticizes the Department of 
Justice because of a letter criticizing an article, not commenting 
on the case. And again I do not think we wish to take the advice 
of the member from Saskatoon Southeast on the conduct of an 
Attorney General. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has 
practised law in this province for over 20 years. He is well 
aware of the differences between civil and criminal matters. He 
is well aware of the potential liability on the civil matters that 
we were commenting on before. 
 
The advice that we gave the minister still stands. We 
recommend to the minister in those cases that he look strongly 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

at settling those actions before they cost the province many 
millions of more dollars, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
stand by that advice, and the Minister of Justice would be well 
advised to listen to it and to heed that advice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that routinely cites the sub 
judice convention when it suits its purpose — but in this case 
the Minister of Justice has blithely chosen to completely ignore 
it. Let me remind the Premier what the Premier said on 
December 11 right in the middle of the SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) disaster: 
 

. . . I will have no member of this government trying to 
influence the prosecutions branch or interfering in the due 
process of law. 

 
Yet that’s exactly what this Minister of Justice, what this 
minister has done. Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s decided to look at 
it another way and what he . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member go directly to the question, 
please. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier going to do 
to restore public confidence in the integrity of the judicial 
system of this province, and what will the Premier do about a 
Minister of Justice that continues to comment on cases that are 
before the courts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, for those that are inclined 
to be confused, the comments I made earlier about the Legal 
Aid Commission and other cases that are presently before the 
court were not for the purpose of commenting on those cases, 
but for the purpose of pointing out some of the bizarre 
reasoning coming in from across the way. And just to make that 
clear. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Southeast has also practised law 
for a good period of time, and he will appreciate that his 
obligations go outside the courtroom and follow him into this 
House. And he has a duty to the public to inform them as to the 
law, and not to mislead them as to the law. And I would direct 
the member from Saskatoon Southeast as to his duties as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice says he 
had to step in to correct inaccuracies in the original StarPhoenix 
article. He comments on people’s duties before the public. 
However in today’s paper defence lawyer Robert Borden says 
there are no inaccuracies in The StarPhoenix article but yet you 
have the Minister of Justice arguing the facts of the case. 
 
I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, whether he wants to be the judge or 
the prosecutor. But one thing is certain, Mr. Speaker, he should 

not be the prosecutor in this case. If he wants to be the Minister 
of Justice he should act like a Minister of Justice. Will the 
Premier fire the Minister of Justice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if defence 
counsel invited me to comment on the case or not, in the article 
today, but I decline to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Future of Valley View Centre 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment. Saskatchewan Party MLAs in constituencies 
across Saskatchewan have received numerous letters from 
families concerned about the future of Valley View Centre in 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Family members who have relatives living at Valley View are 
concerned that the NDP is planning to close Valley View. One 
mother from New Brunswick writes, and I quote: 
 

I feel to move him and close down the centre would be a 
big mistake . . . (and that the government needs to 
reconsider closing Valley View.) 

 
To the minister: what are the NDP plans for Valley View and is 
closure being considered? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and certainly I’m happy to respond to this. Since 1972 we’ve 
had a plan in this province for the inclusion of people with 
disabilities in the community. And when Valley View was first 
built there was over 1,000 people there. There’s now 300 and 
what that reflects is that over time more people have chosen the 
community option. 
 
Now that being said, there is no plan to close Valley View but 
we have had an ever declining number of families who are 
making that choice. And certainly the organizations that work 
with families are wanting to support community inclusion. So I 
would say that there is no such plan and if there were such a 
plan we would certainly be very upfront about discussing it 
with people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Valley 
View is home to people with families across Saskatchewan and 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

other parts, and all across Canada. Some residents of Valley 
View have been successfully moved into the community but 
some residents require the type of special care that, as of today, 
is only provided at Valley View. As one family member 
expressed it, when they attempted to move their loved one into 
the community it was two years of hell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if closure of this facility is not planned for now or 
in the future, can the minister assure the House today that a 
sufficient number of beds will be maintained at Valley View to 
meet the needs of those who cannot live in the community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I just reiterate that 
there is no plan for any change in the very slow process that’s 
been taking place since 1972. 
 
I would say that if there ever was a decision that, because the 
numbers were becoming so small that you had to make some 
decision that it just is completely not effective to run a large 
facility with such a small number of residents, certainly no steps 
would be taken in that regard unless there was extensive work 
with the families, with the individuals, with the staff, with the 
community, to see whether in fact a reasonable and sensitive 
and caring plan was possible for those individuals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister refuses to clearly answer the question. The question is: 
is Valley View going to be maintained, open; how many beds 
are going to be maintained in Valley View; are the people that 
require this specialized care going to be able to stay in Valley 
View? 
 
And if not, Mr. Speaker, where are their loved ones to go? 
Where are these families supposed to be ensured that their 
family members will have a place to go and how are they going 
to be ensured that adequate care will be provided to them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I think, Mr. Speaker, that my 
responses have been quite specific and if the member opposite 
is suffering from an inability to hear them, that is not my 
particular problem. 
 
I will say that I do have commitments to meet with families 
who are concerned about this. And certainly, I would never 
advocate to move someone who there wasn’t a sufficient 
response to their care needs. 
 
So again, if my personal assurance can be taken that there is no 
such plan and that if there was ever a decision that the 
population there had gotten so small that you could no longer 

deliver to them in the manner we are today, we would move 
into very individualized planning with each family. 
 
But no such decision has been taken to this point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Utility Rates 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all of 
the major Crowns have now released their annual reports. But 
what we haven’t seen to date is any sort of a plan telling us how 
the Crowns are going to achieve the Premier’s campaign 
promise of the lowest utility rates in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another of the Premier’s campaign promises 
that are as empty as that field out there by Belle Plaine. And, 
Mr. Speaker, none of the Crown heads seem to be paying much 
attention whatsoever to the Premier’s utility rate promise. In 
fact most of them seem to be ignoring it altogether. Mr. 
Speaker, is this just another empty campaign promise that the 
Premier has no intention of keeping? 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
response to the member’s question, I want to assure the people 
of this province that the way that the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the New Democratic Party government, is going 
to meet its promise is to make sure that those four major 
Crowns — SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) Auto Fund — remain in 
public hands. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen a dramatic 
turnaround in the Crown sector since 1991. So dramatic, Mr. 
Speaker, that since 1991 when the New Democratic Party of 
Saskatchewan was elected, we’ve been able to reduce Crown 
debt racked up by the old Conservative Party, their forerunners, 
by some $2 billion, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve had dividends of 
$1.8 billion returned to the people of Saskatchewan. I’d say 
that’s an outstanding record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the record of the NDP 
government is that they are demanding dividends to the General 
Revenue Fund based on artificial profits this year — profits 
which will never be there again, which will never be there any 
time in the future unless the Canadian dollar far surpasses the 
value of the American dollar. Exchange rates are a pretty faulty 
premise on which to base profitability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by the NDP’s own admission, we don’t have the 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

lowest utility rates in the country right now. None of the 
Crowns are planning on lowering their rates, and SaskPower 
actually says that it might increase its rates before the end of 
this year. So the overall cost to consumers is only going to get 
higher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised to cut taxes. He raised taxes. 
The Premier promised an ethanol plant at Belle Plaine. There’s 
no ethanol plant at Belle Plaine, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
promised to look after seniors, and now he’s closing long-term 
care homes and booting them out of their beds. This is just one 
more empty promise by a Premier who has failed to keep his 
word. 
 
Will the Premier admit today that he has no intention of keeping 
his utility rate promise and will break this one just as he has 
broken all of the others? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, what I can say 
to the people of Saskatchewan is, this is the kind of spin that the 
Saskatchewan Party has tried to peddle for the last . . . well 
since 1997 I think, when they became a political party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last provincial election, what did the Leader 
of the Opposition say — the former leader of the opposition, the 
member from Rosetown — what did he say? He said on 
September 4, surrounded by all of his candidates, that the 
Saskatchewan Party vowed to undercut the NDP. And what did 
they vow to undercut? They vowed that they would even go 
lower in terms of the Premier’s commitment to have the lowest 
utility rates in all of Canada. 
 
Well I can say to the members opposite, you know, you may 
not have liked the result of the last election — we won, you 
lost. 
 
You may not have liked the campaign where we elevated the 
issue of Crown corporations in this province. The people of 
Saskatchewan want their Crowns in public hands. They want 
head office jobs and jobs in this province. They want dividends 
and they want us to continue to invest in infrastructure so that 
our Crowns are healthy and prosperous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP, under the current 
Premier, not only said that we had the lowest rates in the 
country, but that we would have forever and a day. The promise 
was clear. The express intention was clear. We had and we will 
have. Neither one of those promises or statements were true. 
Neither one of them were and they probably won’t be in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have no intention of keeping this 
promise. In fact, the minister has admitted that she didn’t even 
understand the promise. 
 
First she said she didn’t know what the plan was when she was 

out campaigning last year and then she said Saskatchewan has 
the lowest utility rates at that time. And later, she admitted that 
Saskatchewan doesn’t have the lowest utility rates right now. 
And next, she said she would take rebates in other provinces 
into account. And then finally, she said she wouldn’t take 
rebates into account. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that was what she said until today. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s always harder to keep your story straight when 
you’re not really telling the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier tell us the truth? Will the Premier 
admit that this is just another empty promise he has no intention 
of keeping? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Earlier this morning that member said 
that the government should just give up on this commitment. 
Now if we did that, Mr. Speaker, there would be roaring and 
yelling from the opposition. That’s what would happen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well I want to assure the public of this. This is all spin. This is 
what they’re trying to do. They’ve been trying to spin it since 
November 5 that the Government of Saskatchewan isn’t going 
to keep its election promises. They have been doing everything 
they can to discredit the Premier of Saskatchewan and the NDP. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to make this commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan. Crown corporations will remain in 
public hands. Crowns will be able to provide dividends to the 
people of the province. They will continue to have good 
business practices. They will continue to invest in 
infrastructure; they will not equity strip, Mr. Speaker. And we 
will have the lowest utility rates in the country for 2004, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Funding for Farm Wells 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, farm 
families in Saskatchewan are facing what many experts forecast 
to be another year of drought, and many farm families are 
struggling to secure reliable water supplies for livestock and 
home use. 
 
Unfortunately though, the NDP government has not yet signed 
a new agreement with the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration), and therefore farm families have not been able 
to apply or receive funding for digging new wells. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much longer is the NDP going to wait before 
they sign an agreement with the PFRA and cost sharing the 
drilling of new water wells? How much longer will farm 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

families have to wait to secure reliable supplies of water? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 
And I’ll take notice of the question, and I’ll get back to the 
member opposite on that. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I’m going to ask this one to the Minister of 
Agriculture and see if he has a clue what we’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deadline for applications for the PFRA — and 
I’ll go slow, Mr. Speaker — funding for new water wells was 
April 1, April 1, Mr. Speaker, four weeks ago. But 
Saskatchewan farm families have not been able to apply at all 
because this government has not put money into the program. 
And farmers can’t even start drilling new wells until their 
funding application — get this — is pre-approved. Mr. Speaker, 
so they’re stuck once again in rural Saskatchewan waiting for 
this government to do something about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s the delay? When will the government put 
their money where their mouth is and help out Saskatchewan 
farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I’ll take 
notice of that question, and I’ll get back to the member opposite 
as soon as I get the details on there. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
time I’m going to go to the Premier. Somebody over there has 
to have a clue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was only two years ago we were asking the 
government to put more money in, and the past Agriculture 
minister went to Ottawa and asked them to put more money in, 
in through the PFRA programs for farmers. What happened to 
that? Now all of a sudden nobody knows what we’re talking 
about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we went through the budget a short time ago and 
we saw all the cuts to rural Saskatchewan. The list goes on and 
on and on. How many more of these programs is there no 
funding in place for, that farm families — farmers, ranchers out 
there — are counting on? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier or someone on that side address 
this problem? Farmers are out there. They’re running out of 
water in many cases. We have the potential for a drought in this 

province. And nobody on that side has a clue what we’re 
talking about. 
 
How do farmers expect to receive any assistance when nobody 
on that side of the House seems to care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we will be getting back to the members opposite with . . . 
(inaudible) . . . or with information on the status of that issue 
with the PFRA. 
 
And I do need to point out that in terms of flowing through 
funding to the farmers and producers out there, that 
Saskatchewan is in the lead in terms of signing up on the BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy) programs to get funding 
out there. We want money out to those producers as quickly as 
it can. Because we’ve signed on, those federal dollars will flow; 
producers will be helped. 
 
And as soon as we, as soon as we get the status on the 
information from signing up with PFRA, that will go to the 
members opposite. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this time I’m going to try the minister in charge of 
Sask Water. I don’t know how many are over there, but we’ll 
go through them all till we seem to get an answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency runs right up the Manitoba 
border. On that side, on the Manitoba side, the program’s in 
place. Farmers were pre-approved because April 1 was the 
deadline. 
 
PFRA in Saskatchewan can’t honour any of these applications 
because that government evidently forgot about the program or 
maybe, Mr. Speaker, it was just another cut when the budget 
come out to save this government money and renege on 
commitments that we’ve had in the past years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, well drilling and wells and 
water and dugouts are a necessity in rural Saskatchewan. 
They’re a necessity everywhere. Farmers need that assistance. 
 
The federal government, who this government loves to blame 
— they like to point the finger at the federal government — 
they’ve got their money in place. They’re ready to help 
Saskatchewan farmers. Once again, as we’ve saw the Minister 
of Agriculture do in the past, ask for a number of things — 
when the federal government comes through with them, then 
we change our mind. We don’t like them now; we’re not going 
to fund it. 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

So, Mr. Speaker, will someone on that side of the House — 
don’t tell me, don’t tell the Sask Party — tell the farmers of 
Saskatchewan that they actually haven’t downloaded more onto 
them from that budget and forgot all about rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As both the minister responsible for 
Sask Water and myself have said, we will give to the members 
opposite just as quickly as possible the details on the status of 
that agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was also a reference to the issue of signing 
on with CAIS (Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization). I 
have made abundantly clear to the members opposite, though 
they may not understand, what the issues are in terms of signing 
on to the amendments. We want to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that 
we get the best possible deal we can get for our producers in 
this province. The 60/40 splits that we get with the federal 
government are sucking this province dry. 
 
We have a huge agriculture sector, a relatively small 
population; 60/40 kills this province, Mr. Speaker. They should 
know that, whether they do or they don’t, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the reality. And we are working for the best deal that we can 
get. The CAIS program with the amendments is good. We 
support that. But we want to make sure we get funding from the 
federal government that is adequate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. I recognize 
the member for Regina Dewdney, the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 234 and 235. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 234 and 235 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates to Committees 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates 
being: 
 

vote 74, Information Technology Office; 
vote 33, Public Service Commission; 
vote 53, Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 

 
And I move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park and seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates, 
being: 
 

vote 74, Information Technology Office; 
vote 33, Public Service Commission; 
vote 53, Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation 
 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Government motions, item no. 2, Hon. Mr. 
Van Mulligen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates, 
being: 
 

vote 70, Centenary Fund; 
vote 12, 18, 175, 176, and 177, Finance; 
vote 23, 171, Industry and Resources; 
vote 20, Labour; 
vote 35, Saskatchewan Research Council; 
vote 71, Fiscal Stabilization Fund; 
vote 147, Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan; 
vote 140, Saskatchewan Water Corporation; 
vote 164, Saskatchewan Watershed Authority; 
vote 165, Crown Investment Corporation of 

Saskatchewan; 
vote 159, Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan; 
vote 154, Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation; 
vote 152, Saskatchewan Power Corporation; 
vote 153, Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 

Corporation; 
vote 150, SaskEnergy Incorporated 
 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 
I move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion moved by the member for 
Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana, will members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Government motions, item no. 3, Hon. Mr. 
Van Mulligen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates, 
being: 
 

vote 34, Chief Electoral Officer; 
vote 57, Conflict of Interest Commissioner; 
vote 55, Information and Privacy Commissioner; 
vote 21, Legislative Assembly; 
vote 56, Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate; 
vote 28, Provincial Auditor 

 
be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on House Services. 

 
I move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Speaker: — With respect to the motion moved by the 
member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana, will the members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Government motions, item 4, Hon. Mr. Van 
Mulligen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates, 
being: 
 

vote 36, Community Resources and Employment 
vote 73, Corrections and Public Safety 
vote 27, Culture, Youth and Recreation 
vote 3, Justice 
vote 170, Education Infrastructure Financing 

Corporation 
 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

I move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Speaker: — Once again on the motion moved by the 
member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for 
Nutana, will members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Government motions, item no. 5, Hon. Mr. 
Van Mulligen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates, 
being: 
 

vote 30, Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 
vote 16, 17, 145, Highways and Transportation 
vote 75, 163, Northern Affairs 
vote 151, Municipal Financing Corporation of 

Saskatchewan 
 
be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure. 

 
I move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Speaker: — With respect to the motion moved by the 
member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, will the members take the question as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — Order. Committee of Finance. The first item 
before the committee is interim supply and I invite the Minister 
of Finance to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
beside me is Ron Styles, the deputy minister of Finance. Seated 
on his left is David Pratt, the senior analyst in taxation and 
intergovernmental affairs. Seated beside me on my right is 
Terry Paton, the Provincial Comptroller, and seated beside him 
in Dennis Polowyk, the assistant deputy minister for treasury 
and debt management. Immediately behind me is Joanne 
Brockman, the executive director of economic and fiscal policy, 
and seated beside her is Glen Veikle, the assistant deputy 
minister for the treasury board branch. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if I just might make a few brief opening 
comments. Interim supply, which we are considering today, 
provides the opportunity for the government to receive approval 
for certain monies to enable the important work of government 
departments and agencies to proceed even though the budget for 
the new fiscal year has not been officially approved by the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
With this interim supply Bill, we are seeking approval for an 
appropriation equal to two-twelfths of the budgeted amount for 
all departments except for the Department of Learning. The 
supply Bill seeks approval for two-tenths of the operating grant 
funding for K to 12 (kindergarten to Grade 12) schools. This 
recognizes that school boards generally operate on a 10-month 
basis. 
 
With the level of funding requested in the interim supply Bill, 
departments and agencies will be able to cover their expenses 
for the months of May and June. In the event that the budget is 
not passed by the end of June, we will seek approval for 
additional funds to ensure the work of government can continue 
pending the adoption of the budget by the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Thank you. Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And to 
your officials, Mr. Minister, welcome this afternoon. It is my 
understanding that we have about an hour or an hour and 10 
minutes. And I’d like to begin with two or three issues that 
many people have questioned me about and I’d like to get a 

better understanding of some of those things. And then a 
number of my colleagues would like to ask some specific 
questions to the granting of the interim supply for the specific 
critic areas that they represent. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d like to begin by having you and your 
officials clarify for me. You’ve indicated and the Premier has 
indicated that the focus on this year’s budget was health, health 
spending — approximately 160 million; if you look at estimates 
of last year versus estimates of this year, we see an increase of 
about $160 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, last time that we were in interim supply 
date — which was April 2 of this year — on pages 332 and 333 
of Hansard, you indicated that a couple of things had happened 
in light of the questions that I asked you. And you had indicated 
that the province had received and was obligated to receive the 
$60 million more or less that was a new federal transfer because 
of the $2 billion surplus for the . . . in the area of the federal 
government, and that promise was fulfilled and you indicated 
that the 60 million was received in last fiscal year that ended on 
March 31. 
 
Then you indicated that the $79.3 million which the 
government had received back at the conclusion of the mid-year 
report — I’m not sure exactly when that was received; I think it 
was about November — you indicated that $79.3 million had 
been received and that for this fiscal year we were actually were 
looking at $47.7 million that you were moving forward, sort of, 
for this year. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the question that I need you to answer and to 
explain to the people of Saskatchewan: if we compare the 
estimates presented by your government a year ago, the 
estimates that you presented this year, we see a difference in 
health expenditure of about $160 million dollars. Can you tell 
us, of that $160 million additional spending in health care, what 
new monies would your government would have received prior 
to March 31 and subsequent to March 31 in the way of this 
40-some million dollars that you’re now putting into the fiscal 
picture for health? 
 
Because I looked at the estimates for health care; we in fact see 
that the Health estimates for last year actually decreased in the 
forecasted expenditure for health. So the additional monies was 
not allocated into any health expenditures for last year, yet 
you’ve indicated on record that about $60 million was received. 
 
So if I add 60 and 47 millions of dollars together, I’m seeing 
about $107 million of federal money. Is that the only amounts 
that this government has received from the federal government? 
Or are there other amounts that your government received since 
the estimates document of a year ago? And what will we see for 
expenditures in this year? 
 
(14:45) 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to members of the Assembly, seated in 
your gallery, or the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Murray Hinds, who’s 
a good friend of mine and also a former law partner of mine, 
and I understand a water polo competitor of the member from 
Regina Elphinstone-Centre. And it’s very good to see Murray in 
the gallery today. He’s very active in the legal community, but 
also a number of community organizations in Saskatoon. And 
so I’d like all members to join me in welcoming Murray to the 
Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the member raised a 
number of questions. One, I believe he raised a question about 
the relationship of the estimate this year to the forecast from last 
year versus the estimate of the previous year. 
 
The estimated expenditure for this budget in Health is $2.687 
billion. And he’ll see that on page 67 of the summary budget 
document. And he will see then, also in that line, that there is an 
estimated expenditure that is the budget estimate for last year 
was $2.526 billion. And then the forecast expenditure for the 
year of ’03-04 was $2.522 billion, about roughly 3, $4 million 
less than . . . So the forecast expenditure at the point we 
published the budget was about 3, $4 million less than what we 
forecast to spend for the year. And I’m not sure of all of the 
reasons immediately offhand as to why it’s down. 
 
But the member will know that, early in the year, we 
encouraged departments to exercise some additional review in 
terms of spending and to see what they could do to reduce 
spending for the remainder of the budget year. And in part, that 
may account for the reduction in the estimate. Although it’s not 
unusual when you consider a budget of, you know, now roughly 
$2.7 billion that, in any given years, there may be some flow 
over from one year to the next for various reasons. 
 
With respect to the amounts that were budgeted prior to March 
31, that is in the old fiscal year, we booked in $48 million in 
health renewal funding and we also included $62 million as our 
share of the $2 billion that was distributed by the federal 
government for health care in the provinces. 
 
And you’ll remember the discussion about the $2 billion. We 
had originally anticipated booking that in the current fiscal year 
and we had been led to believe — based on statements by the 
then leader of the Liberal Party or the new nascent Leader of the 
Liberal Party, Mr. Martin — that this would be funds that 
would be taken into this current fiscal year that we’re in now, as 
opposed to the previous fiscal year. And on that basis, we had 

looked forward to booking that this year. 
 
But at the end of the day, the federal government could not 
provide us the kinds of assurances about when the money 
would flow to the satisfaction of the auditors and, therefore, we 
have had to book that in the previous fiscal year. 
 
This year we are booking an additional . . . we are booking 
$47.7 million of health renewal funding as well. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, has 
the treasury of Saskatchewan received the 62 million as 
promised by the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Yes, we received the cash, Mr. 
Speaker . . . or Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s good to see that 
we have that cash. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, then as you’ve clarified, you’ve indicated 
that the health expenditure for the previous year in fact just 
dropped a little bit below the estimates. There was no dramatic 
decrease or dramatic increase. So therefore the 60 million that 
was provided by the federal government last year was not added 
into the expenditures and budgets were increased. 
 
Yet as you’ve indicated, near the end of the fiscal year there 
were many health regions that were actually doing something 
called cost containment. They were delaying surgeries; they 
were doing all kinds of things. And I see then as you’ve 
indicated, there’s about a $4 million reduction in the actual 
expenditures. So we had budgeted for last year, 2.5 to $6 billion 
and the Government of Saskatchewan did not spend quite that 
much. 
 
Will we then see, Mr. Minister, that health authorities, regional 
health authorities, are they going to be also indicating surpluses 
because they didn’t spend as much? Or in fact, what was the 
reason for cost containment measures if we had $4 million of 
additional monies, or is this in other sectors of the health 
budget? And I know I’m asking you a specific health question, 
Mr. Minister, but there seems to be, you know, a degree of 
uncertainty here. 
 
We’ve indicated in this Assembly the many people that have 
come forward and said, my surgery is being delayed; I’m on a 
waiting list that’s getting longer. Yet we see that $4 million of 
expected expenditure in the Health department didn’t take 
place. We know that the federal government contributed $60 
million. You’ve said the money’s in the bank for last year. It 
doesn’t seem to add up. 
 
So could you clarify what you would expect as Finance minister 
to see from the regional health authorities for their year-ends 
that coincide with the last fiscal budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, if I might make a 
couple of points. One is that $4 million in a context of a budget 
that last year was $2.5 billion is about a quarter of one per cent 
of the total budget. And it’s not always entirely possible at the 
end of the day to completely calculate to the penny what it is 
that we should be spending. 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

And I also point out that towards the end of the year, that we 
encouraged the Department of Health and all departments to 
exercise restraint, to do additional reviews in a number of areas 
with respect to expenditures to see what we could do to, even 
during the course of the last fiscal year, to contain expenditures. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as 
you have indicated then, if I can summarize. Would you agree 
with the fact then that your budget for this current year, which 
shows an increase in health expenditure of about 160 million, 
estimate of last year to estimate of this year, and the fact that 
you have indicated that you have brought forward 62 million 
and 48 million respectively of two amounts of federal monies 
that have been allocated through to the province of 
Saskatchewan, those two numbers add up to about 110 million. 
So the provincial taxpayer for the province of Saskatchewan 
then, through other resources that you have access to, is actually 
going to contribute about $50 million of provincial monies to 
the increase in the health budget of $160 million? 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chair, last 
year’s total budget was in the neighbourhood of $2.5 billion. 
The increase last year over the previous year in total was about 
$184 million. About $110 million of that could be attributed to 
the federal government and about $74 million to the provincial 
government. But part of that 110 then is the $62 million that we 
booked in this last fiscal year as part of the $2 billion transfer 
from the federal government. 
 
I believe that this year the support we are receiving from the 
federal government is less than it was last year. And the 
member gets at one of the frustrations that not just 
Saskatchewan but that all the provinces have with respect to the 
federal government when it comes to support for health care, 
that for us to provide health care on a sustainable basis and to 
go forward and to plan, we need to have from the federal 
government stable funding; and we also need to have 
predictable increases in that funding. 
 
We should not have a situation where federal government says 
that, well if we have a surplus at the end of the year, then 
maybe that’s money that you can book the following year, and 
then get into, you know, a protracted public discussion about 
whether or not that $2 billion will be there. And then when the 
$2 billion is there say, whoops, we didn’t mean for that to go 
into the next fiscal year as we originally had indicated that it 
should, but it should now go into the existing fiscal year. That’s 
not the kind of stability that Saskatchewan or any of the 
provincial governments are looking for, and we need better 
from that from the federal government. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While I don’t 
disagree with you as far as a better federal plan that is upfront 
and is understood by all, there’s no question that we need that. 
 
It’s just the point that I was making, Mr. Minister, is that when 
you, when your predecessor prepared last year’s budget, they 
were not planning on a $62 million revenue to balance the 
health budget . . . the health expenditures against other 
revenues. That 62 million was not included. And while you’ve 
indicated that in your document, of course it is shown that it 

was received as revenue for last year. Okay, no question about 
that. But the expenditures for health did not get increased by 
that revenue that was anticipated. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s move on to another topic. And the full-time 
equivalents, Mr. Minister . . . Your document page is 151. And 
you stated in your budget address, and there was a lot of 
concern expressed by third parties, and we know what’s 
happened with the park closures and everything else. You 
indicated in your document on page 151 that the number of 
full-time equivalents that would be decreased from the listing 
that you’ve provided is in fact 104.8, or let’s round up to 105. 
 
And yet you’ve indicated in the press, Mr. Minister, a number 
of times, that it’s over 500 employees. Now you made reference 
to the fact that some are seasonal and some are part-time. So I 
understand it, and I’d like you to clarify, is that in fact meaning 
that about 500-plus people will be affected, but when you look 
at the full-time equivalents we’re going to actually be talking 
about full-time jobs, about 105? That’s the first thing that I 
want you to clarify, Mr. Minister. 
 
Then secondly, if we look at the departments that had 
significant change, and I’ll just pick three of them. The 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization shows a change of 
about 53 full-time equivalents. The Environment department 
shows 34 full-time equivalent changes. And Highways and 
Transportation is about 21. 
 
Mr. Minister, would officials in each of these departments be 
able to provide for the Legislative Assembly a breakdown as to 
what amount of human resource cost is in fact being saved by 
each of those departments and, you know, subsequent to that, 
never mind those three, but all of the departments that show, 
you know, even a reduction of two employees. Has the 
Department of Finance or treasury tracked every one of these 
departments to know what the resulting savings will be for the 
departments involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the member raised a 
number of questions with respect to FTEs, or full-time 
equivalents, that are incorporated in the budget documents. One 
of the figures that we have, 104 FTEs, pertains to the difference 
in full-time equivalents that are estimated this year versus the 
estimate that was in the budget document last year. 
 
And there is a reduction between these two estimated amounts 
of 104 FTEs but there will be a greater difference between what 
actually occurred during the year and forecasts during the year 
because there was an increase in the number of full-time 
equivalents, notably in areas such as fighting forest fires. And 
so therefore the decrease will be greater from the actual number 
forecast to be employed during the year to what is in the 
estimates this year. 
 
With respect to the numbers of people that are affected, the 
member is right that each FTE can implicate more than one 
person. There may be part-time positions. There may be 
temporary employees occupying part of a full-time equivalent. 
There may be summer students occupying some of these 
full-time equivalents, and so the member is right. 
 
As to the question of being able to provide a specific figure for 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

what is saved by reducing the number of FTEs, again this is a 
difficult exercise for us. I would certainly encourage the 
member to ask the various departments when they come 
forward during estimates, to ask them where it is that the 
savings have occurred and to what extent the savings are the 
result in reducing staffing complements or the number of FTEs. 
We are still going through a bumping process within 
government and therefore in a global sense it’s very difficult for 
us to say, well we’ve reduced the number of FTEs and therefore 
this results in X number of savings. 
 
Now I’ve heard the member give a range of values to the media. 
I don’t want to give a range of values. At the end of the day I’d 
like to give a more exact figure but we would not be able to do 
that until such a time as that process is completed. But certainly 
when the estimates come forward, the member is encouraged to 
ask the ministers responsible for departments with respect to the 
specific subvotes: you show a reduction here; is that in part 
achieved by reducing a full-time equivalent in that area? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for clarifying that. 
As you’ve indicated, I’ve tried to estimate where we’re at and 
where certain departments are at, and I know that my colleagues 
will look forward to questioning ministers as they appear before 
the various committees in estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, one specific question, and you may not be able to 
answer this. I note that under the category revolving funds, the 
Highways Revolving Fund doesn’t exist any more, and in fact it 
was incorporated into the Department of Highways. What 
allowed for that transfer now? And if it was done now, what 
enabled it to be done this year, and why wasn’t it done the years 
before? It seems that there may have . . . It may have resulted in 
the ability to save some duplication by looking at the numbers. 
Or is it just a new procedure that has been adopted by the 
Department of Highways? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the change that the 
member is asking about refers to a change that we are making 
with respect to our budget, where we’re booking capital 
differently than in the past. 
 
In the past when we had a capital dedication in a particular year, 
the revolving funds would be able to expense that over a 
number of years — say, Highways capital equipment as an 
example. But with the changes that we’re making in the budget 
this year, we no longer need the revolving fund to accomplish 
that. We can now do that through the normal budgetary process. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Okay. Thank you for clarifying that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, another area that I’d just like to spend a few 
minutes on is equalization — a favourite topic of yours. As 
you’ve indicated, Saskatchewan has . . . is part of a federal 
agreement that may last as long as 2009, and we need to make 
changes to that agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, by my research it looks like a recent document 
was signed that produced the equalization contract, if you like, 
between the federal government and the provinces not too long 

ago. Could you indicate how Saskatchewan Finance 
department, treasury department . . . how was Saskatchewan 
involved in the actual putting together of the document that we 
currently have difficulty accepting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, if I might . . . or, Mr. 
Chair, if I might just review the process. 
 
First I should indicate that this is not a federal agreement that 
the federal government has with the provinces; that it’s not a 
contract that is signed between the federal government and the 
provinces, no more so than the foundation operating grant is an 
agreement between the province and the various school boards, 
or that revenue sharing is a contract between the province and 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Equalization is a federal program, and at the end of the day it is 
up to the federal government to do what it will do with that 
program. So it’s not a matter of us agreeing to anything, and 
certainly we’re not in a position to, if you like, sign any contract 
with them. 
 
Once a renewal is completed and leading up to this current 
renewal, about two to three years ahead of the current renewal 
which was substantially completed in the last number of 
months, we begin to hold technical discussions at the officials 
level, led by the federal government, and I might say on an 
agenda that is determined in large part by the federal 
government. 
 
The federal government says that these are issues that in the 
coming renewal that we want to assess and perhaps include, and 
we want to obtain the benefit of the advice from the officials 
from the various provincial governments as to the impact that 
these changes might have on the provinces, and will also seek 
to have a discussion on items that they’ve specifically said that, 
this is part of equalization but when the next round comes up 
we’ll have another review of that. And one of those would be 
the mining tax base. 
 
So in this last round of renewal I think some of the issues that 
were on the table were the treatment of commercial licence 
revenues for commercial vehicles and how that might affect 
equalization bases in the various jurisdictions. Another one that 
was on the agenda was the question of property tax revenues 
and how that might be treated, and to what extent that might be 
taken as a sign of relative fiscal health among the provinces. So 
that too was then one of the items that was on the agenda. 
 
And again as I indicated, the federal government put the mining 
tax base on the agenda, and there were also other issues that the 
federal government put on the agenda. Provinces had, some 
provinces had made the point that when the federal government 
makes an adjustment because of some change in equalization 
and then books that adjustment at one point, that that may 
create difficulties for the provinces in terms of cash flow. And 
therefore the provinces had a proposal to equalize, if you like, 
that or to average those shocks over a period of time to lessen 
the impact at one point for the provinces. 
 
So the federal government then comes out with its agenda, 
invites discussion on the part of the various provincial 
government. To an extent, some provinces may discuss among 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

themselves how we are to treat these proposals by the federal 
government, but in the main it’s a two-way discussion or, if you 
like, a bilateral discussion between the federal government and 
ourselves. 
 
At the conclusion of that process, the department then makes a 
report to the ministers. And then there may be discussions at the 
ministers’ level, and prior to the federal government calling one 
final meeting of the Finance minister to hear their, if you like, 
last comments with respect to the proposals that they have for 
equalization renewal, and then after that point, the federal 
government proceeds to make the changes that it will make and 
— as it has done in this particular case — the changes that it 
plans to make and put into legislation. But that’s roughly the 
process. 
 
Again the items that are on discussion are the ones that the 
federal government puts on the table. We can during that 
process indicate or flag items that, if they’re not on the table 
now, that perhaps these ought to be on the table at some future 
time. And sometimes the federal government will do that. I 
think the property tax issue, for example, is something that the 
province of Quebec has sought to be at the . . . or to be part of 
the agenda. And the federal government’s finally, in this 
renewal, put that on the agenda. 
 
But again I want to emphasize that this is not a matter of 
contractual agreement. This is a matter of 10 jurisdictions in 
Canada, each of them with their own interests, each of them 
with their own peculiar impacts with respect to equalization, 
that enter into largely bilateral discussions with the federal 
government. And that’s roughly how that process works. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for trying to 
simplify a very complicated process. And we understand that of 
course the formula that is used to determine equalization carries 
back years and goes ahead. And the numbers . . . If someone in 
the public, I’m sure, is looking at the budget documents from 
years past and looking at what was estimated and what was 
actually received, they see tremendous fluctuations. And we 
know that equalization formulas that kick in can create that. So 
I appreciate your response, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the research done by Professor Courchene I think 
for the year . . . 2001-02 I believe was the specific year. He 
identified a very serious concern for the province of 
Saskatchewan in the oil and gas sector. The Premier has 
indicated the concern. You’ve indicated the concern from the 
point of Saskatchewan, and the Leader of the Opposition has in 
fact indicated that that needs to be addressed. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of what you just said and putting together 
a federal program that, you know, the items that are included on 
the table are actually the federal government’s items, what kind 
of attempt will you be making as Finance minister to change the 
minds of people in Ottawa in the very near future as to how 
Saskatchewan should be getting a different deal? Whether we 
want . . . Do we want the same kind of deal as Nova Scotia and 
Newfoundland? Do we want to create a provincial plan that is 
different? And how will now the federal program, as you’ve 
identified, be able to accommodate the needs of Saskatchewan? 
 
And I think the perceived description of both the Premier and 

the Finance minister . . . Mr. Goodale’s indicated that there 
seems to be this problem and that we need to deal with it. As 
Finance minister representing Saskatchewan, how will you put 
forward Saskatchewan’s position as to what might serve us 
better? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, you know, some 
people might take the point of view that there’s nothing you can 
every say or do in the provinces that changes anyone’s minds in 
Ottawa unless there’s some political reason for Ottawa to 
change their minds. And I hesitate to say that. You know 
Ottawa did respond to certain issues defined by Professor 
Courchene in his article . . . and could be likened to the federal 
government is caught publicly in the act of picking the pockets 
of the people of Saskatchewan and then decided, upon publicly 
being caught, to respond. 
 
But I take a more optimistic point of view that at the end of the 
day that if your cause is just and that there are good reasons for 
the people of Canada to accept the arguments that you put 
forward, then you should do that, and you should do that at 
every level — as the Premier has done in his meetings recently 
with the Prime Minister, as I am doing in exchanging 
correspondence with the federal Finance minister and meetings 
that I have had with the federal Finance minister to discuss 
equalization, as our officials will do as they hold discussions at 
the officials’ level to follow-up on, in many cases, the 
discussions that are held at a more senior level. 
 
We will also discuss this matter at meetings of provincial 
Finance ministers. And as Western Finance ministers we will 
make recommendations to the meetings of the Western 
Premiers when they meet, recognizing that not all provinces are 
the beneficiaries of equalization, so there are other provinces 
that are not as interested in having equalization as part of the 
agenda. But nevertheless, that is another forum that we have for 
discussion, and the member will also know in recent months we 
have also tried to engage the public in that dialogue. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
final question before one of my colleagues has a couple that 
she’d like to ask. 
 
The Senate Committee on National Finance met with Professor 
Courchene and had, I believe, given him as much as an hour of 
presentation time where he’s made that presentation. And others 
are doing that as well. So there are ongoing things that are 
happening. 
 
Do you, in your or in your official’s knowledge of a committee 
like the standing committee on . . . or the Senate Committee on 
National Finance, is that committee going to make 
recommendations to parliament, and will proposals put forward 
by provinces like Saskatchewan, will they be given serious 
recognition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I might point out 
that I will be appearing tomorrow before the Senate Committee 
on National Finance, and I’ll be accompanied by the Finance 
critic when I do that. 
 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

The committee in question last made a report to the federal 
government 2002, a couple of years ago, with respect to the 
equalization program. One of the recommendations that they 
made in that report is that the federal government should return 
to a 10-province standard for calculating equalization. And that 
is a recommendation that, if it had been adopted by the federal 
government, would likely mean that the member and I would 
not be having a discussion today with respect to equalization 
because it would cure many of the problems and issues that we 
have with respect to equalization. 
 
So the committee has made recommendations in the past. I 
understand that they are revisiting the equalization issue, in part 
because of the controversy that has surrounded the renewal of 
the equalization at this point and in part because of the 
comments made by Professor Courchene, and I think is one of 
the reasons that they extended an opportunity for him to appear. 
 
We look forward to the opportunity to make our case, to point 
out to them the unique way in which Saskatchewan is affected 
by equalization. You know, we hope that they will make further 
recommendations to the federal government. 
 
We’re encouraged by comments such as the comments from, as 
I understand it by the deputy minister for Newfoundland, who 
also indicated that, you know, that a return to the 10-province 
standard would not only have a beneficial impact for the 
province of Newfoundland, but pointed out specifically that it 
would have an even greater beneficial impact for the people of 
Saskatchewan. He recognized I think in part that the reason that 
this issue has been opened up by the Senate is because of the 
controversy surrounding equalization in Saskatchewan. So we 
look forward to the opportunity. 
 
We don’t know of course at the end of the day what regard 
these recommendations by the committee — if there are 
recommendations — might be accorded by the federal 
government. But we can all hope that . . . you know, who 
knows? They’re going to a federal election. Who knows what 
party will pick this up as an issue to campaign on. Perhaps they 
might reverse a trend that we see of them trying to obtain 
support in the cities within our jurisdictions, but try to obtain 
the support of people in provinces in Canada so that those 
provinces are better supported to provide priority services, and 
those provinces can move ahead with their agendas. So we hope 
that at the end of the day will be the outcome. 
 
But again, you know, one can never be sure what will be the 
specific outcome. But I’m an optimist. And as an optimist, I 
have to believe that when you have a good cause, like we do, 
that there is a question, a fundamental question of fairness here 
that has been recognized by people outside our borders, that at 
some point that will prevail and that we will be accorded fair 
and just treatment by whoever that federal government might 
be. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome to the 
ministers and to your officials. This is my first opportunity to 
ask some questions in not any real direct department, but some 
questions that I have that surround my critic area of Aboriginal 

Affairs. 
 
Because Saskatchewan has a wonderful opportunity with our 
increasing number of Aboriginal people . . . we actually have 
our own private little baby boom going on in this province, but 
at the same time it causes some citizens to be confused about 
issues, especially around money, on how money is spent on and 
off-reserve. Minister, can you confirm for me, first of all, that 
the federal government pays for the health care for Aboriginal 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
for the question. And I was interested to hear the member’s 
opening comments with respect to demographics in 
Saskatchewan and point out that I read a very interesting article 
in the most recent edition of National Geographic which points 
out population trends and demographic shifts in the Great Plains 
region of the United States. And when you read that, it’s 
interesting the comparisons that one can quickly make with 
what is taking place in the Great Plains region of Canada as 
well. 
 
The question of support by the federal government: when it 
comes to health care for First Nations people, the federal 
government will provide some level of services on reserves. 
They may pay, for example through their own arrangements, for 
health nurses to be located on some reserves in Saskatchewan 
or First Nations in Saskatchewan. They may provide funding 
for First Nations hospitals in some parts of Saskatchewan which 
are then open to people who live on those First Nations, but also 
for people in that area from off the reserve. 
 
But once a person moves off the reserve, or leaves the reserve 
to access a service in the province of Saskatchewan, then that 
becomes an entirely . . . a cost that’s borne by our health care 
system and certainly is an issue that presents challenges to us. 
Certainly all those people who do not live on the reserve and 
move into our cities, town, and villages in Saskatchewan access 
our health care system the same as they would, as anyone else 
in Saskatchewan. But then they’re also obliged to pay taxes the 
same as anyone else in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for clarification. I 
was under the understanding that, for example, prescription 
drugs would be paid for basically through their card, through 
the federal government. So you’re saying that the province 
actually picks up the costs of all the health services and 
procedures for Aboriginal people that are not living on-reserve. 
That’s a confirmation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the member is asking a 
detailed question about how certain services are provided to 
First Nations people. It is our understanding, and I stand to be 
corrected on this, that there are circumstances under which the 
federal government will provide support for certain prescription 
drug purchases by First Nations people. Now what the 
breakdown is there between on-reserve and off-reserve, I’m not 
clear but certainly would encourage the member to ask these 
questions of the Minister of Health, or we can also undertake to 
provide a written answer for the member so that in the interests 
of clarity that the member is well served by the actual facts as 
opposed to us trying to grapple with what we think are the facts. 
So we would certainly undertake to provide a written response 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

to that for the member. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister; I appreciate that. At 
the same time I’m wondering if you can give me an idea of 
which of your departments actually get funds from the federal 
government for different works that may be provided for 
Aboriginal people. For example, does the Department of 
Learning get money directly from the federal government for 
learning? Does the Department of Community Resources, for 
example? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Just a type of a breakdown just for more of an understanding. 
Because I believe some of the issues that we are dealing with 
today in the province as a whole, there’s a lot of confusion, of 
lack of information and education between all peoples as to 
who’s . . . where the rights are and what, and who’s paying for 
what. So if you could provide that breakdown for me, I would 
appreciate it. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Minister, can you tell me if there is costs 
that go to the federal government from the provincial 
government for services provided to Aboriginal people. Is there 
any administration costs added to that, to that bill that would go 
to the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to the last 
meeting of the Committee of Finance to deal with interim 
supply, we undertook to provide a schedule of all of the various 
agreements and arrangements that we have with the federal 
government where we are transferred funds for specific 
agreements to provide certain services. 
 
Now some of those services may be specifically related to First 
Nations people. But I’m not really clear on that, and I think it’s 
better that the question is put to the specific departments when 
they come forward. There may be arrangements where we 
undertake to provide a specific service for someone who is off 
the reserve and where we provide that service and we’re 
compensated for that by the federal government for some 
specific reason that I couldn’t articulate what that reason might 
be. I know we enter into many arrangements with the federal 
government, some of it related to First Nations people. 
 
There may well be also program delivery within the 
departments that are not covered by these agreements, where 
services are provided to First Nations people because, at the end 
of the day, these are citizens of the province. They do not 
necessarily live on the reserve but we are nevertheless obliged 
because they are citizens of Saskatchewan to provide them, too, 
with the services that we provide for all of our citizens. So I 
think it’s a better question to put to specific departments. 
 
Also I suspect that the Department of Government Relations 
and Aboriginal Affairs might have further insight in a general 
way on this specific question than we might at Department of 
Finance. Again, that there’s no clear breakdown of where, you 
know, where we differentiate between First Nations and people 
who are not First Nations when it comes to agreements or 
funding arrangements with the federal government. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I am trying not to be 

too specific because I understand, you know, in generalities. 
I’m just asking questions to get some background. 
 
I notice in the budget that there’s $10 million left going into . . . 
less going into TLE (treaty land entitlement) money this year 
than last year and it’s because some of the agreements have 
been settled. But I know in the big picture your Department of 
Finance must be budgeting for the next round of TLE 
agreements that are coming forward. And can you give me an 
idea of what you’re looking at for the forward budgeting for 
these agreements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, again we find it 
difficult to provide the kind of answer that will satisfy the 
member and the members of the committee because we simply 
do not have the details on the framework that’s there to support 
treaty land entitlement and the expenditures. But we do believe 
that the minister responsible for Aboriginal Affairs would be in 
a position to provide a better explanation of that process and the 
funding when his estimates come before the House. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank the 
minister and his officials for attending here this afternoon so 
that we could proceed with the estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question that I have has to do with the rebate 
on farm fuel, and specifically with regards to bulk card locks at 
fuel dealerships. And I’m wondering if there is going to be a 
move that there has to be a minimum gasoline purchase of 200 
litres at card locks before a fuel tax exemption permit for the 80 
per cent will be allowed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, that is the subject of 
some discussion between ourselves and the industry at this 
point. And at the time that we reach a conclusion in that matter, 
we’ll certainly undertake to get that information to the member 
in addition to communicating it to the public. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad that 
you’ve come forth with that statement, and I would hope that 
you would examine this carefully. There are a number of 
problems that such an implication would have for farmers and 
for the businesses in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all, there would be a significant cost incurred to create 
the systems necessary to handle the restrictions. Secondly, key 
locks would be forced to charge customers 100 per cent of the 
tax on all purchases because they cannot be automated to 
comply with the restrictions. Further, if the proposed change is 
made, farmers would likely move their purchasing from card 
lock to key . . . or a key lock to on-farm storage. And this 
presents a number of problems. First and foremost would be the 
environmental risk. I can tell you without a doubt, the 
professional nature of our bulk fuel dealers are very conscious 
of environmental standards. These standards, however, do not 
cross over necessarily to all farms. 
 
It also would cause the . . . with the demise of the farm 
economy, the potential for theft increases with on-farm storage, 
and the additional cost combined with the reduction throughout 
would result in some card-lock or key-lock projects becoming 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

unfeasible. And, Mr. Minister, particularly with this number 
being contemplated, this will hurt small farmers who still are 
running gasoline trucks, three-tons, whatnot, or small gasoline 
tractors. And I would hope that the minister will take that under 
consideration and not implement such a move. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, again we are 
undertaking discussions with the industry to see how we might 
best implement this revenue measure, and at the point that we 
reach some understanding with the industry how we might most 
effectively and sensitively do this. And we will be 
communicating this, and we will make note of making sure that 
we respond specifically to the member’s question as well. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Chair, I move no. 1: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $1,020,526,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2005. 

 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the minister that: 
 

The sum not exceeding $1,020,526,000 be granted to Her 
Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 
2005. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2005, the sum of $1,020,526,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Deputy Chair: — It is moved by the Minister of Finance: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2005, 
the sum of $1,020,526,000 be granted out of the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move that the 
committee rise and the Chair report that the committee’s agreed 
to certain motions and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved that the committee 
rise and that the Chair report that the committee has agreed to 
certain resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Agreed. 
 
(16:00) 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 
same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
resolution be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, later this day. 
 
The Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 

 
APPROPRIATION BILL 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: —I move that Bill No. 42, The 
Appropriation Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 42, The Appropriation Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is leave of the Assembly 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been granted. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly and under rule 57(2), I move that the Bill be now 
read a second and third time. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 42, The Appropriation Act, 
2004 (No. 2) be now read a second and third time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I am advised that Her Honour is here 
for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 16:04 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly, I present to your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 42 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 2005 

 
to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:07. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 
2004. I would like to declare, Mr. Speaker, that this Act will be 
treated as a confidence vote as it is integral part, as it is an 

integral part of our 2004-2005 budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in preparing the 2004-2005 budget, I might say 
that this was a difficult process. We had to take action to 
address the widening gap between revenues and expenditures. 
We conducted a thorough expenditure review and cut spending 
in lower priority areas when possible. 
 
Twelve departments had their budgets cut and funding 
reallocated to high priority essential services, including health 
care and education. Health care funding increased by $160 
million for 2004-2005. We have a record budget for the 
Department of Health at almost $2.7 billion. 
 
Saskatchewan residents have told us that health care remains 
their number one priority. Securing our publicly funded health 
care system is a priority for this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also have a record budget for the Department of Learning at 
slightly over $1.2 billion. The budget increased funding to the 
Department of Learning by $45 million. Education contributes 
to our growth, our prosperity, and the future of our province. It 
is the best investment we can make in our young people. These 
two sectors, two of the highest priority areas for Saskatchewan 
people, account for 90 per cent of the spending increases in the 
2004-2005 budget. Saskatchewan people have told us what their 
top priorities are: health care and education. 
 
However, the cost to support these valued public services are 
increasing. And spending cuts alone were not sufficient to meet 
the increased funding pressures in these two priority areas. Mr. 
Speaker, we reviewed numerous revenue options. For the PST 
(provincial sales tax), this included expanding the base or 
increasing the rate. The decision to raise the PST one 
percentage point was not an easy one, but it was necessary to 
maintain the essential services that Saskatchewan residents rely 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although this Bill increases the PST from 6 per 
cent to 7 per cent, it does not broaden the base. Items previously 
not subject to the tax will remain exempt. This includes key 
family essentials such as residential electricity, heating fuels, 
children’s clothing, and prescription drugs. In addition, 
restaurant meals are still not subject to PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will also note that even after the rate increase 
Saskatchewan still has the second lowest sales tax rate in 
Canada. Our tax policies remain competitive, fair, and 
sustainable. The PST increase will raise an additional $136 
million in tax revenue annually. While this amount is 
substantial it still does not meet the funding increases for health 
care and education. However, the additional revenues will help 
maintain high quality health care and education for 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to lessen the impact on low-income earners, we 
will also introduce a $8 million annual increase to the 
Saskatchewan sales tax credit. This move balances the need to 
increase revenues and fund essential services with protection for 
low-income earners and families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Provincial Sales 
Tax Amendment Act, 2004. 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 36, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise today and speak on Bill No. 36, An Act to amend 
The Provincial Sales Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in beginning my remarks today I would like to 
quote a promise made by the Premier of this province on page 
15 of the NDP election platform. A reporter asked the Premier 
and I quote, “Do you have a mandate to change or raise the 
PST?” And the Premier said quote, “No, no.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems passing strange to me that we’re here 
beginning a debate on raising the provincial sales tax in light of 
the fact that the Premier himself said that this would not 
happen. Mr. Speaker, he said no to an increase in the provincial 
sales tax and here we are today initiating debate on exactly that 
broken promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this promise lies right at the very heart of why this 
NDP government has abandoned its credibility with the people 
of Saskatchewan. It’s broken trust. It’s broken faith in the face 
of the fact that the Premier of this province on the election said 
categorically that he would not raise the provincial sales tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout this session in the days that we’ve 
been meeting, we have said that there has been a fundamental 
betrayal of the people of this province from this Premier and 
this government. And this exactly speaks to the heart of it, 
because this exactly is a betrayal that is very clear in terms of 
what the Premier said and now what is happening with this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite quip from their seats that 
somehow this is justified or expected, or somehow that they 
were caught by surprise. May I remind them, Mr. Speaker, they 
were the government going into this election. 
 
And just like today, the Finance minister didn’t even understand 
that he had broken promise and faith with the farmers of the 
province; and he didn’t even know what’s going on with the 
PFRA and the commitment that they had made to support a well 
drilling program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time after time after time this government has 
broken faith with the people of this province, and this highlights 
it as clear as anything that this government has done when we 
talk about raising the provincial sales tax from 6 to 7 per cent. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder when we go out into the province, 
into our constituencies and across Saskatchewan, in Saskatoon, 
and Yorkton, and Regina, and Swift Current — all around the 
province — that people are telling us that they have no faith and 
no confidence in the credibility or the honesty of this 
government to meet and stay with their commitments. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to understand because today we’re 
opening up the debate on increasing the provincial sales tax in 
the face of the promise that was made by the Premier of this 
province in the last election campaign. It’s pretty clear. It 
doesn’t sort of need to be explained. The Premier said one thing 
and now his government is doing something entirely different 
from what commitment that was given to the people of this 
province when they were considering who they were going to 
select to be the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note as well that the Finance 
minister tries to somehow paint this as this was the only 
opportunity to generate revenue in order to pay for the increased 
expenditures for health and education. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened reasonably carefully during the 
interim supply discussion between the official opposition 
Finance critic and the Minister of Finance. And I heard the 
question asked, how much money has the federal government 
committed to the cost of health in this current fiscal year? And 
the answer I believe was a total of $110 million of the $160 
million that has been committed to the health care budget came 
from the federal government. That’s what I heard happen. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to be very quick with figures 
to understand that the province’s additional commitment to the 
health care system was $50 million. Now that’s still a 
significant amount of money, but it isn’t justification for raising 
the PST and expecting to raise $136 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason why this government has to increase 
the PST is because their economic development plan, the 
growth of this province, has been an abysmal failure. And the 
reason why they have to increase taxes in order to meet their 
commitments is because the economy simply is not growing. 
And it’s not going to grow as long as this government is so out 
of touch with the needs of businesses, is so out of touch with 
the needs of the citizens of this province. 
 
Yesterday the minister in charge of the Crown Investments 
Corporation said this government’s attitude is going to be to 
make the Crown corporations the employer of choice. That this 
is what they’re going to do, is lever everything in this province 
to make sure that the public sector and the Crowns are going to 
dominate the economy. And thank you very much, they provide 
useful and important services but they don’t grow the economy. 
 
The private sector is where the economy grows, and the private 
sector is going to get the clear message that they are not 
welcome in Saskatchewan. And how in the world are we going 
to ever get out of this spiral of having to raise taxes in order to 
meet essential services if we don’t fundamentally change the 
attitude of this province and this government? 
 
The member from Prince Albert sits there, the man that 
engineered the whole SPUDCO debacle, and sits there and 
chirps from his seat as if he understands how the economy 
works. All he understands is how to blow money, try to keep it 
from public view, and then get discredited by his own 
colleagues and placed in the backbenches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the credibility of the 
member from Prince Albert who oversaw the debacle about the 
investments by government in these kinds of crazy investments. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s no, it’s no wonder, it’s no wonder, it’s 
no wonder that it’s going to be difficult for the members 
opposite to try to understand that they have to do something 
fundamentally more than just managing the decline of the 
economy. They have to actually do some things fundamentally 
different to grow the economy. 
 
And what do they do? They break their election commitments, 
every single one of them almost without exception, and 
including the most important one of all that talked about not 
raising the provincial sales tax. And today here we are opening 
the debate on doing exactly that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is impossible to understand how this 
government is going to do anything except managing the 
decline of the economy. They don’t understand the reality of 
our demographics; they don’t understand the opportunities that 
we have to grow the economy; they don’t understand how 
important it is to give a positive, enthusiastic signal of the 
importance of the private sector in our economy. And instead of 
doing that, they send the signals that our promises are worth 
nothing and this province is going to go the route of a Crown 
and a public sector dominated economy that has little room or 
appreciation for the private sector in this province. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, they make the decision to raise the provincial sales 
tax. 
 
Now I heard the minister say that they are very confident that 
this increased tax is going to raise, I believe, $136 million of 
extra revenue. Well, Mr. Speaker, I recall a few years back 
when the provincial government was actually . . . they, after Mr. 
Romanow, the former premier of this province, he actually 
increased the sales tax up to 9 per cent in the early 1990s. And 
they were very concerned when the discussions were going on 
about reducing the tax, how much revenue would be lost, how 
much absolute revenue would be lost. And interestingly, they 
projected that it would be, I don’t remember the numbers, but 
for discussion I think it was somewhere . . . 80 to $90 million 
would be foregone on revenue for each percentage point of 
provincial sales tax at that time that would be diminished. 
 
And as they did it, they found something very interesting 
because, Mr. Speaker, as they diminished the tax they actually 
found that the amount of revenue they projected, had projected 
to lose was not nearly as great. And you know why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because when you reduce taxes you generate more 
economic activity, and therefore the amount of revenue that 
actually flows into the government increases, or does not 
diminish nearly as much as you might expect. 
 
Now I think it’s also true in the opposite case. When you raise 
taxes you don’t keep the same amount of economic activity 
happening. So it is entirely possible that not only by raising 
these taxes the government is going to fall short of the amount 
of money that they’re projecting to collect because the 
economic activity will diminish. 
 
You ask the businesses, on the west side of this province 
particularly, what this is going to have as an impact for their 

business. And what it’s going to do, Mr. Speaker, it’s not going 
to automatically say, oh good, the taxes have gone up by one 
percentage point; we’re now going to continue to make the 
decision and we’re going to buy the refrigerator or stove or 
whatever purchase that a consumer’s going to make; we’re 
happy to pay the extra one per cent and we’re happy that the 
government is going to collect another $136 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s going to happen in far too many instances, 
particularly on the west side of this province, is people are 
going to vote with their feet to go across the border in a 
sales-tax-free jurisdiction and make their purchase there. 
 
So not only does the government not collect the extra 1 per cent 
that they’re projecting, they don’t collect the 6 per cent that 
exists now. And so where is this increased revenue going to 
come from if that indeed happens? And I’m sure if you ask the 
business community on the west side of the province, you’re 
going to hear them tell you is that that’s exactly what’s going to 
happen, and their opportunities to keep their businesses viable 
in Saskatchewan are going to be severely jeopardized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in Prince Albert on the weekend, and 
interestingly I was talking to some business people. And they 
said, you know what happens when you increase this sales tax? 
What you do is make us one more percentage point less 
competitive than our competition in Alberta. And so for people 
that are buying a bicycle or a recreational purchase — some of 
these things, canoes or whatever can be a sizable purchase — 
and so what happens for those businesses in Saskatchewan, 
including in Prince Albert, these businesses are saying, we have 
to now cut into our profit margin by 6 per cent in order to meet 
the prices that are quoted from Alberta. And now by raising the 
provincial sales tax, we have to take another percentage point 
out of our bottom line in order to meet the competition. 
 
How in the world is that growing the economy, Mr. Speaker? It 
simply is not. And this NDP government simply does not 
understand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all of my colleagues will want to 
speak at length about this Bill, and so I want to make sure that 
people have time to consider it. And I also know, Mr. Speaker, 
that it’s important for the people of the province to realize that 
this is a Bill that, actually is the Bill that we have to vote on in 
terms of support for the provincial sales tax increase that was 
promised not to happen by the Premier. And now another 
promise broken is happening to us. 
 
And people, I know, Mr. Speaker, are going to want to 
comment on this legislation. They’re going to want to hold this 
government accountable for their broken promises. They are 
going to want to make sure that they have the opportunity to 
register their displeasure at the decision that was made by this 
government in bringing this legislation forward. And in order 
for them to accomplish that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill 36 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 



April 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004. I 
would like to declare that this Act will be treated as a 
confidence vote as it is an integral part of our 2004-2005 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, concern is growing among health professionals 
over the harmful effects of tobacco and the need to introduce 
strong measures to reduce tobacco consumption, particularly 
among our youth. Increasing the tobacco tax, and consequently 
the price of tobacco products, is generally considered one of the 
most effective deterrents of tobacco use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill increases the tax on cigarettes and loose 
tobacco from 16 cents per cigarette or gram of tobacco, to 17.5 
cents. Also, Mr. Speaker, this Bill modifies the calculation of 
the tax on cigars. This change is to ensure that all tobacco tax 
collectors are using the same method to calculate the tax on 
cigars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Cancer Society applauded 
Saskatchewan’s provincial budget because of the increase in 
cigarette taxes and additional funding for cancer care in the 
province. 
 
Keith Karasin, executive director of the Canadian Cancer 
Society in Saskatchewan, said, and I quote: 
 

Over time cigarette tax increases will reduce the number 
of people who smoke and go on to develop cancer, and 
reduce rates for smoking among youth. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Karasin went on to say, quote: 
 

We are encouraged that both parties in the legislature are 
focussing on the need for action to prevent cancer and the 
need for funding to improve treatment for people who are 
diagnosed with cancer. 
 
Bans on smoking in public places and tobacco tax 
increases are the two most effective ways to reduce 
smoking rates. Over time these lower rates lead to fewer 
people developing cancer. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the changes contained within this Bill are 
expected to yield approximately $17 million in additional 
revenue in 2004-2005, revenue that will continue to help pay 
for our vital public services in Saskatchewan, including health 
care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Tobacco Tax 

Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 37, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise this afternoon to speak to Bill 37, An Act to amend The 
Tobacco Tax Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say first and foremost is that the official 
opposition very much supports any initiatives that are going to 
destabilize the use of tobacco products in our province and 
prevent people from beginning to be addicted to tobacco and 
any of its products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by and large I think that it has been shown in other 
jurisdictions that as the price of tobacco products increase, the 
accessibility and the incidence of young people starting to 
smoke diminishes. And I think that that is an important 
consideration in looking at this legislation. 
 
I think there is always a balancing act — and I suspect that the 
minister fully understands this — between how much you can 
raise the taxes on tobacco and how much then you open the 
doors for smuggling of the product and the consequences that 
that potentially has. And it is kind of a balancing act and there’s 
no finite rules that you can establish to make this happen. 
 
But I think that, by and large, what is being proposed in this 
legislation is not going to tip the equilibrium in a significant 
way and will be a further deterrent to young people from 
starting. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the other thing that should be considered 
when we raise the revenues from tobacco, is not only what is 
the effect on discouraging people from starting, but can we 
encourage people to quit the habit as well before it has 
permanent and lasting health implications by their use of the 
product. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think we maybe have to look at putting a 
little bit of a direct relationship in saying perhaps some of the 
revenue that we generate from an increased levy on tobacco 
could be dedicated to providing financial support for devices 
like the patch and other medications to help individuals quit 
smoking. That we could make that connection and that tie in to 
say, yes, we’re taking in extra revenue from the tobacco taxes 
and we’re going to make a commitment to have greater 
financial support to help those people who are currently 
addicted to tobacco end their addiction and end their 
dependence on the tobacco products. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we think that there’s certainly merit in this 
legislation. We think that it strikes a reasonable balance. We 
know there are going to be people like were quoted from the 
cancer agency and others that are going to want to comment on 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2004 

this legislation. And in order to facilitate that, Mr. Speaker, I 
would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that second reading debate on Bill 37 be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:33. 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................781 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................781 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................781 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................781 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................781 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................781 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................782 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................782 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................782 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................782 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................782 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................782 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................782 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................782 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................795 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Personal Thanks 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................784 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Bronze Medal at Dragon Boat World Championship 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................785 
 Fire Hall in Rural Municipality of Three Lakes 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................785 
 Child Care Saskatchewan Spaces Increased by 200 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................785 
 Volunteer Recognition Awards Banquet 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................786 
 Clayton Gerein Wins Gold 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................786 
 Fire Hall Opening in Warman 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................786 
 SaskPower Poster Contest 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................786 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Comments by Minister of Justice 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................787 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................787 
 Future of Valley View Centre 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................788 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................788 
 Utility Rates 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................789 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................789 
 Funding for Farm Wells 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................790 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................791 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................791 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................792 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................792 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Referral of Estimates to Committees 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................792 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................794 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................794 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................799 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................800 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................801 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................801 
ROYAL ASSENT .............................................................................................................................................................................802 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 36 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................802 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................803 
 Bill No. 37 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................805 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................805 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


