















































Hansard: November 18, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 63A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2004, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1787 
 November 18, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again today I 
stand to present a petition on behalf of the constituents of 
Cypress Hills. The community of Burstall has been very prolific 
in signing these petitions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present this on behalf of the 
citizens of the community of Burstall. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf of 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan concerned about the 
farm safety net program here in Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Yellow Quill and Rose Valley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today on behalf of people from my constituency who are 
concerned about the government’s desire to fund the CAIS 
(Canadian agricultural income stabilization) program: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Yellow Quill, 
Archerwill, and Kelvington. I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition dealing with the underfunding of the CAIS program by 
the provincial government. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the CAIS program receives 
adequate provincial funding, the funding formula is 
changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and that 
the provincial government contribute funds to the latest 
BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Wolseley, Neudorf, and Lemberg. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present regarding the brick plant. I was out and I 
just got a new truckload so that’s kind of nice. Regarding the 
brick plant in Claybank, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a number of them here, and signatures 
range from down in the States to British Columbia, Alberta, 
Manitoba, Ontario. This plant is well visited from people all 
over Canada and United States. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents from the 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are very concerned 
about the deplorable state of Highway 35 south of Weyburn, 
which is even worse now because the NDP have decided to turn 
it back to gravel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 

 
And the petitions are signed, Mr. Speaker, by residents of the 
United States and all over Canada, but especially by the people 
in this immediate area who have to drive on this deplorable 
highway every day. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2004 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again I rise with a petition from citizens in my 
constituency who are very upset with the way the government’s 
going about to force school amalgamation. 
 
And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Glentworth, 
Fir Mountain, and McCord. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here, 
citizens concerned about the high cost of crop insurance: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Kenaston, Hanley, and Young. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith natural 
gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the cost 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects in those areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Grandora, Saskatoon, Langham, 
and Conquest. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again in the 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens of west 
central Saskatchewan very concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of the school divisions. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of the town 
of Kerrobert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned with the 
province’s inadequate funding to the CAIS program. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that funds to the latest BSE assistance package be 
provided as released by the federal government. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Neudorf, Stockholm, and Grayson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of people concerned with the CAIS program: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and the 
provincial government contribute funds to the latest BSE 
assistance package released by the federal government. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

It is signed by the good people of Neudorf, Broadview, 
Summerberry, and Lemberg. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) they are hereby 
read and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions 
being sessional papers nos. 72, 107, 637, 638, and 640. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 



November 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 2, 
The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be heard in Committee of 
the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive Committee of the Whole on this Bill. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 2, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 9, 
The Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Electrical Inspection 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 9, The Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a third time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 68 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: several fire 
departments across my constituency have contacted my 
office regarding a letter received from SaskTel. The letter 
tells them that a brand new system of emergency 
communications must be set up by December 2006. The 
current SaskTel FleetNet 800 service will then be obsolete. 
Fire departments across Saskatchewan who have invested 
thousands of dollars in FleetNet will be forced to come up 
with more money to purchase new equipment. 
 
Will SaskTel be providing any grants, loans, or other 
assistance to our rural fire departments and emergency 
service providers to help them pay for the new 
communications equipment? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 68 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what public consultation 
process took place prior to the recent changes of delivery 
of services and staffing in the Sun Country Regional 
Health Authority? 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2004 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 68 
ask the government the following question: 
 

Again to the Minister of Health: please provide the 
average percentage of wage increases awarded to 
administrative positions in the Sun Country Regional 
Health Authority for the fiscal year 2004-2005 and the 
total amount of money these increases cost for this fiscal 
year. 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I am very pleased 
and honoured to introduce some very special guests today, 
guests from Switzerland. We have with us the holder of the 
highest public office in Switzerland, Speaker Max Binder, who 
is the Speaker of the National Council and who hails from the 
canton of Zurich. And he is here along with Mrs. Ruth Binder, 
and I’d ask them to rise. 
 
And along with them is His Excellency Anton Thalmann, who 
is the ambassador of Switzerland in Canada, and Mrs. 
Dominique Thalmann. With them also is Mr. Jean Claude 
Hagmann, Consul General in Toronto. 
 
Speaker Binder is a farmer by trade. First elected as a member 
of the Communal Council in 1985, he was elected as a national 
councillor in 1991. He became Speaker in the year 2003. He 
and Mrs. Binder have three grown children. 
 
His Excellency Anton Thalmann joined the Swiss foreign 
service in 1977. He has served in Brussels, Belgium, Berne, 
Tokyo, and Paris. He was the head of the Swiss mission to 
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) from 1999 to 2003 
and was appointed Ambassador to Canada and the Bahamas in 
the year 2003. He and his wife have two daughters. 
 
The delegation will spend two days in Regina, then continue on 
to Saskatoon and Ottawa. And they are accompanied by Mr. 
John Clerc, assistant secretary general of the National Council; 
Mr. Jean-François Pagé, visit coordinator, Parliament of 
Canada; Mrs. Mireille Khouri Aubé, who’s the logistics officer, 
Parliament of Canada; and Ms. Tatjana Paul, interpreter. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Welcome to all from Switzerland and from Ottawa here to the 
legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Any further introductions? I recognize the 
member for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a group of students seated in the western 
gallery. They’re a group of students from the Rainbow Youth 
Centre, which is located in the fine constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. They look to be fine ambassadors of that 
great institution, and they’re accompanied by their teacher, 

Terrance Sunshine. And I look forward to being able to spend 
some time with them shortly. 
 
And as my old friend Keith Goulet used to say when groups 
would come to the legislature, I’d like to say a word to you in 
Cree, Ta wow. Welcome to your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today with a 
great deal of pride, and I would like to introduce to you and 
through you, seated in your gallery my two daughters. First, 
Tracy who has got some degrees from the University of 
Saskatchewan and pursuing another degree in the University of 
Regina, and my other daughter, Roxanne, who’s got her doctor 
degree from the university of Saskatoon and is presently the 
chief resident of the Alberta Children’s Hospital. So I’d ask you 
and all the members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and to all members of the House, a good friend of mine, 
Mr. Dave Lepard, from Saskatoon. Dave is long-time, retired 
employee of the University of Saskatchewan, and has for many 
years encouraged many different people to run for many 
different things: school boards, credit union boards, co-op 
boards. And he’s definitely made Saskatchewan a better place, 
and he’s also . . . A other claim to fame is that he’s also married 
to my constituency assistant, Connie Lepard, who is the best 
and most experienced constituency assistant, working since 
1986 for my predecessor for three terms and hopefully will be 
working another three terms with the current MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) of Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
And I’d ask all hon. members to welcome a good friend and 
someone that made Saskatchewan and Saskatoon a better place 
— Mr. Dave Lepard. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 
Legislative Assembly my brother, Jerry, who is seated in the 
east gallery. Jerry, his wife Alice, two children — Terry, Dylan 
— and a wonderful granddaughter, Kara, reside here in Regina. 
And I’d just like all my colleagues to welcome him to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been 



November 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

looking up in your gallery, and we’re certain that we see seated 
there Curt Phillips, who is a commissionaire here in the 
legislature and greets many of us warmly as we go by the 
doorway to get into the building. 
 
My seatmate later this afternoon is going to make a statement 
on an achievement that is remarkable for someone from 
Saskatchewan, and I just ask all members to congratulate and 
welcome Curt to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the legislature, I take great 
pride in introducing two people who’ve had a huge and 
significant impact on me. 
 
Elder Mindy Lera, senior representative of the urban council 
from the Cowessess Reserve. We had lunch together today, and 
she called our building beautiful, awe-inspiring, and she knew 
this building in her younger years as the pile of bones. And Jean 
McGillibray from Naicam is actually a constituent of my 
colleague, the member for Melfort, but she’s a friend of mine. 
It’s her first visit to the legislature. 
 
So please help me welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Joy McFarlane-Burton Joins 
National Association of Teachers 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the past 28 
years, the community of Biggar and the surrounding district 
have been privileged to have a dedicated teacher sharing her 
knowledge and talents in the art of singing. On November 8, 
Joy McFarlane-Burton learned that she had one more honour to 
add to an already impressive resumé when she was accepted 
into a worldwide organization of vocal instructors. Joy joins the 
ranks of over 6,000 members in Canada and the United States 
and 25 countries around the world as a full member in the 
National Association of Teachers. 
 
This organization is the largest association of teachers of 
singing in the world. The Association of Teachers encourages 
the highest standards of vocal art and ethical principles in the 
teaching of singing. According to their maxim, the association 
promotes vocal education and research at all levels, both for the 
enrichment of the general public and for the professional 
advancement of the talented. 
 
Over the years Joy has encouraged and developed the talents of 
many performers in and around Biggar, and there’s none more 
deserving of the honour bestowed on her through the 
membership in the National Association of Teachers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that the Assembly join with me in 
congratulating Joy McFarlane-Burton for her dedication to 
teaching and her recognition of this esteemed organization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Achievements of Saskatoon Debaters 
at Canadian National Debating Championships 

 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Elocution and Debate Society, or SEDA, is a volunteer-driven, 
non-profit organization that promotes speech and debate among 
the students of this province. Since 1974, the association has 
helped shape thousands of Saskatchewan students into 
self-confident, responsible adults with the ability to think 
critically and to assert and defend their beliefs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year SEDA sent its first official delegation to 
the Canadian national debating championships where 50 teams 
from eight provinces competed for the national title. And I’m 
pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, Kevin Hovdestad, Vinay Kumar 
Mysore, Jennifer Wang, and Vanessa Corkal, who are all 
students at Walter Murray Collegiate Institute in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview, were members of the 
Saskatchewan delegation. 
 
I particularly want to congratulate Kevin Hovdestad and Vinay 
Kumar Mysore who went undefeated in six preliminary rounds 
and the semi-finals to win a berth in the final debate of the 
tournament. And though they were narrowly defeated in the 
final, the judges’ split decision going in favour of their 
opponents from Nova Scotia, Kevin and Vinay can be 
extremely proud of their performance during the course of the 
tournament. Not only did they come within a hair’s breadth of 
bringing the Canadian national debating championship title 
home to Saskatchewan, but they also earned an invitation to the 
prestigious Oxford Union Schools debating championships in 
England next spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Kevin, Vinay, and all the members of 
Saskatchewan’s delegation on their skills and their 
accomplishments. These young people are some of 
Saskatchewan’s best and brightest. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Diefenbaker Homestead 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
each day as we pass through the rotunda, a statue on display 
serves to remind us of the contributions made by one great 
Canadian, John George Diefenbaker. As we all know, John 
Diefenbaker was the only Saskatchewan resident to be elected 
prime minister of Canada. 
 
Diefenbaker laid the foundations for the compassionate Canada 
in which we now live . . . the Canadian Bill of Rights which 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2004 

was the predecessor to our Charter of Rights and Freedoms. He 
extended the franchise to all First Nations people, appointed the 
first female cabinet minister, appointed the first Aboriginal 
senator, and he expanded the old age pensions. 
 
And it’s with heavy heart the disregard of John Diefenbaker’s 
memory is exemplified in the abhorrent condition of the 
Diefenbaker homestead home. It has sat neglected for a number 
of years, closed to the public. And in the November 17 edition 
of the National Post, the poor state of the Diefenbaker 
homestead was evident. The neglect should bring shame to this 
government for not doing its part to honour Mr. Diefenbaker 
and his achievement as a politician. 
 
I was happy to read in yesterday’s Leader-Post that the building 
will be moving to the Sukanen Ship Pioneer Village and 
Museum near Moose Jaw, where it will get what this 
government is not willing to provide — the proper respect and 
treatment it deserves. 
 
I would hope that John Diefenbaker’s memory is thought of in 
our upcoming centennial, as the only prime minister of Canada, 
and would ask all members to recognize his achievements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Curt Phillips Competes in New York City Marathon 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, on November 7, 2004, Curt 
Phillips, a commissionaire here in the legislature, took part in 
the New York City Marathon. Curt has worked in this building 
for the last 10 years and he’s an avid runner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once word got out that Curt would be participating 
in the New York City Marathon, employees of the Legislative 
Building helped raised money to cover some of Curt’s travel 
costs. And it was a tremendous outpouring of support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Curt was the only runner from Regina that took 
part in the race, and one of only a handful from Saskatchewan. 
He was amazed by the reception he received along the road 
from the people of New York. He was wearing a big Canadian 
flag on his shirt and one of the phrases that he’ll always 
remember is: welcome to the Bronx, Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Curt completed the 26.2 mile race in 3 hours, 56 
minutes, and 23 seconds, meaning his finish time was faster 
than more than 80 per cent of the 35,000 participants. Anyone 
who knows what . . . that runs knows what an accomplishment 
this is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Curt Phillips for his performance in the New York City 
Marathon, and for representing Regina and the province of 
Saskatchewan so well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Dr. Dennis Kendel Receives 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to ask members to 
join me in congratulating Dr. Dennis Kendel, a constituent of 
Saskatoon Southeast, who earlier this week received the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit. Dr. Kendel is currently the 
registrar of the College of Physicians and Surgeons in 
Saskatchewan and has had a distinguished and illustrious 
career. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Kendel has served as president of the Medical 
Council of Canada, president of the Federation of Medical 
Regulatory Authorities of Canada, has served as the board 
Chair of Saskatchewan Blue Cross, and served as a member of 
the Board of Directors of the Health Services Utilization 
Commission, and currently serves on the Board of Directors of 
the Health Quality Council. 
 
He is recognized nationally in the area of professional 
assessment and regulation. He has raised the standard of 
medical care in Canada and was instrumental in developing a 
national policy, that all physicians be required to complete a 
minimum of two years accredited postgraduate medical 
education and a Medical Council of Canada qualifying 
examination. 
 
He has worked hard in his field and in addition to that, Mr. 
Speaker, he has been very active in other community areas. He 
has played a leading role in the review of the independent 
committee reviewing the personal injury protection plan, is a 
lay leader in the Faith Lutheran Church in Saskatoon, and has 
served as campaign Chair for the Salvation Army fund raising 
for several years. 
 
I would like ask all members to join with me in congratulating 
Dr. Kendel in his recognition in joining the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Craik Eco-Village 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. More good news 
for Saskatchewan, this time emanating from the fine community 
of Craik. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2001 the town of Craik and the rural 
municipality of Craik No. 222 began work on a sustainable 
living project in their community, Mr. Speaker. Sustainable 
alternatives related to land use, food and fibre production, 
shelter, energy generation and conservation, water and waste 
management, recycling, and more will be featured in the four 
key activities of this project: eco-centre, outreach and 
education, community action, and the eco-village. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the words of the people of Craik speak best for 
themselves and I quote: 
 

We believe that this initiative has the potential to be a 
leading example for communities (across our province) 



November 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

seeking to (improve and) move into a new period of 
revitalization and sustainability. We realize that this is an 
ambition project for (the) rural community but history 
shows Craik to be a progressive community that addresses 
challenges in (an) innovative way(s). 
 

Mr. Speaker, this project is pure Saskatchewan — people 
coming together as a community to solve a larger common 
problem as we did in our history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A number of our members have visited this centre and many 
more should. And, Mr. Speaker, we invite all members to visit 
the centre, enjoy the great food and hospitality. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Broomball Championship in Odessa 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to inform you and the House regarding a small 
community in my constituency. Odessa, Saskatchewan was the 
home to over 240 athletes last weekend, November 11 to 13, as 
the community of Odessa hosted the Western Canadian 
Broomball Championships. Teams from Manitoba, Alberta, 
Yellowknife, as well as two teams from Saskatchewan were 
treated to the warm hospitality of rural Saskatchewan in 
particularly Odessa, Saskatchewan. 
 
The results of the ladies’ pool were as follows: the Hexx from 
Manitoba took first place, the Edmonton Extreme took second, 
and the Odessa Flames took third in ladies’ division. In the 
men’s division, the Edmonton Express took first, Saskatoon 
First Generals took second, and the Calgary Blazers took third. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Odessa was not maybe the community that people 
would first think of for a broomball championship to be held, 
but Odessa has been well known in the broomball circles as a 
winner of many provincial championships and even national 
championships over the years. 
 
The tremendous successful weekend wrapped up with an 
awards ceremony and banquet attended by over 300 people on 
Saturday night, followed by entertainment and a cabaret. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Annette Gaetz and all the 
volunteers from the Odessa community as well as the Indian 
Head community that showed the western hospitality that 
Saskatchewan is so well known for. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Sale of NewLeaf Potatoes 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister 

Responsible for SaskWater: in 1998 SPUDCO (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company) was strongly 
encouraging potato producers in the Outlook-Lucky Lake area 
to grow a variety of potatoes known as NewLeaf potatoes. In 
fact, SPUDCO had a very large inventory of NewLeaf potatoes 
and was selling them to potato producers for seed. SPUDCO 
was telling the producers that there was a large and growing 
market for NewLeaf potatoes so there would be no problem 
marketing all of the NewLeaf potatoes that they could grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many producers did SPUDCO sell NewLeaf 
potatoes to, and what quantity of NewLeaf potatoes were sold 
as seed potatoes by SPUDCO? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 
the hon. member for the question. I don’t have those specific 
details with me today. I’ll undertake to have an answer to that 
question for you tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
surprised that the minister doesn’t know about NewLeaf 
potatoes because they are a genetically modified variety 
produced by Monsanto. Apparently SPUDCO bought a large 
quantity of these GMO (genetically modified organism) 
potatoes and then sold them as seed potatoes to the local 
producers. But here’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. In 1998 these 
NewLeaf GMO potatoes were deregistered by Agriculture 
Canada. So all of the potatoes that SPUDCO convinced 
producers to grow became virtually worthless. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask: how many producers did SPUDCO sell 
NewLeaf potatoes to, and how much of these GMO potatoes 
did the NDP (New Democratic Party) dump on unsuspecting 
producers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the SaskWater 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as I indicated to the member, he deserves a very clear 
answer to that question, and you will know by tomorrow the 
precise number of producers that these potatoes were sold to. 
But let me make it clear, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I believe once the member’s 
taken notice, that is it. I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going 
to try again and perhaps the minister has more knowledge in 
another area. In the spring of 1998 when the NDP was going 
around selling these GMO potatoes to producers, they knew 
that this variety was under review by Agriculture Canada, and 
the NDP had this huge, huge stockpile of GMO potatoes that 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2004 

were about to become worthless. So what did they do with 
them? Well they sold them to local seed potato growers. 
 
They said that there was a huge market for them. This doesn’t 
sound good because it simply wasn’t true. By the fall, those 
potatoes were worthless. And I find it astonishing that the 
minister knows nothing about it. This is just one more deception 
from this immoral, this unethical and dishonest government. 
Why was the NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. When it comes to 
parliamentary language, the members ought to keep a couple of 
things in mind. Number one . . . Order, please. Number one is 
you should not ought to have . . . utter remarks that are 
personal. Number two, the members ought to also keep in mind 
whether members could be offended by their remarks in any 
way. 
 
And I would ask the member . . . Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. And where remarks are not necessarily political 
but more related to character. So I would recognize once again 
the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears 
that we have a very, very, very impersonal government; it 
doesn’t care very much about people and their concerns and 
their problems. My question to the minister — and surely to 
goodness he knows the answer — why was the NDP selling 
worthless GMO potatoes to local producers? We want an 
answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, the member is implying 
motives to SaskWater that he should be careful about implying. 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, SaskWater’s intent in this whole 
endeavour was to facilitate the development of a substantial 
potato industry in the Lake Diefenbaker area. And sheds were 
built, Mr. Speaker, that have facilitated some 5,000 additional 
acres of potato production that did not exist before. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government expended significant efforts 
to restructure . . . to assist the Lake Diefenbaker Potato 
Corporation in its restructuring. And that should not be 
forgotten by the member opposite. So the motives that he’s 
applying to SaskWater I think are highly questionable, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe that that 
minister would justify duping local producers to get themselves 
off the hook for some potato barns that they shouldn’t have 
built. Mr. Speaker, the callous indifference to producers in 
Saskatchewan is just unbelievable, but there’s an even greater 
concern that I want the minister to address. Not only did the 
NDP government try to dupe local producers, they also dumped 
some of these GMO potatoes into the commercial market, for 
human consumption. 
 

Will the minister tell us what quantity of GMO potatoes were 
sold to Pak-Wel right here in Saskatchewan, what quantity were 
sold to the Bassano Growers in Alberta, and what quantity of 
these GMO potatoes would have found their way into the 
grocery stores right here in Saskatchewan and have been 
consumed by Saskatchewan consumers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite says that these potato sheds 
should never have been built. And there’s no question about the 
fact that our government made a number of mistakes in 
undertaking this venture. But for the member opposite to say 
that the sheds should never have been built is a strange 
comment given that many residents of his constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, are benefiting from the existence of these storage 
sheds today. 
 
And I just want to point out to the hon. member that at least five 
of these seven sheds are now full and that they have facilitated 
and expanded potato production in the Lake Diefenbaker area 
from 2,000 acres in 1996 to 7,000 acres today. So clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, there has been significant economic benefit to local 
residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the minister a 
question about consumers in Saskatchewan knowing what was 
on the table that they were eating and he skated so far away 
from that question that it’s insulting to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question to the minister. He’s struck out 
on every one so far. Let’s see if he can answer this one. Were 
these companies informed that they were buying GMO potatoes 
from SPUDCO? Were they informed? And secondly, was the 
Saskatchewan public informed that they were eating GMO 
potatoes from SPUDCO? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskWater Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the member deserves a very clear answer to that 
question. He will have it for tomorrow and I’ll take notice. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister should 
know a lot about this because these things aren’t supposed to 
happen in the dark. In fact, for every shipment of SPUDCO’s 
GMO potatoes that were shipped out of Saskatchewan, there 
would have had to have been a ministerial exemption issued by 
the federal Department of Agriculture. That’s the rules. That’s 



November 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

what SPUDCO was supposed to have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please table these ministerial 
exemptions so that we can see if the NDP government correctly 
identified the variety of potatoes or if, again, when it comes to 
SPUDCO they did a big cover-up, and that they covered up the 
fact that they were shipping GMO potatoes that were used for 
human consumption. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I’ve said to the member, he deserves clear answers to the 
questions that are being asked about whether SPUDCO was 
involved in the sale of GM (genetically modified) potatoes on 
the . . . for human consumption, and he will get those answers 
in this House very shortly. I commit that I will have a response 
for him. I want to make sure he gets accurate information, Mr. 
Speaker, and therefore I’m taking notice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, Tom and Dave and Margaret 
Dolman are three of the potato growers who were swindled by 
this NDP’s GMO potato scam. In 1998 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The member ought to be 
careful with his language with respect to the type of language 
that is used. In here, he has the freedom of speech. I’m not 
trying to restrict his manner of speech, but I will insist on him 
using parliamentary language. The member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, these people were hurt by 
the NDP’s GMO potato scam. In 1998, SPUDCO convinced the 
Dolmans to seed 350 acres of NewLeaf potatoes and they 
proceeded to sell the Dolmans $60,000 worth of NewLeaf 
potatoes. Even then, at that time, the NDP knew that these 
genetically modified potatoes were under review by Ag Canada. 
But did they warn the Dolmans? Did they discuss it with them? 
Did they mention it to them? No. And I think we all know what 
happened next. They were deregistered by Agriculture Canada. 
 
The market disappeared overnight; the Dolmans lost their 
investment. And do you know why they lost their investment, 
why they lost thousands of dollars? Because they trusted this 
government; they trusted those ministers in that front row. They 
trusted the government that they would tell them the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Will the NDP 
compensate the Dolmans for this deception? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater 
Corporation. 
 

Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, before we . . . first I 
think we should conclude whether or not in fact any deception 
has occurred. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, and that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. I recognize the 
member for SaskWater . . . the Minister for SaskWater 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, before members start using words like deception, we 
should make sure that we have a very clear accounting of the 
facts. And that, Mr. Speaker . . . that, Mr. Speaker, is why I’m 
taking notice of these questions today, and why I’m also 
assuring members that they will get an answer in this House as 
they’re entitled to, Mr. Speaker. But I think members should be 
careful about the words they use. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — The only way we’re going to get to the bottom 
of this mess is through a public inquiry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — You know, we hear this NDP government get 
up and talk about how much they’ve helped the potato industry. 
Well let’s just look how they’ve helped the Dolmans. First they 
sold the Dolmans $60,000 worth of GMO potatoes, potatoes 
they knew that could be deregistered by Ag Canada. Then they 
told the Dolmans there was a huge market for these potatoes — 
don’t worry about it, we will look after them, we will get them 
sold for you — even though they knew, Mr. Speaker, that that 
wasn’t true. 
 
The Dolmans wound up with thousands of pounds of potatoes 
they couldn’t sell; they lost thousands of dollars. And the next 
spring, what did the NDP government do? What did they do, 
Mr. Speaker? They forced them into bankruptcy, that’s what 
they did, Mr. Speaker. They helped them . . . that’s how they 
helped them. They helped them right into bankruptcy. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP deceived the Dolmans. They convinced 
them to buy these worthless GMO potatoes and then they 
forced them into bankruptcy. What, Mr. Speaker, what is the 
Premier going to do to compensate the Dolmans? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. There were a lot of actors in the 
potato industry . . . Well let me use a different word as members 
have pointed out that perhaps that’s not the best word. There 
were a lot of stakeholders in the potato industry, Mr. Speaker, 
who lost money, including the people of Saskatchewan for 
which we apologize, Mr. Speaker — $28 million lost there. 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2004 

The Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation lost money and faced 
bankruptcy. Individual investors and farmers, Mr. Speaker, lost 
money. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question about the fact that 
bad business decisions were made by government; and I might 
add, by the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation. But the 
question of motives is a very different, is a very different 
matter. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the members should be 
careful about the motives that he implies to SaskWater. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Dolmans have launched 
a lawsuit against this NDP government and they would like it 
settled. But it appears the NDP would rather drag its feet, run 
up huge legal bills for the NDP law firm, and put these people 
through more grief. Will the minister settle this lawsuit 
immediately, or does he plan to run the Dolmans through 52 
days for questioning and 30,000 questions like he did in the 
other previous SPUDCO case that he lost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
SaskWater Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, discussions I 
believe have already been underway with respect to the 
potential of an out-of-court settlement in this regard and I am 
definitely willing to look at an out-of-court settlement in this 
regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it was in the public interest that we settled on an 
out-of-court basis with the investors in Judith River and the 
Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that we would be well advised, and I’ve given 
direction to my officials, to explore an out-of-court settlement 
with the Dolmans. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Call for Public Inquiry into Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company 

 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has just confirmed that 
the taxpayers are going to be, are going to need to be on the 
hook again for an out-of-court settlement because of misdeeds 
by this government, because of how they treated the Dolmans. 
Mr. Speaker, he’s just confirmed that. 
 
The minister has also said today that for him this whole thing 
turns on motives. Maybe even he might agree with a public 
inquiry if he had to . . . if he had reason to question the motives 
of his colleagues. Well he ought not to question them, Mr. 
Speaker; he ought to just look down the row and look at the 
former minister responsible for SPUDCO. And then he ought to 
read the Premier’s report where the Premier admitted exactly 
what the motives were: the motives for this were deception, Mr. 
Speaker. The motives for . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Before we proceed any further, I would ask the 
member from Swift Current to rise in his place and withdraw 
that statement. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the use of the word 
deception. 
 
The Speaker: — I then recognize the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — What the Premier’s report into SPUDCO said 
quite clearly — this is the Premier’s report, Mr. Speaker — is 
that the government, the NDP government, the NDP minister, 
didn’t tell the truth about SPUDCO. That’s what the Premier’s 
report says. That’s the motive. 
 
So with all of that before the legislature today, to the Premier of 
the province of Saskatchewan: does he finally have the courage 
to do the right thing and call a public inquiry into the SPUDCO 
scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all the Leader 
of the Opposition does not accurately describe what is in Mr. 
Perrins’s report. Mr. Perrins simply said that the government 
didn’t accurately communicate the nature of the relationship 
between SPUDCO and Con-Force, Mr. Speaker, and acted for 
far too long before that mistake was corrected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the words that the member uses with respect 
to deception are hardly accurate. The government’s motive in 
establishing and investing in the potato industry in the Lake 
Diefenbaker area was to encourage diversification. We had 
$200 million, Mr. Speaker, worth of irrigation infrastructure. 
And we wanted to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that that 
infrastructure was truly used and that farmers in the local area 
could benefit in terms of value-added from that infrastructure, 
Mr. Speaker. And that was the motive for investing in the 
potato industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is pretty interesting. We 
have the minister, and I assume supported by his Premier, 
saying — characterizing — the fact that the government on 
purpose refused to accurately communicate with people. 
They’re characterizing that as anything but the word that I used, 
that you called me out of order for, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
that is. 
 
You know, in Swift Current and across the province, where we 
grew up, where the members grew up, if wilfully you refuse to 
communicate accurately, we have a word for that, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s a word for that. And that is what is at the heart of this 
scandal — not just the $35 million of taxpayers’ money that has 
been squandered by the NDP, but the fact that they didn’t tell 
the truth about it when they were asked direct questions. How 



November 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

now can we expect anything more from them than that 
continued pattern of behaviour? That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we 
need a third party, independent, public inquiry. This is 10 times 
worse than the sponsorship scandal that’s currently the subject 
of an inquiry in Ottawa. 
 
Will the Premier do the right thing and call an inquiry into the 
SPUDCO scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the SaskWater 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I just first of all want to 
say very clearly, that government . . . the Perrins report said that 
government misrepresented the relationship between SPUDCO 
and Con-Force, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, to broaden that 
and suggest that there was misrepresentation in other areas, that 
is not . . . The Perrins report does not suggest that in any way, 
Mr. Speaker — in any way. 
 
And second, Mr. Speaker, just talking about misrepresentation 
for a moment. The Leader of the Opposition has characterized 
the SPUDCO loss as the biggest loss in Saskatchewan history, 
Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I find that interesting because 
this member who’s asking this question now was working for 
government in the late 1980s, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was sold off and the 
government of the day lost . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pattern of 
behaviour with the NDP government . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pattern of behaviour with this current Premier and with this 
NDP government that continues to repeat itself. 
 
The Premier campaigned on lowering taxes for the province of 
Saskatchewan. I guess he didn’t accurately communicate the 
truth because he increased people’s taxes, Mr. Speaker. He 
promised lower tuition fees but I guess he didn’t accurately 
communicate the truth because tuition fees have increased, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Not long ago, in December of this year, we 
learned today that the Premier promised to come clean on the 
Future Is Wide Open campaign. He promised the media . . . 
He’s on tape promising to come clean on the Future is Wide 
Open campaign. Today he says he’s changed his mind; he 
won’t tell the truth about that either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I guess he didn’t accurately communicate the 
truth in that regard, Mr. Speaker. Well I suspect in the light of 
this that the people of this province are waiting to accurately 
communicate something to the Premier, and that is we need a 
government in Saskatchewan we can trust, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Once again, in light of the GMO revelations 
today, in light of what we’ve heard from your minister, will the 
Premier, will the Premier call a public inquiry into the 
SPUDCO scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — When the member opposite from Swift 
Current says that we should come clean with the people of 
Saskatchewan, the member opposite from Swift Current, Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite from Swift Current should come 
clean. 
 
On SPUDCO we’ve told you that there’s been two Provincial 
Auditor’s reports. There’s been the Ernst & Young report. And 
there has been, Mr. Speaker, a police investigation into the issue 
without any criminal charges. No criminal charges, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The member opposite is hypocritical in his comments because 
he says this. Here’s an individual, Mr. Speaker, who worked for 
a government for four years, Mr. Speaker, worked as a member 
of a government and then, Mr. Speaker, takes a severance from 
that very same government, takes a severance payment. And 
then, Mr. Speaker, goes on, Mr. Speaker, goes on and receives a 
provincial grant in an investment in his community and receives 
a federal grant from the federal government, Mr. Speaker. And 
both of those, Mr. Speaker, both of those ventures today 
disappeared. They disappeared, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why would you attack the integrity of everyone . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Crown 
Management Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 75, 
The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 
Crown Management Board that Bill No. 75, The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 82, The 
Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 82, The Miscellaneous 
Municipal Statutes Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 83 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 83, The 
Medical Profession Amendment Act be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 83, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2004 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 84 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 
(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les 

services de l’état civil 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 84, The 
Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2), be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 84, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act 2004, be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to move a motion 
under Rule 49. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested to move a motion 
under Rule 49. Would the member indicate the nature of the 
motion. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Sale of NewLeaf Potatoes to Producers 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again today 
we’ve discovered through question period that there are 
significant issues involving in this case, GMO potatoes, Mr. 
Speaker, and how those potatoes were represented to producers; 



November 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

a lawsuit that has resulted from it; and word from the 
government that they may settle that lawsuit adding to the total 
loss to taxpayers on SPUDCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this remains the biggest business scandal in the 
history in the province of Saskatchewan involving the 
government. It remains tenfold greater than the sponsorship 
scandal, Mr. Speaker, that is plaguing Ottawa right now, that’s 
the subject of an inquiry. It is clearly, in terms of confidence in 
our province by outside investors, the most important issue that 
we could deal with at this point in the legislative proceedings. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that is the nature of the motion that we 
wish to move. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. The member for Swift Current, 
Leader of the Opposition, has requested for leave to introduce a 
motion under Rule 49. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney, 
the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table a response to written question no. 511. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to question no. 511 has been 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the Human Services Committee and the House Services 
Committee, I move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:33. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1787 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1788 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1788 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1788 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1788 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1788 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1788 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1788 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1789 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1789 
 Bill No. 9 — The Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1789 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1789 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1789 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1790 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1791 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Joy McFarlane-Burton Joins National Association of Teachers 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1791 
 Achievements of Saskatoon Debaters at Canadian National Debating Championships 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1791 
 Diefenbaker Homestead 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1791 
 Curt Phillips Competes in New York City Marathon 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1792 
 Dr. Dennis Kendel Receives Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1792 
 Craik Eco-Village 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1792 
 Broomball Championship in Odessa 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1793 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Sale of NewLeaf Potatoes 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1793 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1793 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1795 
 Call for Public Inquiry into Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1796 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1796 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1797 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 75 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1797 
 



 

 Bill No. 82 — The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1798 
 Bill No. 83 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2004 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1798 
 Bill No. 84 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
 Loi no 2 de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1798 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Sale of NewLeaf Potatoes to Producers 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1798 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1799 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1799 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


