















































Hansard: April 05, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 13A  MONDAY, APRIL 5, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 337 
 April 5, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents from the 
area of Cypress Hills who are concerned about the increase in 
crop insurance premiums for yet another year, a third year in a 
row. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by constituents from the 
communities of Abbey, Richmound, and a couple of other rural 
communities in the Southwest. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of my constituency of Rosetown-Elrose 
regarding recent changes to the crop insurance program that 
results in a large premium increase for insured farmers, while 
overall coverage is reduced. And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Demaine, Beechy, and Lucky Lake. 
 
I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again I rise in the Assembly with a petition from citizens 
of my constituency who are extremely concerned about the 
condition of Highway 43, and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of Lafleche, 
Glentworth, Gravelbourg, and Glenbain. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
where citizens outraged at the possible reductions of services at 
Davidson and Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at the current level 
of service at a minimum, with a 24-hour acute care, 
emergency, and doctor services available, as well as lab, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to users from the Davidson and Imperial areas 
and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Kenaston, La 
Ronge, and Melville. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in the House to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens from west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with the Unity seniors’ lodge project. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Unity, Saskatoon, and Tramping Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens that are concerned with 
Highway 22, particularly that section between Junction 6 and 
Junction 22. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Earl Grey, Southey, Melfort, and Bulyea. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 47, 48, 69, and 73. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: with 
regard to the Highway 11 twinning project, what is the 
department’s plan for accesses on this highway and the 
communities of Hague, Osler, and Rosthern? Has the 
department consulted with the councils in those 
communities about the number and location of these 
accesses? And what is the position of those communities 
about these accesses and how does that compare to that of 
the Department of Highway’s plan? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly some guests in your gallery. I ran into them leaving 
the Legislative Assembly at lunchtime. They are . . . I know this 
much. I don’t know each of their names but they’re students at 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) and they’re here today to watch the proceedings of 
the Assembly. 
 
And I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming these 
students to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature, 22 
students from Connaught School who are seated in the west 
gallery. These are grade 7 and 8 students. Their teacher is 
Rosanne Fournier. And there are a couple of them that are 
related to the Assembly in that they’re a granddaughter of one 
of our former members. 
 
And I would also like to point out that the member sitting 
immediately behind me is a graduate of Connaught School, 
where he attended grades 1 to 8. And so what I would say on 

behalf of all of us in the Assembly, we welcome all 22 of you to 
think seriously about a long, rewarding career in politics. Let’s 
all welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Forum to Explore Saskatchewan’s Economic Potential 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday 
afternoon, April 2, the University of Saskatchewan College of 
Commerce held a forum entitled explore Saskatchewan’s 
economic potential. This forum saw commerce students divided 
into three student governments comprised of 55 students each. 
Each government elected a premier and a cabinet. Each 
government presented their economic plan to grow 
Saskatchewan by 2010. 
 
I repeat, Mr. Speaker, they all agreed it is necessary to grow 
Saskatchewan. Each team exhibited many fresh ideas, 
tremendous motivation, and youthful energy that was indeed 
refreshing. 
 
Here are some of the ideas they came up with, Mr. Speaker: 
promoting Saskatoon as the medical mecca of Western Canada 
and allowing private companies such as the Mayo Clinic to 
invest in Saskatchewan health care; allowing private MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging) and CT (computerized 
tomography) scan clinics to improve health care and standards 
in Saskatchewan; eliminate capital tax in the manufacturing and 
processing tax by 2012 and an immediate cut in the general 
corporate rate; shift individual tax rates towards a flat tax 
structure to keep high income earners in Saskatchewan; and 
decrease the education portion of property tax; and make 
tourism and Aboriginal tourism a priority. 
 
Quite an ambitious policy agenda. We could learn from them, 
Mr. Speaker. This government could learn a lot. The Minister of 
Industry and Resources was there so I hope he picked up a few 
ideas. There was no wiener roast tax. The students wanted real 
balanced budgets and deficit reduction. 
 
Congratulations to government policy course professor, Cathi 
Wilson-Loescher, and the three premiers: Jocelyn Krause from 
the Prairie Vision government, Jeff Danyliw from the Sask for 
Life government, and congratulations to Kristjan Hebert of the 
Sask Right government. Jeff Piercy from my constituency was 
on that team. 
 
An election was held, Mr. Speaker, and the Sask Right 
government won. Their party colours were green and gold . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m afraid the member’s time has more than 
elapsed. I recognize the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Special Olympics Western Canadian  
Curling Championship 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

Special Olympics Saskatchewan is enriching the lives of people 
with disabilities through sport. 
 
This weekend I had the pleasure of helping open the 2004 
Special Olympics Western Canadian Curling Championship at 
the Highland Curling Club here in Regina. This event 
welcomed people from British Columbia, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and Manitoba, including 90 athletes, coaches, 
managers, mission staff and officials, and 30 volunteers. 
 
And there was a very special team that threw the first rock. It 
was skipped by one of the Special Olympics curlers, and it had 
on it Marcia Gudereit, Joan McCusker, and Jan Betker. And I 
noticed just a quick toe as the rock was making its way up to 
the centre, and it made it right to the button, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Special Olympics Saskatchewan offers a 
year-round program that provides athletes with a lifetime of 
learning. Through this organization athletes have the 
opportunity to participate in more than 100 programs at the 
local, provincial, national, and international level. From five-pin 
bowling to floor hockey, from snowing to rhythmic gymnastics 
. . . snowshoeing, pardon me. It’s a new sport I think. Athletes 
can choose from a wide selection of sports that help to enhance 
their personal growth. 
 
This weekend a team from Melfort finished first in the Division 
2 category, and a team from Nipawin took first place in 
Division 3. Regina’s team finished third in Division 3 category 
after beating Lethbridge 6 to 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge Special Olympics Saskatchewan 
for its dedication to providing athletes of all ability levels with 
quality sport training. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Senior Couple Reunited 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, about 
three weeks ago students and residents in the Montmartre area 
raised a number of concerns regarding the conditions that Mr. 
and Mrs. Paul Shiplack have faced for the last four years. Paul 
and Marcia Shiplack have been married for 48 years. They have 
done everything together from managing a family farm and 
raising a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Shiplack’s have been committed and dedicated 
to each other for all of their married lives. Unfortunately, for the 
last four years they’ve been forced to live apart due to failing 
health conditions. Mrs. Shiplack has been living in the 
Montmartre care home while her husband, Paul, has resided in 
subsidized housing across the street, even though he was 
assessed at a level 3 care in 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Shiplack served his country in the Second 
World War in order that we might enjoy the freedoms we take 
for granted today. But for the last four years he has been 
fighting another kind of battle — the right to enjoy his 

remaining years at his wife’s side. 
 
I am pleased to say that, following discussions with Mr. Dwight 
Nelson, CEO (chief executive officer) of the Regina Health 
District, the district has reassessed Mr. Shiplack’s condition and 
as of this past Friday, Paul and Marcia Shiplack were together 
again at the Montmartre care home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, situations like that faced by Mr. and Mrs. Shiplack 
should not happen. Families should not have to raise media 
attention to have their concerns heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the students for raising their 
concerns to the Minister of Health. I am pleased to forward 
letters from the students and residents of Montmartre and hope 
that this type of circumstance does not happen to other families 
in the future. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Making Education and Training a Priority 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, our government made a 
commitment to Saskatchewan people to build a future right 
here. And the people know that our government is following 
through with that commitment even in the face of challenging 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget reinforces our commitment to provide 
students with high quality education and training opportunities. 
We’ve increased education funding by $45 million to a record 
$1.2 billion. 
 
In keeping with our commitment to make Saskatchewan first 
choice for young people, we are increasing the post-secondary 
graduate tax credit to $1,000 over the four years. This year the 
tax credit is going to go from $350 to $500. And also for our 
young people, Mr. Speaker, we are investing an additional 
$500,000 into the Young Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan 
program. Our contribution to post-secondary education and 
student supports totals almost half a billion dollars. 
 
We’ve increased the budgets for SIAST, regional colleges, and 
the Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission. And to 
support research at both our universities, we’ve increased the 
Innovation and Science Fund by almost $2 million. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people made it clear that education 
is one of their top priorities. We listened and we have 
responded with a sustainable budget that delivers on what 
matters most to people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

Junior Achievement Awards in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last week Thursday I had the 
privilege of attending the Junior Achievement Awards Banquet 
in Saskatoon. Junior Achievement is a program directed at high 
school students to promote and develop an awareness and 
understanding of entrepreneurial and business issues through a 
variety of programs, including the operation of small, 
student-run businesses. 
 
I would like to ask the members to congratulate all participants 
and especially the winning competitors. The winning company 
that participated was a company called Blingabrite which 
manufactured decorated light bulbs and coasters and was highly 
successful. 
 
There was in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, a number of 
individual winners, including the Spirit of Junior Achievement 
which was a tie between Lindsay Igini and Ryan Legge. The 
Achiever of the Year was Jen Nowoselski and Professional 
Leadership Award went to Justin Smith. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, there was an inductee into the 
Junior Achievement Hall of Fame and that was Wally Mah, 
who is a businessman in Saskatoon who operates North Ridge 
homes. I would be, Mr. Speaker, be prepared to table their 
shareholders report and listing of information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Nobel Prize Winner Donates Money to Luther College 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, teachers in Saskatchewan make a difference every 
day in the lives of students. 
 
Nobel Prize winner Henry Taube was so inspired by his former 
teacher at Luther College that he donated $100,000 US (United 
States) to the school recently. And I’m pleased to say that 
Luther College is located in the constituency that I represent, 
Regina Rosemont. 
 
The late Paul Liefeld taught chemistry at Luther for more than 
40 years and took a special interest in Dr. Taube. It was this 
interest, Mr. Speaker, that encouraged him to pursue a 
bachelor’s and master’s degree at the University of 
Saskatchewan. He later went on to complete a Ph.D. (Doctor of 
Philosophy) at the University of California, Berkeley in 1940. 
 
Mr. Taube has taught at Cornell University, the University of 
Chicago, and Stanford University and in 1983 he was awarded 
the Nobel Prize in chemistry for his work on the mechanisms of 
electron transfer reactions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Taube says he will always remember Mr. 
Liefeld’s influence and I’m sure we all have teachers we can 
recollect in our school years that did that. He recalls thinking of 
Mr. Liefeld as a big brother and admired him very much. 
 
The donation from Mr. Taube will go toward the Luther Spirit 

Campaign to raise $3 million to renovate and restore the Royal 
Street campus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask members to join me in acknowledging the 
profound impact that Mr. Liefeld and other teachers have on 
students such as Dr. Taube, and I also recognize Luther for its 
commitment to students, and ask everybody to join me in 
thanking Dr. Taube for his generous donation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

National Wildlife Week 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 4 marked 
the beginning of National Wildlife Week in Canada. National 
Wildlife Week takes place each year in the week surrounding 
April 10, the birthday of Jack Miner, a pioneer of Canada’s 
conservation movement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no better symbol of our commitment to 
preserving our wildlife and other natural treasures than the 
national and provincial park systems. 
 
In Saskatchewan the provincial park system also is a huge draw 
for tourists. Growth in tourism is one of the limitless 
opportunities before Saskatchewan. Unfortunately like so many 
other opportunities here it is stymied by the short-sightedness of 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) government. 
 
People throughout our province are completely baffled as to 
why this NDP government would make the decision to keep 
many of our provincial parks closed for an extra month when so 
little money will be saved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from a column in this morning’s 
Leader-Post. Bob Hughes writes: 
 

So, as I am driving through the park on my way home, 
gulping in the view that is laid out in the fading light of a 
wonderful . . . day, I am wondering how such a 
magnificent place (as) this could be asked to suffer the 
blunderings of this government we have running our lives. 

 
He adds: 
 

The stupidest thing I’ve ever seen a government do in any 
budget is what the NDP did . . . when it decided to hold off 
the opening day of the province’s most popular 
campgrounds . . . 
 

Mr. Hughes goes on to say: 
 

This government consciously has ruined the enjoyment 
opportunities of the people it is supposed to be serving. 
And it is hammering businesses that depend on campers 
. . . 

 
He concludes: 
 

The government is acting as if it is brain dead and on life 
support. Somebody should pull the plug. 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Emergency Room Issues in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 
In January Dr. Jon Witt wrote a letter to the Minister of Health 
raising serious questions about understaffing and patient safety 
in the emergency room at Royal University Hospital. For that 
the NDP fired Dr. Witt as director of emergency medicine. The 
minister said Dr. Witt hadn’t proven any patients actually died. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister demanded evidence and now he has 
it. On Friday Dr. Witt confirmed he gave the government a list 
of 88 people who died within 48 hours of receiving care at the 
Royal University Hospital emergency. In every case the patient 
died after waiting longer in the ER (emergency room) than 
mandated by national guidelines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister do the right thing, reinstate Dr. 
Witt as head of emergency medicine and launch an independent 
investigation into the sometimes deadly consequences of 
understaffing and overcrowding at the emergency department at 
RUH (Royal University Hospital)? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health 
Region issued a press release within the last hour or so and they 
set out some things that they are doing. It’s quite lengthy but I 
think, practically, it . . . The first one is that they’re acting on 
the recommendation of their chief of staff, Dr. Ronan Conlon, 
to refer to the College of Physicians and Surgeons all of the 
medical charts involved in the information — all those people 
who die within 48 hours of receiving care at RUH. 
 
Second thing is the health region has engaged Dr. Larry 
Ohlhauser of Edmonton to chair an external expert review team 
of all emergency services operations in the three hospitals in 
Saskatoon. He’s the former CEO, or registrar, of the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta. 
 
And the third thing is they’ve appointed Dr. Paul Hayes as the 
interim medical director of the RUH emergency department. 
He’s a general surgeon with special care and experience in 
trauma. 
 
And the fourth thing is the board has announced that they do 
support the decision to relieve Dr. Witt of his administrative 
duties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
question to the Minister of Health. Minister, are you satisfied 
that this investigation that’s being conducted is . . . Is the 
minister satisfied that this investigation is going to meet the 
requirements of independence so that the Saskatoon district 

health association is simply not investigating itself, and that the 
terms and references are broad enough so that this can be done 
properly in regard to this entire incident? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the whole purpose of the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons is to be a professional 
review of the medical profession, with the main goal of making 
sure that the medical profession serves the public in a safe and 
consistent manner. They have a long history of doing a very 
good job and we are pleased that they are doing that. 
 
The bigger issue of the emergency services in Saskatoon is 
being dealt with through an overall review where a report will 
come back by the end of June. We think that’s appropriate. We 
think that they have gone and taken the appropriate steps to sort 
out and deal with the issues that are there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
minister, will the minister assure this House that the 
information that comes out of these reports, both the one by the 
independent doctor and the College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
are going to be made public so that the entire health system in 
Saskatchewan can know that this was done independently and 
properly, and that there are proper balances and checks put into 
place so this doesn’t happen again? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely certain that 
the people involved will follow the law of Saskatchewan as it 
relates to The Health Information Protection Act and all of the 
regional health authority legislation to make sure that the 
appropriate answers are given to the public of Saskatchewan, 
while also protecting the privacy of all the individual people 
involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One final question 
to the minister, Mr. Speaker: will the minister assure this House 
that if the allegations and the concerns expressed by Dr. Jon 
Witt are substantiated, that he will indeed be reinstated as the 
head of emergency medicine at Royal University Hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this goes to the core of the 
misinformation that the member opposite started with. I did not 
have anything to do with relieving Dr. Witt of his duties; that’s 
something that’s done in the Saskatoon Health Authority. If 
they, after all their investigations, show that there’s an 
appropriate position for Dr. Witt in the system, I’m sure he will 
get it. 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Whistle-Blower Protection 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Dr. Jon Witt was fired for speaking up about the dangerous and 
potentially fatal situation in the emergency room at RUH. Now 
Dr. Witt is calling for effective whistle-blower legislation to 
protect health care professionals and other government workers 
from being fired when they tell the truth about serious problems 
in our health care system. 
 
The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses is also calling for 
legislation to protect nurses from being fired when they speak 
out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right after the question period, the Saskatchewan 
Party will introduce strong new legislation to protect people like 
Dr. Jon Witt from being fired for speaking out. Will the Premier 
and his NDP government support the Saskatchewan Party’s 
whistle-blower legislation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I 
would be pleased to wait still another day or so till the 
opposition decides to table their piece of legislation to see what 
it actually says. 
 
Section 74 of The Labour Standards Act actually provides 
whistle-blower protection, which as compared to other 
legislation across Canada, protects all employees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Jon Witt was fired by the 
NDP not because he made unfounded allegations or failed to 
provide proof. No, Dr. Witt was fired by the NDP because he 
had the courage to speak out about serious problems in the 
NDP’s crumbling health care system. The Saskatchewan 
Party’s whistle-blower’s legislation will protect Dr. Witt and 
others like him who have the courage to speak up when they see 
serious problems with the actions of the provincial government. 
 
Will the Premier join with the Saskatchewan Party today to 
protect employees from being fired for speaking out about 
wrongdoing in government? Will the Premier and his NDP 
government support the Saskatchewan Party’s whistle-blower 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that 
Dr. Witt is still practising medicine at RUH. So I’m not sure 
what this piece of legislation will do, but I’m anxiously waiting 

to see it tabled so we can have a look at it and see what it does 
say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied  
Science and Technology 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Learning. The labour dispute 
at SIAST has now escalated into a full-blown strike. All classes 
have been cancelled today, and all 12,000 students are sitting at 
home — well not all of them; some are in our gallery today — 
they’re wondering if they’re going to be able to complete their 
school year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government talks about the importance 
of educating our young people. But those words don’t mean 
much when you have 12,000 students in danger of losing their 
school year. Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely unacceptable. What 
is the minister going to do to ensure that these students are able 
to complete their school year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working to get a 
collective agreement with the employees at SIAST. 
 
I can advise the House that on Saturday morning we provided 
an offer to the employees — not a final offer, but an offer that 
would move us forward in terms of dealing with wage parity 
issues, that would deal with salary increases, and would take a 
look at some of the other complexities that are at the table. The 
employees advised us at that point that they were not going to 
accept that particular proposal, and as such have escalated their 
job action. 
 
I can tell also the members of this Assembly that this hour the 
president of SIAST is meeting with the student associations to 
advise them of the action that we are taking to deal with issues 
that they have raised. Individual students who are interested in 
knowing about some of the implications and some of the issues 
before them, we have set up a Web site at 
www.campusupdate.ca which will advise them of options 
available to them in dealing with provincial training allowance, 
student loans, and deal with some of the other issues. 
 
I’m sure we’ll have an opportunity to expand on this; I know 
members are interested, and of course we have a great deal to 
say about this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’d like to 
thank the minister for finally addressing some of the students’ 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

concerns. It’s too bad it has to be on his timetable and not 
theirs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week when we asked the minister about the 
SIAST strike, he told us to be patient. Wait for the budget, he 
said; the budget will fix everything. Well the budget fixed 
everything all right, Mr. Speaker. They went from rotating 
strikes to a full-blown strike, and now every student at SIAST is 
having his or her school year threatened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister absolutely guarantee that every 
single SIAST student will be able to complete their academic 
year on time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minster of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that 
all members be upfront and honest in terms of their approach in 
this House. I was very clear — and it was very clear to 
members of the media — that it was not my view that the 
budget or the mandate would immediately resolve this situation. 
This is a very complicated set of issues, and I was very clear to 
this Assembly on that. I want to tell members of the House that 
there are a number of different issues that are involved here, and 
I know that they’ll be interested in hearing this. 
 
We of course have been working with the Apprenticeship and 
Trade Certification Commission to make sure that apprentices 
who are working here will not see their situation jeopardized. 
SIAST has been in touch with the health regions to talk about 
the impact the job action may have on them. 
 
I can assure students that we are taking a look on a 
program-by-program basis as to how we can deal with the 
possibility of a prolonged strike by the SIAST instructors, and 
that exam schedules and in fact the school year have been 
adjusted to compensate for the reduced preparatory time that 
students will have. 
 
This is the first day of a full-scale walkout. It’s very hard to say 
how long this may take. We are committed to making sure that 
SIAST maintains an open dialogue with the student 
associations, and the campus directors will serve as the primary 
student contact points. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister has 
come a long way from not wanting to discuss this on the floor 
of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government created this mess; now they 
have to fix it. It was the NDP government that let 38 out of 41 
public sector contracts expire this year. It was the NDP 
government that ran this province so far into the hole they have 
no money to settle the contracts. It was the NDP government 

that waited too long to bring in a conciliator, and now the 
SIAST strike has escalated into a full-blown strike just in time 
for final exams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s job is to ensure students complete 
their classes on time. Do your job, Mr. Minister. What is the 
minister going to do to ensure every single SIAST student 
completes their classes on time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that 
all members understand how collective bargaining works. We 
brought in a conciliator when SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union) asked for us to 
bring in a conciliator, when we thought that there was some use 
in doing that. The conciliator has been working with the parties. 
This was one of the ways that we got to what I believe was a 
workable option. It was presented to the bargaining committee 
on Saturday. I regret the fact that it has not met with their 
approval and as a result that they have walked out on a 
full-scale strike. This is very disruptive for students. 
 
This is part of the process. What we now need to work our way 
through is how we can best address the needs of students and 
how we can make sure that they do not lose their class year. 
This will need to be done on a program-by-program basis and 
that is what the SIAST leadership team will deal with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Utility Rates 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last fall 
the Premier made, as a centrepiece of his election campaign, a 
promise to provide the lowest basket of utility rates in the 
country. Mr. Speaker, in last Saturday’s front page story in the 
Leader-Post, Gord Gunoff, the business manager for the 
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, said, among 
other things, that a senior official at SaskPower had told him 
that increases in the electrical power rates are likely in the 
not-too-distant future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm the worst suspicions of 
consumers in this province, that rates for electricity are going to 
be going up, contrary to the Premier’s promise to provide the 
lowest basket of utility costs in the country? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. What I can assure the 
people in this province is that we are committed to having the 
lowest cost bundle of utilities in the country by the end of our 
term, Mr. Speaker. And we will meet, we will meet that 
commitment. Mr. Speaker, we anticipate that this information 
will be available to the public after we’ve had the opportunity to 
have it reviewed by a third party, independent validator. And 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure the members that it is our 
government’s intention to have the lowest bundle of utility rates 
in this country during our term in office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the promise of the lowest bundle 
of rates in the country over the next four years isn’t what the 
people heard in the election campaign. They heard something 
much more immediate and much more specific. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Gunoff continued in his newspaper quote that 
such increases in SaskPower rates would be unacceptable and 
without merit, and that he believes that ways could be found to 
save money and avoid power rate increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the minister confirm that a 
rate increase application will be forthcoming and in what 
amount? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as Chair of the board of 
the Crown Investments Corporation, along with my colleagues 
that sit on the board representing the various utilities in the 
province, I can indicate to the member that we have not 
received any application for a rate increase at SaskPower. What 
I can also confirm for the member is that it’s our intention 
during this term of government to have the lowest bundle of 
utility rates in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Opening of Provincial Parks 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the truth of the 
matter is that is not what the NDP said in this election. And 
they are prepared to betray the consumers in the province of 
Saskatchewan as this budget has betrayed government workers, 
it’s betraying seniors, and it’s even betrayed campers, Mr. 
Speaker, and people who own businesses at the provincial parks 
— people who run golf courses, who operate stores, who sell 
fishing tackle. The NDP without any warning, and apparently 
without even the courtesy to consult with those businesses, took 
away up to a third of their summer season. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: people are 
furious about this NDP decision. Why is the NDP attacking 
those businesses in Saskatchewan parks and those thousands of 
Saskatchewan people that want to use those parks beginning 
with the May long weekend? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. No 
doubt this year our budget was very tough. We set out a clear 
priority list for our government and this meets what the people 
of Saskatchewan wanted to do. So there are no easy answers, 
and the choices we made were not easily made or lightly made. 
 
I want to say that the change in the start-up date reflects the 
customer demand for park usage. From the May long weekend 
to mid-June, 14 provincial parks right across this province will 
be open on the May long weekend. 
 
I want to emphasize that 14 parks will be open. Discussions are 
taking place with the commercial lessees and others who will 
affected by the parks. Now our parks have a great reputation for 
good customer service relations, and listening is part of that. 
And so we are listening to the concerns that the people are 
talking to us about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the government is listening to the 
outcry from Saskatchewan people, but they don’t want their 
parks to open until the middle of June. It’s unbelievable, Mr. 
Speaker. Here’s what some of the businesses are saying about 
this NDP decision to shorten summer. 
 
Here’s what they are saying, quote: 
 

It’s absolutely the most asinine decision I’ve ever heard 
. . . They’re cutting one-third of our business. 

 
Here’s what the manager of the Good Spirit Golf Course had to 
say: 
 

We’ve spent thousands with tourism and drawing people 
to this area. Keep people at home; keep people coming to 
Saskatchewan. This is a real blow. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. How in the world does this 
measure help tourism in the province? How does it help us to 
attract new dollars to Saskatchewan? And why didn’t this 
government have the courtesy to at least consult, consult with 
those businesses that they would be damaging by this decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this is an important 
decision. I’m glad we’re talking about this. Actually on the 
radio on Friday afternoon . . . I am really glad to hear that parks 
are important to people here in Saskatchewan. They are a crown 
jewel of what we do here, and it’s important. 
 
In the parks that with no services until June 18, day use will be 
available — especially for the boat launches and docks after 
spring thaw. But we’re looking at all sorts of possibilities. The 
key point here is that we’re trying to save money to make sure 
our parks are sustainable. We want to see a sustainable park 
system. And this is very important. 
 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

So we’re looking at all things and we’re talking to people. 
We’re listening to all ideas. And I’d be very interested to hear 
what their ideas are in terms of how to make these parks 
sustainable into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know it might be radical 
thinking but the Saskatchewan Party believes that when 
summer comes, the parks should open in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult to believe 
anything this minister or this Premier would have to say in light 
of the fact that they systematically are breaking all the promises 
that they made in their election platform. But now we can’t 
even believe what the NDP have to say in the 2004 
accommodation guide, the Saskatchewan accommodation 
guide. I’ve got a copy right here. 
 
Here’s what it says about Douglas Provincial Park — open year 
round, full services May 20 to September 6. Here’s what it 
ways about Good Spirit Provincial Park — open year round, 
full services May 20 to October 15. In fact every provincial 
park is supposed to be open from May 20 to October 15. But 
it’s not true, since the Premier shortened summer. 
 
And so the question to the Premier or the minister is this: how 
much money was spent printing this particular guide that is now 
inaccurate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are tough 
choices and they were not easily made or lightly taken. And I 
appreciate the comments from everyone. 
 
And what I especially would like to hear is, how do we make 
these parks sustainable? We have 34 wonderful parks in this 
province, a very key piece of our green and prosperous 
economy plan, and we want to make sure they’re sustainable 
into the future for the next generation. 
 
And what is their platform? What is their policy around the 
parks? What did they say last fall? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. The minister’s 
decision was made . . . Apparently he would have been at the 
cabinet meetings that decided to not open these parks in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They would have discussed how 
much they were going to save. There is a, there is a guide that 
the government would have paid for, or helped pay for, that 
tells people that all the parks would be open on the May long 

weekend — which they are not. 
 
To the minister: how much money was, did the government 
spend on printing this inaccurate camping guide? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the budget before us, the 
budget debate today and this afternoon, is a very tough one. 
And we have some really important issues before us in terms of 
health and education, and those are the priorities for this 
government. 
 
Tourism is a very key piece for the Department of Environment. 
We know that the out-of-province people come to our parks 
later in June and in July and August — that’s the key time for 
these people to come. And so that’s why we planned this, this 
savings at this point. 
 
But I am still really anxious to hear what those folks would do, 
over on that side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can’t answer the basic 
question about the campground guideline. It’s been difficult for 
people phoning in to open-line shows even to get answers, or 
the media to get answers from the minister about how this new 
policy will work. 
 
On Friday, callers to a phone-in show seemed to know more 
about it than the minister did. First the minister said the parks 
are going to be open on the May long weekend — just no 
services — but then a caller called in and said that the park 
manager at Douglas Park had told him, no, they’re going to be 
putting a big rock in front of the entrance to keep, to keep 
people from coming in, Mr. Speaker. A big rock to keep people 
from coming in. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how did this get by the Premier or cabinet? 
How did they come to this decision? What did they say — 
here’s the plan, Mr. Premier, we’re going to shorten summer 
and we’re going to use rocks to keep people out of their parks, 
Mr. Speaker? And then when they finally do get in we’re going 
to charge them three bucks every time they want to have a 
wiener roast. How did that happen? 
 
Was there a cabinet meeting that decided this? Would the 
Premier please stand up and explain to Saskatchewan people 
how — as the member quoted earlier — how this, the stupidest 
park policy ever, could have come to be in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the question. And around the rocks, there won’t be 
rocks on the road. And if he heard that same radio show, I did 
say that every penny counts in how we operate our parks, and 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

this is very important. Every penny counts. 
 
And it was a very informative radio show program because 
people really had some concerns about tourism. And I said what 
we will do, as good customer relations, is listen to people’s 
concerns, and especially the people with businesses. We will 
make sure that we hear their issues, and this is very important. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, this is not an easy budget to take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when will the minister 
actually listen to what the people are saying about the parks 
because I think the people are being pretty clear? Is the minister 
going to be on one side of the rock at the park entrance and the 
people on the other and he’ll be listening to how angry they 
are? 
 
And will he just simply clarify for the people of the province, 
will these parks be open? Will they in fact be open with no 
services or will there be large NDP rocks in front of the parks 
and people can’t access them? 
 
I mean I think that’s a pretty important question as the May 
long weekend approaches. Would the minister please clarify 
exactly what this policy means for hundreds of Saskatchewan 
people that like to go camping on the May long weekend? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, clearly on the May long 
weekend there will be 14 parks open with full services. On the 
first day of summer, all the parks will be open. And that’s very 
important — all parks will be open on the first day of summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 201 — The Whistleblower Protection Act 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 201, The 
Whistleblower Protection Act be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that Bill No. 201, The Whistleblower 
Protection Act be now introduced and read for the first time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF CORRESPONDENCE 
 

Board of Internal Economy 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, it’s my 
pleasure to table correspondence from Her Honour Lynda 
Haverstock, the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, with 
respect to the membership on the Board of Internal Economy. 
 
Before orders of the day, I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day I would ask for leave to move a motion with respect to 
sitting hours of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move a motion with respect to hours of sitting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

MOTION 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would move: 
 

That, notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of this Assembly, that when this Assembly 
meets on Thursday, May 20, it shall meet from 10 a.m. to 
1 p.m.; and when the House adjourns on Thursday, May 
20, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, May 26 at 1:30 
p.m. 

 
I move, seconded by the member for Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Douglas 
Park and seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That, notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of this Assembly, that when this Assembly 
meets on Thursday, May 20, it shall meet from 10 a.m. to 
1 p.m.; and when the House adjourns on Thursday, May 
20, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, May 26 at 1:30 
pm. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government and table responses to 
written questions no. 40 through 45 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, and 
45 have been submitted. 
 
I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government and convert for debates 
returnable questions no. 46 through 58 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 46 through to 58 have been 
converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen, that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I appreciate the opportunity to be able to 
continue my remarks that I left off on April 1, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At that time I had begun my remarks talking about the 
importance of the budget to the people of Saskatchewan and the 
benefits that I was able to see as the budget rolled out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had mentioned at that time, on Thursday last, 
that there was a recognition in the delivery of this budget, the 
development and the delivery of the budget, that these are 
indeed difficult and challenging times for the province of 
Saskatchewan, but that the Minister of Finance and this 
government’s approach to all of the issues in front of us with a 
great deal of compassion despite the fact that the difficult 
choices have to be made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had also indicated that — and some of this has 
been substantiated in meetings that I’ve had subsequent to the 
rollout of the budget on Wednesday and my remarks on 
Thursday — but it’s very . . . it strikes me, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 
very easy to be able to criticize individual items in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, as we’re seeing daily in the media, as we’re 

hearing about daily in the question period here. 
 
It’s very easy to address individual items, taken out of context 
from the overall approach that the government has taken in 
developing a fiscal plan for the province of Saskatchewan. 
Easy, Mr. Speaker, because of course nobody likes taxes; 
nobody likes the idea of increasing taxes. Nobody likes the idea 
of having to lay off people who are working for the people. 
Nobody likes the implication that service will be changed or 
affected. Nobody likes the idea of debt increasing. Obviously 
nobody likes the idea of closing parks or charging extra money 
for various services. 
 
Nobody likes these ideas, Mr. Speaker, but obviously we have a 
significant challenge in the province of Saskatchewan in 
meeting the needs of the people of this province and with the 
resources available to us. 
 
I had indicated in my remarks that the government’s intention 
here is to focus very much on one of the first priorities of the 
people of Saskatchewan. First priority of the people as 
expressed is quality health care delivered to meet the needs of 
the people of the province. Second, Mr. Speaker: quality 
education delivered to meet the needs of the people of the 
province. 
 
And on top of that, Mr. Speaker: commitment to continued 
support for agriculture and, Mr. Speaker, commitment to 
support our rural municipalities, our urban municipalities who 
are also tax collectors, and who impose taxes on municipality 
taxpayers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have set some very specific priorities, and 
I just want to set the context in which the budget was 
developed. I think it goes without saying that there was 
challenges in the system. The health care since 1999, Mr. 
Speaker, has been increasing at a rate of roughly 6 to 8 per cent 
per year since 1999. Revenues in the province are increasing on 
natural basis of about 2 per cent per year. General expenditures 
across the province increasing at approximately 3 per cent per 
year. So there’s a growing debt gap, Mr. Speaker, gap that 
needs to be addressed. And this budget goes a long way in 
addressing that, closing that gap that exists between revenues 
and expenditures. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, some other things that I’ve discovered in 
talking with people across the province — and I’ve now met 
with several chambers of commerce for a discussion of the 
budget, I’ve met with individuals on coffee row and collectively 
in meeting rooms — and there are some things that a lot of the 
people in Saskatchewan haven’t really gained full 
understanding and knowledge of. And I just want to point out a 
couple of things, Mr. Speaker. Copies of the budget documents 
are available across the province and I would very much like 
members of the public to get their hands on the, on the budget, 
Mr. Speaker, and take a look at the revenue and expenditure 
side. 
 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, I want to stress that when we look at 
the schedule of revenue for the province we take a look at the 
taxes collected by the, by the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And the total amount of the tax collected in 
Saskatchewan is $3.5 billion, 3.5 billion. If we take a look at the 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

total revenue collected by the province of Saskatchewan, it’s 
$6.5 billion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at taxes versus all the revenue, 
we see that 53.8 per cent of all the revenue collected is from the 
taxes in this province. Individual income tax is at 1.2 billion; 
sales taxes collect in this budget, Mr. Speaker, just $1 billion; 
corporate capital, corporate income, fuel, tobacco, and other 
taxes collected represent only 53 per cent of total revenues for 
this province. So that’s a very important number to keep in 
mind, Mr. Speaker — 50 per cent of taxes . . . 50 per cent of 
revenues is taxes from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
On the expenditure side, Mr. Speaker, we are spending in this 
budget a record $2.7 billion on health care. And we are 
spending an increased amount on education — $1 billion. So 
together, Mr. Speaker, health care and education are costing this 
province $3.7 billion. 
 
So back to those numbers I said on revenue side, Mr. Speaker. 
We collect 3.5 billion from all the taxes — individual, sales, 
and corporate taxes — in this province, fuel and tobacco 
included. So we don’t collect enough money in taxes in this 
province to pay for current spending on education and health 
care. Let’s keep in mind, health care alone is increasing 
between 6 and 8 per cent per year. There is an unsustainable 
ability of this province to keep up with education and health 
care, but the commitment of this government shown in this 
budget to be true to the people’s needs, the people’s priorities, 
in funding health care — 6 per cent increase in health care in 
this budget alone, Mr. Speaker — indicates that we’re willing to 
do what is necessary to keep up with that. 
 
So what are we doing in health care, Mr. Speaker? Let’s just 
take a look at that. Right now on 2.7 million . . . Pardon me. 
That health care budget, Mr. Speaker, if we break it down, 
essentially is $7 million per day is what health care costs us. We 
talked about the provincial parks earlier in question period. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re spending about $14 million on parks currently. 
We could shut down the parks entirely . . . And don’t get me 
wrong; I don’t want to be quoted on that out-of-context 
statement, Mr. Speaker. We could close down the parks — not 
that we would want to and not that we ever would — but if we 
were to close down the parks, we would fund health care for 
two days, Mr. Speaker, less than two days. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is . . . And you will see, Mr. 
Speaker, how often the opposition wants to quote us out of 
context. I made it very clear in my remarks what I was trying to 
say, and the opposition wants to take it out of context, as they 
have with so many other things both during the election 
campaign and today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2004-05, the current budget year, we are going 
to spend 160 million new dollars — new dollars, Mr. Speaker 
— on health care. That’s a 6 per cent increase. Keep in mind 
that the PST increase that was in this budget will raise 
approximately $130 million. So, Mr. Speaker, every single 
penny plus more from the rise in the PST is going to spend, 
going to pay for the increases in health care — every single 
penny plus more going to be spent on new dollars in health 
care. That’s new MRIs, that’s better diagnostics, that’s better 
access to surgeries, reduced waiting lists — all of the things that 

we’ve been told are very important, Mr. Speaker. Seventy-one 
per cent of all new operating costs, that’s what health care is 
taking from this budget — 71 per cent of all new operating 
costs, 85 per cent of net new spending. 
 
Health care has been increasing, as I said, Mr. Speaker, at 6 to 8 
per cent since 1999, obviously unsustainable at the current rate. 
So obviously, Mr. Speaker, we have to find new opportunities 
in revenue generation in this province if we’re going to keep up 
to it. The provincial tax base, every single dollar collected on 
individual sales tax and individual income tax and corporate tax 
does not even meet the needs of the health care system 
currently, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And then education — 45 million new dollars in education this 
year, Mr. Speaker, increasing that spending by 3.8 per cent. 
And 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker, new agriculture spending. 
 
So when we look at our priorities, where’s the new spending, 
Mr. Speaker? Number one, health care at 6 per cent. Number 
two, agriculture at 5 per cent. Number three, education at 3 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker — very important for our funding priorities. 
 
I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, as the minister responsible for 
Government Relations, to have overseen some increased 
support to the municipal sector this year. During the election 
campaign and prior to that in last year’s budget, this 
government committed to spending $10 million additional 
money into the municipal sector to ensure that and help the 
municipal governments deliver their services to their taxpayers 
without further addressing the tax needs at the municipal sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on budget day that $10 million was . . . that 
commitment was maintained. But also, Mr. Speaker, we broke 
that down into how is that money going to be delivered — rural 
municipalities, urban municipalities, and the North? Mr. 
Speaker, that $10 million: 7.4 million was committed to the 
urban pool, 1.6 million committed to the rural municipality 
pool, and $1 million committed to the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there’s been some criticism about the rural share being 
less than the urban share. Well, Mr. Speaker, I did some further 
breakdowns. And out of the urban pool, Mr. Speaker — that 
urban pool, remember at 7.4 million — out of that urban pool 
the towns and villages, which are certainly a part of rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the towns and villages got 2.1 
million. When you add that together with the rural municipality 
pool of 1.6 million, we have an additional $3.7 million going 
into rural Saskatchewan. Three point seven, Mr. Speaker, just 
happens to be exactly 50 per cent of the urban pool of 7.4 
million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have committed in this budget to rural 
Saskatchewan an additional $3.7 million in revenue sharing, 
reducing the need for those municipalities, urban and rural, to 
be able to commit further liabilities on the property tax sectors. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, I had the benefit of announcing new 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure project funding. The 
province of Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, announced a 
further $11 million into the municipal sector for rural and urban 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

water, waste water, and transportation projects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, of this new eleven and a 
half million dollars from the province of Saskatchewan, fully 50 
per cent of that, 5.8 million — fully 50 per cent of that — was 
earmarked for rural Saskatchewan, RMs (rural municipality), 
towns, and villages. 
 
That’s, added together — 5.8 million, $3.7 million, Mr. 
Speaker, from the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program, and the rural and urban revenue-sharing projects, Mr. 
Speaker, with this budget, this year’s commitments, the 
province of Saskatchewan is committing a brand new $9.5 
million for rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, on infrastructure 
and rural revenue-sharing. 
 
This is brand new money and represents a significant 
commitment from this government to sharing in the costs of 
delivering water, sewage treatment, road building, landfill costs, 
all the things that rural Saskatchewan has said are our priority 
and we were able to deliver on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s some significant priorities. We have health, 
agriculture, education, and municipalities, Mr. Speaker. This 
government was able to, despite difficult, challenging times, to 
find new dollars to support those important initiatives 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The most important part of all of that, Mr. Speaker, that we 
can’t forget is that health care demands so much attention that 
we have to be there to support that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a few other things that I wanted to 
mention while I was on my feet. Last week, Mr. Speaker, I had 
the opportunity to speak to the chamber of commerce in the city 
of North Battleford. I was a director of the chamber of 
commerce for six years in the city of North Battleford. These 
people are . . . continued to work for the business community in 
the city. 
 
And they have a few messages for the legislature, for the 
Government of Saskatchewan, for the Minister of Finance, and 
for their MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly). And, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to acknowledge here in the Chamber to 
everyone that I have recognized and understood the challenges 
that are presented to communities along the Alberta border 
when we’re dealing with increased PST, provincial sales tax. 
Yes there are significant challenges facing people who have the 
Alberta tax-free zone very close to us. 
 
The chamber of commerce in North Battleford wanted to make 
very clear that there are challenges like in the city of North 
Battleford, like in the city of Swift Current, but, Mr. Speaker, 
they also realized that the delivery of health care in the province 
of Saskatchewan is very critical. And when you break down the 
cost of the current 1 per cent increase in the PST (provincial 
sales tax), basically $136 per person per year on this basis, Mr. 
Speaker, the majority of the people that I talked to indicated 
that $136 is not a great deal of money to pay for the . . . to 
insure that health care can be provided to the people of this 
province. 

This morning, Mr. Speaker, I was in the city of Lloydminster. I 
spoke with the chamber of commerce over breakfast in the city 
of Lloydminster. They had some concerns as well, Mr. Speaker, 
obviously not with the PST. The exemption for the people in 
the city of North Battleford remains in place. 
 
But the concerns in the city of Lloydminster did deal with the 
delivery of service to rural people around Lloydminster and at 
the same time their concerns also dealt with the continued 
twinning of the Yellowhead highway to ensure that there’s safe 
travel along the most used highway system in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, they were pleased to know 
that we are continuing our commitment to twinning the 
Yellowhead highway. We are continuing to put the dollars that 
are necessary into that important project for them. 
 
They were also very pleased to know the royalty rates on oil 
and gas would continue, that the ethanol program would 
continue, because there are net benefits there for the people of 
the city of Lloydminster and the business community. And the 
budget was reasonably well received in that community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to conclude my remarks today simply by 
indicating that while it is easy to pick on some of the individual 
matters in this budget, because overall it’s impossible to 
criticize a government that has made its priorities health care, 
education, and municipalities and agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s hard to criticize a government who’s put their priorities 
there. But it’s very easy to criticize some of these little matters. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, some of the other matters that deserve some 
positive attention include some of the things that are being done 
in health care, Mr. Speaker: $115 million, $115 million, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that the salaries, benefits, medical fees for 
service to help attract and retain qualified health professionals 
in our province is there in place; $46 million in facilities and 
equipment including 27 million in capital and 19 million in 
diagnostic equipment, like a new MRI, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How many times have we heard the need for a new MRI in the 
province? And this budget ensures that there will be another 
MRI in this province. Very, very, very good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Let’s not forget the budget puts $6.6 
million more to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Mr. Speaker, 
important money to ensure that we can get through some crisis, 
personal family crisis, in a lot better way; $1 million for 
prevention projects including enhanced diagnostic and 
assessment for fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. This is 
something, Mr. Speaker, that deserves applause throughout the 
entire community, and this commitment from this government 
will continue into future years. And I think, more importantly, 
Mr. Speaker, 72 more training seats in nursing education 
program. These things here are going to assist us in dealing 
with the future crisis in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to commend the government for 
maintaining its commitment to highways — 295 million to fix 
the roads and build better highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s keep a couple of things into perspective here. 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

When we look at the total value on the revenue and expense 
pages — the total value of money collected on the fuel tax 
versus the total amount of money that’s spent on delivery of 
roads in the province and heavy-haul roads through the 
Department of Agriculture and road money in industry— 
virtually, Mr. Speaker, the revenue collected on road tax and the 
money spent on highways virtually evens out, Mr. Speaker. We 
are spending the money collected on the fuel tax; we are 
spending it on roads and highways. 
 
Unlike the federal government, Mr. Speaker, which is collecting 
some $200 million in fuel tax revenues from this province and 
putting virtually none back into the province of Saskatchewan. 
Less than 10 per cent, I’m told, Mr. Speaker. And that of course 
is on some of the major tourist routes that take people right 
through the province. We need greater support from the federal 
government on that. 
 
And let’s not forget the $1 billion commitment, Mr. Speaker, in 
provincial support for the agriculture policy framework and 
income support program; $1 million is a lot of money from a 
province of this size, Mr. Speaker. That commitment to 
agriculture is certainly a significant commitment over the term 
of that agreement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think for communities all across this 
province, and particularly some of the urban communities like 
North Battleford — $12.6 million for affordable housing 
construction under the provincial housing policy framework. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the housing industry has met with this government 
on several occasions. The housing industry over the years has 
always said the more money you put into housing, the healthier 
your economy is going to be. We have met that challenge, Mr. 
Speaker, putting more money into affordable housing 
construction, increasing the ability of our municipalities to be 
able to support a better lifestyle throughout the community. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of positive things in this budget. 
Easy to dwell on some of the negatives, but it’s been a 
challenge. Making difficult choices to preserve the delivery of 
health care and other programs in this province has made it 
difficult. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, I want in closing just to say one more time, as 
I did in my opening remarks on Thursday, I want to say that I 
am extremely pleased to have been able to sit at the table with 
the Minister of Finance, looking at the overall package and 
saying, how do we close the gap? How do we be more 
transparent in the documents that we deliver? How do we 
ensure that the future of this province is protected by dealing 
with some of our challenges today? 
 
It will take courage to meet the challenges. The Minister of 
Finance has done that. And I’m very proud to stand in the 
House today to say I support the Minister of Finance. I support 
this government, as difficult as the decisions have been. And I 
look forward to working in the coming years so that the people 
of Saskatchewan a year from now, when they look back at 12 
months of growth and development in this province, that they 
will say the government had tough choices to make, but the 
government made the right choices. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to rise in the House today and respond to the budget 
speech. I didn’t have a chance to respond to the Speech from 
the Throne; I had a lot of thoughts on that and would have liked 
to have. But unfortunately because of time constraints, this is 
my first chance standing. 
 
So there are a number of thank yous I want to express first of 
all, as well as some congratulations. And the first 
congratulations would be to you, Mr. Speaker, for winning the 
most recent election held in the province, and that was for 
Speaker of the Chair. I think it’s always a good sign when a 
person is re-elected back into a position that they were . . . that 
they held prior. It tends to show that people had faith in the job 
that they were doing. And whether it’s any of the members here 
or yourself, it certainly is a feather in the cap. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate all the new members that were 
elected. We have five on our side, and I believe there were five 
on the government side, for their recent election. I remember 
back in ’99 when I was elected for the first time and again also 
in 2003, what an absolutely humbling experience it is, and what 
an honour it is to win a constituency in any election, but in a 
provincial election. And for the newly elected members, it’s 
probably a night that you’ll never forget. 
 
I’ve certainly had the opportunity to listen to most of the new 
members speak. And as many of the colleagues have mentioned 
before myself, what a wonderful job they have done in their 
maiden speeches. I listened, I think, to all of them. And some of 
them from the government side I wouldn’t necessarily agree 
with, but I would say that they expressed their views very, very 
well and congratulations to them. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Members on our side . . . I was very, very impressed with all 
five of our members and the speeches that they gave. As they 
were standing speaking, I was thinking back to my maiden 
speech, and I’m quite positive it didn’t sound anything like 
what they were able to perform. And I have a few of my 
colleagues agreeing with me on that. So congratulations. 
 
A number of thank yous — you know of course you never get 
to this House to be able to stand in your place, or our places, by 
ourselves. There’s always a number of people that are behind to 
help one get elected, and I guess I’m no different than anybody 
else. I was absolutely honoured and flattered to have a very 
strong campaign team that helped me win the constituency of 
Indian Head-Milestone. And it was a team. My campaign 
manager, business manager, fundraiser, all worked very, very 
well together. 
 
In fact during the campaign, we would have a meeting every 
Sunday. We wouldn’t campaign on Sundays. We wouldn’t door 
knock on Sundays, but we’d have our campaign team meeting. 
And frankly that was probably the most enjoyable day of the 
week for me, to hear what everybody had been up to and what 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

they were doing, and really how everybody had pulled together 
to put a strong campaign together. 
 
I’d also like to thank the people of Indian Head-Milestone for 
electing me. Of course, we all went through boundary changes. 
I think every constituency, except for the two northern 
constituencies, saw some changes in their boundaries. And of 
course the Indian Head-Milestone constituency was no 
different. 
 
I lost some communities that I . . . over the four years you tend 
to build up some real strong relationships with . . . and you’re, 
you know, a little sad to see them go, if that’s the case. And you 
know communities like Montmartre and Fillmore and Yellow 
Grass were communities on the east side of my constituency 
that, with redesigning the boundaries, I ended up losing those 
communities. But I guess with every loss comes a gain. And I 
certainly gained a number of communities that I really enjoy, 
have had experience with before, and over the last four months 
of representing them have started that relationship of making 
contacts and building relationships with those communities. 
 
Probably the biggest community that I was able to . . . that I 
received after the redistribution was Balgonie, is Balgonie. And 
it’s interesting, you know, because as I travel through my 
constituency there are 21 or 22 small urban centres in the 
constituency, and they’re all struggling a little bit with the same 
thing. They’re all struggling with maintaining their services, 
trying to keep their communities viable. 
 
But the one community that is, it’s a little different than all the 
rest, is Balgonie. It’s close to the city here in Regina, and it has 
been growing. The houses that are going up in Balgonie are 
amazing. They’ve got a brand new community centre and a 
multiplex centre. The schools are continually being added on to. 
So it’s one of the communities that, when you drive in, they 
have an issue with growth as opposed to decline. And that is so 
seldomly found in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Other communities that I inherited, I guess, through distribution 
would be communities like Rouleau, Avonlea, and Briercrest — 
areas that I had spent a fair amount of time in, in my many 
years prior. 
 
In Avonlea, I had taught in Avonlea for about 10 years. But 
prior to that, I played a lot of sports. Now I don’t know if that 
was a good thing because I remember some real rivalries with 
some of the people that I was knocking on the door. I’d knock 
on the door, and I’d look at them, and they’d look at me, and 
we’d kind of remember hockey games back 15 to 20 years ago. 
But we were able to get off the hockey subject and get on to the 
politics and the problems with the NDP government, and then 
we kind of found a bond again which is kind of nice. 
 
The other people that I would like to thank of course would be 
my direct family. Without them you . . . There is no person that 
gets involved with politics that doesn’t need a lot of support 
from the direct family. And quite often other members have 
mentioned, you know, the support of spouse and immediate 
family. Well I am certainly no different. The support that I 
received for the four years of being elected since ’99 and also of 
course through the writ campaign and since is . . . you just can’t 
thank them enough. 

And I guess I would question how a person could get through 
this life without support behind the scenes. I don’t know 
whether a person really could. So thank you to my direct 
family: Cindy and the boys and also my parents and Cindy’s 
mom and dad and brothers and sisters that all helped on the 
campaign. 
 
One person that hasn’t sat in this House for the last two and a 
half weeks, that I would wish best wishes to, is the member 
from Yorkton, and the battle that he’s going through. I think . . . 
You know it all puts everything that we talk about in here in 
perspective of what is really important, and that truly is our 
health. 
 
And I guess if he must be feeling not well to have to sit and 
listen to the Chamber and the proceedings in here . . . I hear he 
listens to it quite often. So best wishes from not only myself and 
my family, and all our colleagues. Although it makes the House 
even, quite frankly we miss your debating skills and hope to see 
you back in this House as soon as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — When I looked at the Throne Speech and I 
had listened to the debate on that . . . and I’ve been listening to 
the debate on the budget. You know the Throne Speech has a 
lot of good ideas, but unfortunately I just can’t believe it. 
 
The budget, I just can’t believe it either, that you would go in 
that direction. It’s two documents that kind of set out a 
direction, supposed direction, of government, and frankly there 
has been no direction, especially with this budget. 
 
A lot of people have come out and said that, you know, it’s 
short-term pain. Some people have said it’s short-term pain for 
long-term pain. I would say that it’s short-term pain for 
long-term hurt — a hurt that this province may not get over for 
many, many years. And the hurt is people leaving this province. 
The west side of this province does not need an increase in the 
PST, and that’s exactly what this government has done. So it’s 
not pain. It’s not like it’s just going to go away, because who 
knows what’s going to happen next year. It’s hurt. It’s people 
leaving our province, and that is a situation that we just will not 
get over in our province. 
 
I heard the speaker before talking about how much we bring in 
on income tax. The fact of the matter is we continue to lose the 
people that we need in our economy to produce and to pay tax 
in our economy. We’re losing the population from 20 to 60, and 
that’s the population we need to retain. And this budget does 
absolutely nothing to retain it. 
 
I had the opportunity earlier today, about 10:30 or 11:00, to go 
over to the Institute of Public Policy, and they were debating 
the budget. There was four speakers: Murray Mandryk from the 
star leader . . . the Leader-Post; Rosalee Longmoore from SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses); there was Marilyn 
Braun-Pollon from CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business); and Dr. Rasmussen from the university . . . were the 
four people that were debating it, as well as Dr. John Allan. 
 
And I thought the very last statement that was made by Dr. John 
Allan was very, very fitting. The very last statement, when they 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

were talking about the budget, Dr. John Allan said, well I think 
there must have been a room full of males that wrote the budget 
because they’re obviously lost and wouldn’t stop and ask for 
direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — And I thought that was so true because 
there is no real direction with this budget. You know, it’s not 
like . . . And it was talked an awful lot at that debate, when they 
were going through the budget, about the early ’90s, and the 
direction that the government had to go in in the early ’90s. In 
the early ’90s of course, the numbers weren’t good in the 
province. We were running huge deficits. And when the 
government came in and set forward a game plan, it was 
short-term pain for hopefully long-term gain. 
 
And we started to see that gain by the end of the two terms of 
the NDP government. We were running surpluses. And along 
came the now-sitting Premier, and it turned all that work that 
had happened in the ’90s and turned it over and started running 
deficit budgets. It was interesting because not one of the panel 
— not one of the panel today — would agree that it’s been 11 
years of consecutive balanced budgets because that’s not what it 
is. These last three years have been deficit budgets, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And they say they use the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to balance 
it. But in any other household, if you operated a balanced 
budget like that, you’d run into the same problem that this 
government is running into, and that’s adding to a debt by . . . 
they’ve added to the debt 1.4 billion over the last three years. 
Now if you can tell me how that is balancing budgets, it’s not 
there. 
 
But I guess the most frustrating part of the whole debate over 
the last two weeks is that in the 1990s when we were going 
through short-term pain for long-term gain, we saw the 
direction of the government. We knew what the problem was. 
 
We just went through a 28-day election campaign. And I’ve sat 
in this House for the last two weeks and listened to members 
from the other side say, things are good; quit being so negative; 
quit looking at the negative side. Well if things are so good, 
why would you introduce a budget like this? They went around 
the province for 28 days and said everything is wonderful. You 
know, we’re on track. We’re doing exactly what we want to be 
doing. Everything is wonderful. Health care is fine. Education 
is fine. Our parks are fine. Everything is in perfect shape, until 
they get in and — what? — they opened up the books, and they 
saw the numbers for the first time. They’ve got a government 
that’s been here for 11 years. 
 
It’s not like they came in ’92 and didn’t know what the 
financial picture of this province was. They knew exactly what 
the financial picture of this province was when they were 
elected in 2003. The reason why they knew the exact financial 
picture of this province is because they were the artists of the 
financial picture that we have in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
And that picture has been deficit budgets. It has been declining 
population. It has been the worst job growth in Canada. 
 
And because of that, Mr. Speaker, we find ourselves in the 

same position as what I talked about earlier. So many 
communities are struggling with decline, and that’s exactly 
what our provincial government is struggling with. 
 
Managing growth has its problems, but managing or forcing to 
. . . looking at decline creates a whole new set of problems, and 
that’s where we are today with this NDP government, Mr. 
Speaker. And we don’t see anything in the budget that’s going 
to turn that around. We don’t see any long-term plans to turn 
that around. 
 
Every year in January, February — this year it was in March — 
what I do is I do a tour of my constituency. I rent space in every 
— I guess this year there was 18 different communities — in 
their local hall, their seniors’ complex. We advertise it in the 
papers. We advertise it in their mailboxes. And we have . . . just 
tell people that we’ll be in . . . Whether it’s in Sedley, 
Saskatchewan or Francis, Saskatchewan or wherever it might 
be, we’ll rent space in the local hall and invite people to come 
out and talk about the concerns they may have in their local 
communities. 
 
And so we did it again this past year. And it’s really quite 
interesting because although you go from community to 
community, although you travel hundreds and hundreds of 
miles from one corner to the . . . or a hundred miles from one 
corner to the other, the problems are the same. And I think you 
could probably find that throughout the province. And health 
care continues to be a major concern to people throughout the 
province. 
 
And I know the government has said that it’s its number one 
priority. And I’m glad to hear that. And they have put some 
money into health care. Will it fix it? Do we know that this is 
going to be sustainable on into the future? And the question I 
really think and I think the people of Saskatchewan have is that 
no, it’s not sustainable at the rate we’re going. Health care 
inflation is so, is so great at 10 and 12 per cent that can we 
sustain a budget that feeds health care? 
 
It was interesting, the last speaker talked about an MRI and 
putting in a new MRI and touting the virtues of that. Frankly, I 
mean I’m not going to knock adding another MRI. But what 
health care is, is a people business. We don’t have the people in 
the places to operate the equipment that we have. 
 
There have been a number of examples where, you know, it’s a 
veterinarian can get an . . . can get work done, an MRI done on 
animals before we can on human beings. So we’ve got to look 
at the human part of health care. We just simply don’t have 
enough health care professionals. 
 
And unfortunately we have been far too slow in reacting to that 
problem. If this was the first time that problem had been raised 
and the government starts to work towards it, that would be one 
thing. But I remember being in this . . . standing in my place 
four years ago, talking about the very same thing. And I think if 
you would go back to debate on health care over the last ten 
years, you’d find people on the opposition side saying we need 
more health care professionals to deal with the needs of health 
care. And unfortunately this government is very . . . been very 
slow to react, slower than any other province. And that’s why 
we see . . . find the situation that we’re in. 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

I think also it was, I guess maybe whether it was a trial balloon 
or whatever, when the Finance minister talked about there could 
be possible health care closures and closures of long-term care 
beds, I had the opportunity of meeting with a couple . . . one 
gentleman, actually, in Fort Qu’Appelle that is in a long-term 
care facility. And when I was asked to go meet with him, he 
said well, there will be a number of people here that want to 
voice their concerns with long-term care fees, the cost of them, 
and the future of long-term care. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So when I got there, there was only one gentleman that came 
and met with me. And one of the reasons he said is that there 
was I think a number of other residents that were just not sure 
they wanted to make this a political issue. They were scared of 
being kicked out of the facilities that they were in even though 
it is a huge concern because we are not meeting the demand 
that’s out there. And then when you hear our government 
talking about closing long-term care beds, it is very 
disconcerting. 
 
I guess the most frustrating part was when I was campaigning in 
October and November and we heard some of the fear tactics 
that were being delivered, perhaps by some of the members but 
certainly, if it wasn’t by the members that were elected, 
certainly by a lot of their ground troop. And it was unbelievable 
some of the horror stories that we heard. And seniors being 
phoned up and saying, if you vote for the Sask Party, you’re 
going to be kicked out of your long-term care bed. 
 
Well the absolute hypocrisy of this government to be spreading 
rumours like that and then shortly after, five months later, be 
talking about closing long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker. It is 
shameful and it’s . . . There are so many examples of the 
hypocrisy from the election to where we are today. 
 
One of the subjects that . . . or one of the facilities that is going 
to be hard hit after the budget is the Fort San or Echo Valley 
Conference Centre which is right close to Fort Qu’Appelle. The 
facility itself is outside of my constituency, but the people that 
are impacted and the businesses that will be impacted by this 
announcement are for the most part around the Fort Qu’Appelle 
area and mostly in my constituency. 
 
In the paper on Friday it says that layoff notices went out today 
to eight full-time employees and 43 part-time employees. It 
goes on to say another 31 employees at SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) got notices that same day 
telling that their jobs are being eliminated and that it was not a 
very happy day around the offices of SPMC. 
 
Well you know, I know the one thing that I heard over and over 
again during the election campaign from the NDP — and again 
some of it was from the members that were running but a lot of 
it was from their ground troop — if the Sask Party is elected, 
you’re all going to lose your jobs; everybody is going to lose 
their job in the province. 
 
The absolute hypocrisy again of that statement and those 
statements that were made over and over again during the 
election, and then you go five months later and the layoff 
notices are coming and they have just only began. 

I think as one colleague said . . . I mean the next day after the 
election a number of employees from ISC (Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) were fired, even though 
that was the exact opposite or the one thing that this 
government was trying to put into the minds of so many voters 
in this province was the fear factor of people losing their jobs. 
And that’s exactly what they have gone and done. 
 
But you know, losing the jobs in this example of Echo Valley 
centre is one part. It’s the amount of spinoff jobs and dollars 
that comes into that Fort Qu’Appelle region because of this 
centre. You know I . . . Does the government have to own this 
centre? Perhaps not. But what I would urge the government to 
do, is to do everything in its power to make sure that there is a 
purchaser, that they find a purchaser and make it easy for the 
purchaser to then continue on. 
 
This Fort San houses the navy cadets in the area for each 
summer. It’s a huge, huge contract. It’s a huge shot in the arm 
for the area, and to lose it would be devastating for that area. 
 
While I’m on that area, there’s one other issue that I need to 
bring up, and that’s the water level on the Qu’Appelle Valley. It 
was interesting that so many of the parks aren’t opening until 
June. One of the parks they are going to open is the Echo 
Valley Provincial Park which is a great idea, but they better get 
the water situation solved. 
 
He was talking about using the boat launches. Well it’s great to 
use the boat launches if you’ve got enough water in the lake. 
And right now, with the way that dispute is going and it seems 
to . . . hasn’t come to a final solution yet, I would urge the 
minister to continue on with the negotiations and do everything 
that they can do to get an interim agreement so that the water 
level’s returned to normal for the upcoming summer. Because 
last year, quite frankly, the water level by the middle of June 
and July, the middle of July and into August was so low that the 
lakes really weren’t quite . . . weren’t safe. 
 
The boat launches weren’t safe. We happen to have a cottage 
right close to where the provincial boat launch is and you would 
see trucks back out into the water. They’d have to get so far out 
there to be able to get their boat launched or off that then they 
were getting stuck and there’d be two or three vehicles pulling 
it out. I know of stories where . . . where there was pot-holes. 
They’d be pulling their boat out and the boat trailer would 
bounce down into a pot-hole and rip axles off the boat trailers. 
It was an absolute disgrace. 
 
You know when you’ve got the government going around and 
talking about how beautiful this province is — and it is — and 
then you allow a situation like that in southern Saskatchewan. 
You invite people out to use our facilities and our lakes and 
then you allow a situation like that to happen. But more 
importantly, if it continues it will be again a huge economic 
disaster for that whole Qu’Appelle Valley region. So I would 
urge the minister to make sure that that is solved within the next 
couple of weeks to three weeks. Because if it isn’t, the boards 
need to go in and the water level needs to return. It’s a huge, 
huge issue. 
 
Flipping back to health care, I talked about the need for 
professionals. The other issue that comes up is when you hear 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

this government talk about health — hospital closures or 
conversions — and the concern that that raises in so many 
communities. 
 
And why that raises concern in so many communities is 
because we went through that in the 1990s. We saw 53 health 
care facilities either closed or converted. And I think if you talk 
to a number of the members that were on that side at that time 
— government members that were on that side — and asked 
them was that the solution at that time . . . Perhaps some had to 
be closed. And I know a lot of members, and I don’t have it in 
front of me, but I even believe that the former premier questions 
whether they maybe had gone too far. 
 
Well I would really hazard this government to even look at 
hospital closures in rural Saskatchewan. They have been . . . 53 
of them have — well I guess 52 rural and the Plains hospital 
would be 53 — have been closed. It’s been rationalized and I 
would question that any further rationalization would only hurt 
our health care system. 
 
Right now we have waiting lists. So many of those facilities are 
not being utilized as it is. If they would . . . I just use the 
example of Indian Head — it’s an absolutely beautiful facility. 
They’ve got a health care foundation there that does a pile of 
work. They’ve put in a new X-ray machine. They’ve put a pile 
of money in, local money that they have raised to upgrade their 
hospital. And it’s a great facility. What they need is now . . . is 
this government to make sure that that facility remains open and 
remains to serve the people in that area. 
 
And it’s certainly not just in the Indian Head area; it’s in the 
greater area. It’s right on the No. 1 Highway, and unfortunately 
we have a number of traffic accidents up and down there and 
it’s great to have a facility that can stabilize and treat, if 
necessary, or stabilize and move on, if that’s necessary as well. 
 
Agriculture of course is always an issue that came up and it 
continued to come up as I travelled the constituency. We in our 
constituency have been relatively lucky in that the drought 
didn’t hit us two years ago; we certainly saw it last year 
somewhat. But between drought, between low commodity 
prices and between BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy), 
agriculture is being affected greatly. 
 
And you know the one area that I think so many producers were 
hoping to see some relief on was the property tax, the education 
portion especially of property tax, and we see absolutely no 
relief from that at all in this budget. 
 
It’s an area that I know I’ve had . . . I remember just after being 
elected in 1999, the tax revolt meetings were starting up. And I 
think almost every year I’ve talked about this. But I went to tax 
revolt meeting after tax revolt meeting in my constituency 
where RMs (rural municipality) would vote and they were 
voting in the 80s to 90 per cent range to withhold taxes if 
something didn’t change on the amount that they were paying, 
and especially on the education portion. 
 
Well the government I guess did listen a little bit. Because what 
they did is they put in, I believe it was $50 million over two 
years and people could apply and get some of that money back 
— 25 per cent it was to get some money back, some relief on 

the property tax issue. But then after two years that program 
was done. And they have done nothing to backfill; there’s been 
nothing to deal with that issue. And it continues on. 
 
I know . . . Well of course SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities) is talking about having an emergency 
meeting some time in April because not a word was mentioned 
during the budget. 
 
And that’s obviously . . . I don’t know. It can’t be reflective of 
the rural-urban divide that we have because when I was door 
knocking in, whether it was Regina here for other candidates or 
in my own communities, property tax was an issue, whether it’s 
urban or rural, and this government has completely missed the 
mark. It has failed to address that at all. 
 
I’m going to be very interested to hear what the Minister of 
Learning has to say coming up in the next couple months . . . 
well actually in the next couple weeks, probably. He’s saying 
that we’re going to have changes in the education system that 
we haven’t seen since the 1940s, which is a little scary, you 
know, because some of the changes that this government has 
implemented over the last couple years, or 10 years of its 
mandate, 12 years, have not been that positive, especially for 
rural Saskatchewan. And so we’re going to be very interested 
and tracking the minister as to his ideas with regard to 
education and property tax. 
 
I know as I travelled my constituency, amalgamation of school 
divisions is a big issue, and so many divisions have been 
looking and amalgamating. And so it was interesting, because 
the minister about five, four years ago said we want to see 25 
per cent fewer school divisions in our province. Well that’s 
right where we’ve got to. We were at 120 divisions and we’re 
down to about 80. So we’ve hit that 25 per cent mark. So it will 
be interesting to see what this minister, now that the boards of 
education have done what the minister has asked, what their 
reward will be. And so it will be interesting. I’m not saying that 
there isn’t more room for amalgamation or restructuring, but it 
seems like the school divisions have taken that seriously and 
gone on their own and done what this minister had asked them 
to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other issues that I would like to 
talk about regarding this budget. Unfortunately I don’t have a 
whole lot more time. But I guess the most important issue that 
comes up over and over and over again, and it doesn’t matter 
which group you talk to. 
 
As I said, I was at SIPP (Saskatchewan Institute of Public 
Policy) from 11 till about 12 or 12:30 listening to those four 
people debate the budget. And every one of them, every one of 
them realize, every one of them on . . . every one of the 
members on our side realize that none of the questions get 
answered until we deal with the question of how do we grow 
this province. How do we grow our economy? 
 
And unfortunately without a vision, without a plan, that growth 
will not happen. We have seen population decline for 18 
quarters; we have seen the worst job growth. And until this 
government looks at a plan to grow our economy, we’re going 
to continue to see that. Until we see a government looks at 
getting out of the economy and being a direct investor 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

continually in our economy, we’re going to have more 
examples like Broe industries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so often the government says, well what are we going to 
. . . how can we raise, how can we have the money for this? I 
heard the Minister of Environment talking about, well it’s 
$100,000 roughly if we don’t open the parks until the middle of 
June. Well, Tell Us Again, the advertisement the government 
took out just to talk to the federal government who the minister 
happens to live here in Regina. Here’s how you keep the parks 
open; here’s how you would open the parks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are examples, there are 
pages of examples where this government has wasted money. 
And then they look at over at us and say, well how could we 
finance it? Where would the money come from? 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, it doesn’t matter whether it’s the bingo 
issue from last year, where we’re lost, what, 10 to $11 million 
on that; whether it was $11 million dollars on an insurance 
company in Ontario; or whether it’s $28 million dollars in 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) — the money has been there. The problem is this 
government has mismanaged it over and over and over again. 
 
So when we get to a budget like this, and they throw up their 
hands and say, we just don’t have the money. It’s not that they 
didn’t have it. It’s that they didn’t know what to do with it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment that talks about a budget that has no direction, that 
has no vision for the province in the future. I’ll be supporting 
the amendment, and I won’t be supporting the budget. And I 
would ask a couple of members on that side of the House, that 
have had to have received as many phone calls as we have over 
the last couple of days, to do the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre, 
the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Before I start talking about the budget and that debate, I want to 
first add my congratulations to you in your election, that’s very 
important, and to the Deputy Speaker as well, and to the 
member from Wascana Plains, who made it into a race and gave 
us all that time to reflect on the importance of the role of this 
Speaker in the House. That’s very important. 
 
And as well my congratulations to all the members who are 
elected — it’s an honour to be here — and to the new members 
as well. And I want to say as well, the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest talked about working together on issues and I 
appreciated him mentioning that, and that’s a very important 
issue and I hope we can do more like that. 

I want to take a minute just before I start to reflect on a couple 
of past members and some of the things that we do in this 
House that I hope happens over the next few years. I was very 
fortunate to have a wonderful seatmate, Carolyn Jones, and she 
really helped me a lot in terms of understanding the role of the 
House and things we do here, and so it’s very important that 
people who are in the House here act as mentors to new people. 
And it was a big thing for me, and I appreciated the good work 
she did looking after me and helping me understand the 
important things we do here. 
 
Carolyn had quite a few achievements in the House. She was a 
wonderful caucus chair. I think one of her most exciting days 
was that one day she gave a wonderful speech that went on for a 
little while. She was proud of her filibuster. And it was really an 
important day and she felt, felt very good about it. So Carolyn 
was a wonderful, wonderful member. Our new member from 
Meewasin though will do a wonderful job in her place, and I 
appreciate that. 
 
The other one was Keith Goulet from Saskatoon Cumberland 
. . . Saskatchewan Cumberland. And he was just a real role 
model in terms of helping us all understand the importance of 
the North, and as well as a learner. He was just an exciting guy 
to watch give his speeches and I appreciated that. 
 
Again we have an outstanding member . . . real . . . that’s from 
Cumberland that was elected here. And I’m hoping that she 
serves very well, and I have all the confidence in the world that 
she will. 
 
So I wanted to say that before we started and also to reflect on 
my new riding. I was Saskatoon Idylwyld and now I’m 
Saskatoon Centre. There’s been a few changes. The biggest one 
was the addition of a big chunk of Mount Royal neighbourhood, 
and that was ably represented by the former member of Mount 
Royal, now the member for Massey Place. And he has a special 
attachment to that neighbourhood and when I went around 
knocking on doors people often remarked on his leadership and 
his great representation in the House, and so I hope to live up to 
that. 
 
Saskatoon Centre is a very interesting riding because it’s 
probably one of the most urban ridings in this province and 
there are a lot of challenges. It has three large high schools in it 
which makes it really unique. And those high schools reflect the 
issues that face young people in this province today. 
 
And as well, a big chunk of seniors live in the riding as well, 
and so issues that face seniors are there and it’s very important. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we take a lot of 
pride in, in our green and prosperous strategy, is around 
tourism. And as you know, downtown Saskatoon hosts many 
festivals — the children’s festival, the jazz festival and so on. 
And so tourism is a major part of our economy in Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Now, and as well I want to take a moment to recognize my 
constituency staff back in Saskatoon, Francine and Janine, 
who’ve been with me since the start and the good work they do; 
my ministerial staff, Joan and Sherry, Margret, Linsay, and 
Perry. They do an outstanding job of getting me ready each day, 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

and our work there. 
 
And my own family and my mother. And my wife and kids who 
. . . It’s always interesting when you’re in the House and the 
challenges that you face and it’s an important thing. 
 
Two of my children actually have quite a connection with the 
environment. Cam, our oldest, has been a tree planter five years 
and so she has a lot of experience in that area. I don’t know how 
many thousands of trees she’s planted. And it is in the 
thousands, if not hundreds of thousands. 
 
And as well, my second daughter is just graduating this year 
with a degree in environmental sciences on hydrology, and so 
when we talk about water she really knows water. 
 
In fact, actually our family has a little experience with 
water-borne diseases and Alison actually had giardia when I 
was a teacher in a small village in the central part of . . . 
north-central part of Saskatchewan. So we know what it feels 
like when a community faces those challenges and when 
families face that challenge. And so we take that very seriously 
when we deal with water issues. 
 
So in our budget that I’m getting involved in the discussion here 
today, we think — I believe strongly and I will be supporting 
the budget — that we’ve presented a well-thought-out financial 
plan for this province. 
 
Saskatchewan Environment, along with the rest of government, 
were asked to do our share to deliver this balanced budget, and 
I’m proud to say our department was up to this challenge. And 
we had to make some difficult choices, Mr. Speaker, and we 
believe we did it in a way that made sense for this province and 
for the people of Saskatchewan, for our environment and our 
resources. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately as a result of this need to 
reduce expenditures, we also had to reduce staff and this was 
not an easy decision to make, and the people who work in our 
public service are competent, capable, and committed to serving 
the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to express my concern and sympathy for 
those people and their families. I know this was not an easy 
time for those affected, and I wish this didn’t have to happen. 
But in order to govern effectively, we had to have responsible 
finances and not to back down from these difficult choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our challenge was to ensure that we developed a 
plan that would deliver our government’s commitment to a 
green and prosperous economy within today’s financial reality. 
As a result of our own critical review of the programs and 
services we provide, we’ve reorganized our department so it is 
better positioned to meet the environmental and resource 
management challenges of today and of the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we developed a plan for the department, our 
2004-2005 performance plan that was released last week with 
the budget. It establishes the foundation for new, more 
effective, and progressive environmental and resource 
management programs. 
 

This plan identifies shifts in the management focus and 
activities towards a greater emphasis of continuous 
improvement in environmental stewardship across all sources of 
pollution. It’s a new risk-based approach that will be used to 
focus and prioritize environmental monitoring, compliance, and 
enforcement activities. 
 
A new integrated monitoring unit will be established. This will 
enable the department to focus monitoring activities across the 
province on strategic issues such as cumulative effects of 
environmental impacts on ecosystems. 
 
A specialized enforcement unit will also be created to 
concentrate on longer term, more complex investigations of 
significant environmental damage or resources abuse. New 
ways to enhance compliance through partnerships, education, 
and communication will also be examined. 
 
Key actions in the department performance plan will help move 
the department in new directions on an emphasis on best 
practices. The department organization is significantly changed 
from last year. This realignment of the department programs 
and reporting structures will be used to facilitate 
implementation of these new directions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my department has been reorganized to 
deliver the services that are most important to people and most 
critical to the health of our environment. While this involves 
some decreases in staff and program spending, it does not, Mr. 
Speaker, indicate a lessening in the government’s commitment 
to the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my department will continue to maintain the 
environmental impact assessment process, a key prevention 
program that identifies and helps mitigate the effects of 
proposed government and private projects. 
 
In the area of drinking water quality, Mr. Speaker, there will be 
no compromises. Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that all 
the recommendations of the North Battleford commission of 
inquiry directed at the Government of Saskatchewan have been 
completed or are being addressed. Mr. Speaker, the watershed 
. . . the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority will play a key role 
in this as it continues to develop watershed management plans, 
educational programs, and other initiatives to help protect our 
source waters. 
 
My department, Mr. Speaker, will also support the 
government’s push for a green and prosperous economy here in 
Saskatchewan. To this end, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
Environment will be working with departments, Crown 
agencies, and other stakeholders to develop a green strategy 
with the aim of establishing environmental stewardship as an 
integral part of all government agencies and planning. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Office of Energy Conservation will 
continue to develop and support provincial programs that will 
help us reduce the use of energy. The office, along with other 
important sectors, will play an important role in the province’s 
response to addressing the challenge of climate change and 
reducing our emission of greenhouse gases. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have some interesting stats about our 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

program. One of our tax cuts that was announced in December 
. . . And it was very interesting because here we have, since we 
announced the PST elimination on ENERGY STAR appliances, 
there has been — and this up to March 1, so we have another 
month there — over 600 refrigerators have been sold, 400 
clothes washers, 500 dishwashers, for about 1,600 items. Mr. 
Speaker, do you realize that this means that we’ve eliminated 
437 tonnes of CO2 since we announced this program in 
mid-December. So I think this is an outstanding response to the 
people of Saskatchewan. We are very happy about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Now, Mr. Speaker, to maximize the 
benefits of environmental compliance activities, a risk-based 
approach will be adopted that annually focuses the department’s 
efforts in the most needed areas and then measure success. 
These compliance-related activities will focus on clean air, 
water, and land, with healthy wildlife, fisheries, and forest 
resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my department will also continue to co-operate 
and work together with Aboriginal groups on environmental 
and resource matters to ensure a healthier environment. 
 
Over the last five years, Mr. Speaker, our expenditures on forest 
fires suppression on average has been about $75 million a year. 
This investment protects communities and people. It also helps 
protect the forest which supports our forest industry and an 
important foundation of our economy. This budget, Mr. 
Speaker, recognizes the necessity of these expenditures, and as 
a result the forest fire program has been budgeted to increase by 
$28 million. We’ve also taken steps to review the wildfire 
program to ensure that expenditures are managed appropriately 
and that fire suppression activities are more closely aligned with 
the values that people want us to protect. 
 
Fire, Mr. Speaker, is a natural element in the boreal landscape, 
forest landscape. It has helped shape our northern forest, and it 
provides important ecological benefits. It also helps ensure that 
a range of young and old forest growth that provides an 
important habitat for a wider variety of species. Fire also helps 
control insect and diseases and reduces the buildup of 
combustible matter on the forest floor so that the fire’s intensity 
is not as severe or as damaging. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we understand the natural 
role a fire plays in our landscape, and that for us to put out 
every fire that starts is not sustainable for the forest or for the 
provincial budget. Escalating costs in wildfire management 
agencies across Canada and the world have shown us that. 
Saskatchewan’s wildfire management program has been 
reorganized around the objectives of protecting what is most 
important to people, reducing the likelihood of cost overruns, 
allowing fire to play a more active and beneficial role on the 
landscape. So to assist this, to assist in this effort, funding has 
been identified to help educate people to reduce their wildfire 
risks and to decrease the number of human-caused wildfires. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, through tourism, provincial parks have an 
economic impact of well over $68 million annually. The almost 
2.5 million visitors to our 34 provincial parks enjoy some of the 
greatest outdoor recreational opportunities this province has to 

offer. And this is an important feature of our plan this year, and 
we hope people have a great time out in the parks this summer. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you may be interested in this. In the area of 
forestry, Saskatchewan’s forest ecosystem program was 
recently . . . received International Standards Organization ISO 
14001 certification. That means that the quality of our 
province’s forestry program has received international 
recognition for identifying and minimizing its effect on the 
environment. 
 
Now this is a first in Canada for a province-wide government 
program. This is an outstanding accomplishment, but also one 
that takes a great deal of ongoing work to maintain including 
external audits to verify . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Why is the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 
member on the other side for allowing me to take this minute to 
introduce a neighbour and good friend of mine, Ben Hofer, 
from the Beechy Hutterite colony. Ben is sitting in our gallery. 
 
Ben’s father is in the hospital here in Regina, and so he’s 
wanting to be close to his father, but he’s had some time to 
come by and see the deliberations of the Assembly. He and his 
friends are very astute followers of politics in Saskatchewan. 
Not too much escapes their attention. They’re watching very 
closely, and we appreciate that, and we welcome you to our 
Assembly today. 
 
Would you please welcome Ben. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Prince Albert Northcote has 
also requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

like to join with my colleague in introducing a friend of mine as 
well who is watching the proceedings of the legislature this 
afternoon, Mr. Verdun Jeancart, who is a long-time employee 
of the city of Prince Albert, who is as well very interested in the 
political scene of this province, and who has been very helpful 
on many occasions I would want to say for the people of 
Saskatchewan because of his political activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask you and all members of the 
Assembly to join with us in giving a warm welcome to Verdun 
Jeancart. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the budget this year also includes a new initiative — the Green 
Team — which will provide an opportunity for Saskatchewan 
students to gain work experience and training in the 
environmental sector. 
 
This is a summer employment program of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation in partnership with Saskatchewan Environment. 
Now this program has earmarked $200,000 in funding for this 
summer and will target students at least 16 years old who are 
interested in environmental management and energy 
conservation, and will be returning to an educational institute in 
the fall of 2004. 
 
The important role that our young people have in protecting our 
environment and natural resources cannot be underestimated, 
and so I’m really, really excited about this program. As a 
former teacher, I know that our youth are concerned about the 
environment and about the future of this province and the 
world. My department will be looking at expanding the 
opportunities for our youth to have a greater role and say in 
environmental decision-making processes. 
 
Now before I wind up my remarks, I just wanted to make one 
comment, and that is about the equalization concerns. I think 
that we always have to reflect on this, and I appreciated the 
comments made by members opposite around the priority for 
this, and I would only hope that they could join in with our fight 
for fair equalization . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask members just to 
allow proceedings to proceed here. And the member for 
Saskatoon Centre has the floor, and I would ask members to 
respect that. 
 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Okay. So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard the 
Manitoba comparison. We get about $120 million, and they 
would get $1.2 billion in equalization transfers. And how 
anyone can say that is fair or will let that go is beyond me. And 
it seems to me, it seems odd to me that the opposition here just 
sort of glosses over that fact and can focus more on the 
advertising and not join in and say we actually need more 
efforts in that area. 
 
That’s very important that we get the word out about things that 
really are big issues, and I think this equalization issue is 
important. It’s very critical, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s fair 
and equitable, and we all need to be on the same side, and we 
need to be on the side of Saskatchewan people on this issue and 
not be partisan about this and not cheapen it. This is very, very 
important, and I think that we need to have a good long work on 
equalization. This is very, very important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the 
budget motion, and I will not be supporting the amendment. I 
think the amendment is weak and short-sighted and . . . But the 
budget itself, there are no easy answers. It was a tough one, and 
I will be more than happy to support that. Those are my words 
today. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m certainly pleased to be 
able to enter into the budget speech debate. As you may know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m one of those fortunate members who 
live within commuting distance of Regina, and so I commute 
back and forth fairly often through the week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I find is while I’m either driving into Regina or 
driving home, I get some time to kind of think about some of 
the things I might want to say in the Assembly, and last Friday 
was one of those occasions. I knew that I would probably be 
speaking to the budget this afternoon, so I was giving a bit of 
thought as to how I would organize my presentation and so on. 
 
And I turned the radio on and there happened to be a talk show 
on and the subject that afternoon was, name this year’s budget. 
And I don’t pay particular attention to titles on budget books 
and that sort of thing, so I didn’t really realize that there wasn’t 
a name for this year’s budget. 
 
And I found it kind of interesting, some of the suggestions, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that some of the callers had for this year’s 
budget. One of the suggestions was a no-name budget, and I 
mean that would be quite apt because if you do look at the 
budget there is no name on it. And so perhaps no-name budget 
perhaps would be very apt. 
 
One of the ones I liked is, our pockets are wide open — that 
name for that budget. I thought that was particularly apt also 
with all the tax increases and fee increases. I think that would 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

be a fitting name for this budget. 
 
But there was another suggestion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
think perhaps that’s more appropriate in light of a recent 
election campaign that we had and the . . . no talk of any tax 
increases or hospital closures or reduction in the number of 
government offices and the firing of 500 civil servants. There 
was none of that in the NDP’s election platform. And so I think 
perhaps the betrayal budget would be more appropriate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now if you look back at . . . This kind of piqued my interest, so 
this morning when I got back into the office, I looked back at 
some of the budgets of the past and just for interest’s sake, the 
one budget back in 2002 was called Connecting to the Future. 
We have Meeting the Challenge for Saskatchewan People and 
Building for the Future. And as I said, this year there’s nothing. 
It’s a blank. 
 
And was this merely an oversight that the NDP cabinet 
ministers and their staff were so busy preparing and scrambling 
at the last minute to prepare this budget that they forgot about a 
name, or is this an indication of a more serious problem? And I 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it indicates a much more 
serious problem. I think those people on the opposite side of the 
House, this NDP government, really didn’t have any idea what 
they were going to do if the people should re-elect them, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I’m not the only one that has come to that conclusion. In 
last Saturday’s Leader-Post, one of the journalists, Murray 
Mandryk, writes this, and I quote: 
 

. . . the New Democrats didn’t expect to win last fall’s 
election and made unrealistic promises in order to win. 
And now they don’t have a clue on how to deal with the 
mess they weren’t honest with us about in the campaign. 

 
And I think that’s precisely the situation that we have here. So 
therefore we have a whole hodgepodge of measures to try and 
come up with what this government tells us, $100,000 surplus 
budget, which is like saying a household with a $67,000 income 
might have a 1-cent budget at the . . . surplus at the end of the 
year. I mean it’s just ludicrous, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what do they do to try and convince the people that it’s not 
their fault? I’ve been in this House — this will be my fifth term 
or fifth year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my second term — and all 
I’ve heard from those people on the opposite side is that it’s 
never their fault, it’s always somebody else’s fault. It’s the 
federal government’s fault because they’re not stepping up to 
the plate, whether it be in agriculture or health care or municipal 
services; it’s the farmers’ fault because they don’t produce a big 
enough crop to get this economy going; it’s always someone 
else’s fault. 
 
I think it’s time they start taking responsibility for their actions, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the people of this province certainly 
know whose fault it is for the type of budget that we have this 
year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These people have been in 
government for some 10 or 11 or 12 years and they can no 
longer blame the ’80s and the Devine government. People have 
moved along past that excuse. And every once in a while you 

still hear that 1980s blues coming from that side of the House, 
but it’s been off the hit parade for the last five or six years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Minister of the Environment during question period and in 
his speech said, well if times are tough and we have to do 
everything we can to balance the budget and manage with 
meagre resources or reduced revenue and increased demands. 
And during question period he asked, well what would we do 
when he was questioned about why some of the parks aren’t 
opening till some time in June. And as my colleague from 
Indian Head-Milestone said, one of the things we wouldn’t do is 
spend $75,000 on silly ads like Tell us again. 
 
And then I noticed in Saturday’s paper we have another ad, and 
I’m not sure what this one costs. I would suggest it would cost 
them considerably more than $75,000 to tell the people about 
this year’s budget and mention only those things that they felt 
the people of Saskatchewan would like to hear and view 
favourably, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I can tell you I was out at a couple of major events in my 
constituency this weekend and their version of this budget isn’t 
resonating with the people of this province. I walked in . . . On 
Saturday night I was at a function where oh, some over 200 
people were attending, and I wasn’t in that hall for two minutes 
and I had people coming up to me and giving me advice as to 
what we should do with this government. And I can tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, none of it, none of it was favourable to the 
members on that side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So let’s have a look at this most recent ad and see what it 
mentions. It mentions here that we’re going to spend $2.7 
billion on health care this year. But it doesn’t mention that back 
in 1992-93 that we only spent $1.6 billion on health care. They 
closed 53 hospitals, and it doesn’t mention that they are looking 
at closing more hospitals and more long-term care beds. And 
have health services got better in this province? I would say that 
if you asked the average citizen on the street, they would say a 
resounding no. In fact they’ve got worse, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
One thing I must give this government a bit of credit because it 
seems . . . There’s a saying that it’s an ill will that blows no one 
any good. And there is perhaps one or two items in the budget 
that I commend the government on. 
 
Dealing with fetal alcohol syndrome disorder, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is a serious problem in our province, not only in 
our province but in our country, but that we see the effects of it 
here in Saskatchewan. And there’s a paltry $1 million going 
towards this. At least it’s . . . perhaps it’s $1 million more than 
what we’ve had in the past, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I would 
say if we had a growing economy we could devote more 
revenues to that, to that problem. 
 
And in fact if we had a growing economy many of those young 
people that are the root cause of fetal alcohol syndrome disorder 
would have gainful employments, have jobs that they could go 
to on a daily basis, and perhaps we would see a lessening of that 
particular problem in our society, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
On the second page the ad goes on to talk about focusing on 
children, youth, and opportunity; and this government’s proud 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

to advertise that they’re spending more money on education — 
$1.2 billion. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Well what’s that going to do — the new money, a 3.8 per cent 
increase? Well in last week’s Leader-Post reaction on budget 
day, I believe the president of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees . . . School Boards Association — I understand they 
changed their name — said that the increase in funding in the K 
to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) system would only look after 
the increase in teachers’ salary up until August 31. He said that 
there’s no mention and it does nothing to address the long-term 
problems in funding the K to 12 system. It doesn’t address the 
heavy burden of education tax on property, and so it’s at very 
best a stop-gap measure. 
 
But this government spends thousands of dollars, tens of 
thousands of dollars trying to convince the people of this 
province that they’re actually making some headways in this 
area. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan have said that the increase in 
their operating grant comes nowhere near close to covering 
their increased costs. And so what that will most likely mean, I 
would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that our post-secondary 
students will be seeing higher tuition fees come next year. 
 
So this bit of money that these folks are putting towards 
education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at it in real 
terms and the real differences that it’s going to make, it helps a 
bit but it’s not going to do a lot to alleviate the hurt. 
 
And then we have a section called supporting communities, and 
they talk about an additional $10 million in revenue-sharing 
grants to municipalities. And I believe the Premier announced 
that at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) convention. Well if we look at the way that is 
being broken down, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe in the past 
there was a more . . . there was an equitable sharing of new 
monies between SARM and SUMA, and a lesser amount to 
northern municipalities and municipal governments. 
 
Well this year there’s been quite a change in that. And I mean 
I’m not begrudging the cities of getting $7.4 million. But if you 
do some comparisons, the city of Regina’s getting $1.65 million 
and all the rural municipalities are getting 1.6. It seems to me 
perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is a bit of an attempt by 
this government to widen that rural-urban split that we have in 
this province. 
 
And that’s really unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
we’re a small province of only 1 million people and we can’t 
afford to use those type of splits for our own political 
advantage, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re too small; we need to 
work together; we need to co-operate. And when a government 
is so blatant in using the differences between one sector of our 
province versus another, I think it’s really regrettable and it 
does a lot of long-term damage, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What I noticed in this particular ad is that there was no mention 
of increased vehicle registration fees. There was no increase in 
SaskTel fees. And I might relate to you a phone call that I had 

yesterday afternoon. It was from a rural resident in my 
constituency who had just got his most recent SaskTel bill. And 
to say that this individual was upset would be understating his 
demeanour, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He was very upset at the fact 
that his basic service charge was going up by $10 a month. He 
subscribes to a bundling package and that was going up $10 a 
month and there was a brand new fee there of an administration 
fee of $1.95 per month, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I haven’t had the time to investigate to see whether these 
new charges apply equally across the board or are they again, 
once again, targeted at those people in rural Saskatchewan. In 
an area where sometimes people living across the road from 
you — because you happen to be on the divide, the division 
between one community and another — you have to use 
long-distance and those rural residents are now being charged 
an additional $10 on their bundling costs. 
 
There was no mention of increased of park and fishing licences, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And there was no mention of a whole host 
of other fees that we have seen listed in government news 
releases and in, more particular, in the media, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. No, no mention of increased fees for birth certificates 
and death certificates. No mention of increased water testing 
fees. No mention of a number of fee increases that I see, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was certainly no mention on 
the very brutal attack on rural Saskatchewan that this budget 
presents. There was no . . . This government and one of the . . . I 
believe it was the member from North Battleford mentioned 
that there’s an increase in this year’s Department of Agriculture 
budget, some $13 million I believe it is. 
 
Well that in fact is true. But let’s take a little bit longer term 
look at what the Department of Agriculture budgets have been 
in the past. In fact, if you go back to the Agriculture budget in 
’01-02, it was some $333 million. This year it’s $264 million, a 
difference of about $69 million less than it was back in ’01-02, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The only reason that this year’s budget is increased over last 
year is because on the national front we are moving from one 
program, the AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance), 
CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) programs to the 
agricultural policy framework in which the Canadian 
Agricultural Income Stabilization Program is kicking in and the 
federal government put up $600 million in each year for two 
years to help fund that transition. And the province could have 
added their 40 per cent but this NDP government chose not to 
add their 40 per cent. And therefore we see their budget last 
year in Agriculture was lower than what it, significantly lower 
than what it was in past years. 
 
We heard the Minister of Agriculture, in his reply to the budget 
address, talk about closure of some 22 rural service centres in 
this province. Well in fact that again is very typical of the way 
these, this NDP government likes to deceive and . . . the people 
of this province and only tell half-truths as such, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because in fact there are 31 rural service centres that 
are closing. There are 31 extension agrologists that will be out 
of their jobs at the end of April. 
 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

And they are going to set up nine regional service centres — 
not service centres, information centres I believe they call them 
or some such name. But in reality the 31 extension agrologists 
that are currently in offices across this province at the end of 
April will be losing their jobs. And they won’t . . . I would 
imagine that most of them will not be rehired for any of these 
service or call centres, as such. They were going to set up a new 
call centre in Moose Jaw, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Their ad doesn’t talk about reduction in the farm fuel rebate 
program. It doesn’t talk about the elimination of the 
conservation cover program. It doesn’t talk about the 
elimination of the short-term hog loan. And it doesn’t talk about 
the 13 per cent increase in policing costs that the rural 
municipalities are going to have to pick up this year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. There is no mention; I haven’t heard one 
member on that side of the House mention that. 
 
And it seems . . . I am sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that more 
things . . . As time goes on we’ll learn about more increases and 
more cuts that this government has in this budget that they’re 
not willing to talk about at this time. 
 
But I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I had to pick one statement 
out of this year’s budget that is perhaps the most worrisome to 
all of the citizens of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
would be from their news release on budget day entitled, Health 
budget combines new investment with sustainable measures. 
 
And there’s one sentence in here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
that is a dark cloud on the horizon of many health facilities in 
this province. And I quote, it says from the news release: 
 

Although these are significant increases, changes in health 
delivery are required and will include further 
administrative efficiencies, changes in staff mix, facility 
closures or conversions, and reductions in long-term care 
bed numbers. 

 
And I think that pretty well says it all. I know already that the 
people in Balcarres in my constituency are very concerned 
about their hospital. They are very concerned that it may be 
closed or converted. They have a new long-term care facility 
attached to that hospital. They’re asking how many beds will 
we lose? 
 
The same goes for the people in Ituna. In fact in Ituna we saw 
recently that there has already been a reduction in services 
there. Up until last week citizens could walk . . . patients could 
walk into the health care clinic and receive basic nursing 
services. On the day before the budget the health authority put 
in some new regulations saying that only individuals . . . the 
only individuals that can receive nursing care, nursing services 
out of this health centre are long-term care residents or those 
people who are being referred by a doctor. So people who have 
been going there for many years having their blood pressure 
checked can’t do that any longer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think that’s just the beginning of many cuts that we’re 
going to see. And we’re going to see, I would suggest, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’m afraid we’re going to see some significant 
cuts in health care facilities and closures of long-term beds, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And there was no mention nowhere in any of 

this advertising of any of this . . . of those sorts of things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that lack of being honest with the 
people of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, probably was 
brought home to me more dramatically a couple of Saturdays 
ago, than anything else that I have seen. And it was in a bit of 
an unusual way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We had a . . . one of our 
grandchildren were doing their first Communion, I guess is . . . 
I’m not a Roman, a member of the Roman Catholic Church, but 
my grandson is. And he invited us to witness his first 
Communion at a church here in Regina. And the church . . . 
There was a whole host, I believe there was about 60 young 
people that were receiving their first Communion and of course 
the church was overflowing with parents and relatives and 
grandparents and great-grandparents and so on. And there is a 
. . . in their order of service, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a time 
where they either . . . they call it the prayers of the faithful 
where the commentator goes to the mike and leads the 
congregation in prayer. 
 
And what struck me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s something 
that kept coming back to me over and over again, the first 
prayer was, and I quote: 
 

That provincial politicians keep their campaign promises 
for the good of all. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for some reason I just couldn’t get 
that out of my head. It just kept coming back over and over and 
over again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it made me think about, 
we quite often in this House we will . . . if we’re here for awhile 
we think that we’re the only ones that are paying attention and 
we say things that sometimes we perhaps don’t support fully 
and so on and we banter back and forth. 
 
But when we’re out on the campaign trail people are paying 
attention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I guess I would have to 
wonder how those people that were attending that church that 
Saturday afternoon would view this government particularly 
after this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that those people 
would agree with those callers to that call . . . talk show where 
they would call this the betrayal budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And one other comment that was made to me by a constituent, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that again has stuck with me and keeps 
coming back to me. It was on an occasion I happened to be in 
one of the coffee shops in my constituency and I ran into an 
individual — this was shortly after the election — who I am 
pretty certain didn’t support me in the election. And we got 
talking about campaign promises and that sort of thing. And this 
individual asked me this question, and he was referring to the 
Premier, he said to me, he said, would a man of the cloth lie? 
And I couldn’t answer that question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I 
would like to go and visit with that individual now and see what 
kind of an answer he would give me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So for all those reasons, for those people in that church in 
Regina here a couple of Saturdays ago, and for those people in 
my constituency who are looking to government to bring 
forward programs and budgets that will grow this province and 
so that their children will have a future, for all those people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I can simply . . . I cannot support the motion, 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:00) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure this 
afternoon to stand and speak in favour of this budget and the 
hard work that all members of this government caucus have 
done to prepare a plan not just for this year, but for the next four 
years. 
 
And I think that’s the key message for everybody in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we have to plan for the 
long term. And to go . . . When you plan for the long term 
means that you have to have some clear idea of the direction 
that you want and the fact that you provide for the revenues to 
match the expenses in a four-year plan. 
 
And our Minister of Finance has presented that plan here in this 
legislature, and we are working towards how we can implement 
that to provide the services that are needed. 
 
It’s very clear in that plan that health care and education and 
agriculture are very important parts of the plan. If you notice in 
this budget, there are three areas that have substantial increases 
in the amount of money that’s available, and those are the three 
areas. 
 
The highest increase percentage-wise is in health, $160 million. 
Second-highest increase is in agriculture, $12 million dollar. 
And the third-highest increase is in the whole area of education. 
All of these amounts are extremely important because they 
reflect the concerns of the people of the province. 
 
As it relates to the aspects of the budget that relate to some of 
our resource industries — oil and gas and mining and other 
things — you will see in the budget a very stable perspective 
that affirms a number of the policy decisions that have been 
made over the last number of months. 
 
But before I go and talk a little bit more about health care, I just 
want to congratulate the Speaker on his election. I especially 
want to welcome all the new members in the legislature who 
were elected in this last election. 
 
There are many times when the debate gets very heated in this 
place, but there are also many times when we have good 
conversations and discussions about family, friends, our 
constituents, issues that are of concern to all of us as 
Saskatchewan people, especially as we go from Saskatchewan 
together sometimes to present the position of the province. 
 
I’d also like to say a few words about the constituency that I 
represent. Regina Lakeview has been kind enough to elect me 
now for the third time. This particular time, I ended up with a 
change in boundaries, so that I ended up losing all my friends 
who were east of Albert Street in Hillsdale and over to the 
university, but I gained many new friends north of me into the 
Cathedral area, and up to 13th Avenue. 

And what one finds when one represents an area of Regina like 
I do, is that you end up with the responsibility of representing 
some of the most vulnerable people in our society, some of the 
ones that need the most help, at the same time as you represent 
many of the decision-makers, policy-makers, business leaders, 
who can actually make a difference in how our province runs. 
And that becomes a challenge, but it’s also a huge opportunity. 
 
And I want to thank all of the people in my riding who 
continually provide me with advice and suggestions and who 
remind me why it is that I am standing here on their behalf in 
this legislature. 
 
There are a few things that I just want to emphasize about the 
Regina Lakeview riding. And they relate to some of the 
community activities that happen in that particular part of our 
city. I think I’ll start right off with the Cathedral Village Arts 
Festival, which is going to be happening in the in the spring 
now. And that event, in and of itself, provides a huge focal 
point — not just for the member for Regina Lakeview, but also 
the other members who are in close proximity — because it 
becomes a focal point of how a community can work together 
to provide a celebration, fun, merchandise sales, partying, 
music, arts, and do it in a way that it becomes a renewable, 
ongoing part of the community. 
 
Another activity that’s extremely important right through the 
whole of Regina, but especially in Regina Lakeview, relates to 
all of the activities of our sports-minded people. And we have 
many, many athletes that come from Regina in general, but 
many of them are based in my particular constituency. And I 
very much appreciate the chance to go and see them compete, 
but also show the leadership as our province moves forward to 
hosting the 2005 Canada Summer Games next year. 
 
And many of the activities that we’ve seen taking place in 
Regina the last number of months, including the digging of 
Wascana Lake, relate to the preparation for the Canada Summer 
Games. 
 
We have an incredible facility that is being built at the 
University of Regina that will provide basketball and volleyball 
venues. We have a new facility that is going to be built at the 
Regina Exhibition Park related to soccer and many other 
activities. We have the renewal of the tennis courts right here on 
the legislative grounds as a base for the tennis activities. And 
clearly with Wascana Lake, we have this amazing rowing 
facility will be here. There are many other things that I haven’t 
mentioned but all of it is, becomes sort of a culmination of 
much community effort and fundraising and clearly 
participation from all three levels of government in making sure 
that the facilities are available. 
 
Now as many members know from the times that I get up in this 
legislature to give member statements, we’re very proud in 
Regina Lakeview to have an abundance of writers and others, 
artists who add to the life of not only Saskatchewan, but also 
Canada. And that ability to provide the imagination and the 
ideas and the stories that become our plays and then our movies 
and other things is a gift that we need to keep nurturing and 
keep rewarding. And you can do that in many different ways, 
but practically you end up ultimately having to be a user of 
books, of films, of artwork in your home. All of these things 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

become an important part of how your life is enriched. 
 
And so I encourage all people to go and read a Saskatchewan 
book today. Go and purchase artwork by a Saskatchewan artist; 
listen to Saskatchewan music; listen and participate in the plays 
and the drama, in the movies, all the things that happen in 
Saskatchewan because there is an incredible number of people 
who work in the whole arts world and they end up generating 
many, many more activities of a commercial nature that then 
provide for the richness of our life in Saskatchewan. 
 
A little later I’m going to talk some more about books in 
Saskatchewan because we have some interesting aspects as it 
relates to books. 
 
But before I do that I want to just say a few words about health 
care in Saskatchewan. And the reason that I want to do that is I 
want to take a slight look backwards over the past year and then 
a little bit of a look forwards into the next year. 
 
This past year in Saskatchewan in health care has a number of 
sort of highlights that I think are worth reminding people of. On 
January 28 of this year, just a couple of months ago, we 
released a survey that had been done of all the people in 
Saskatchewan; 5,100 people were surveyed in Saskatchewan, 
and 80 per cent of the people who were surveyed agreed or 
strongly agreed that they were fairly treated by the health 
system and that they had confidence in the health system. 
 
This was an especially positive diagnosis. It actually confirmed 
some of the information that we received in the Maclean’s 
magazine survey of Canadian health care. Saskatoon and 
Regina health authorities were among the country’s best, with 
Saskatoon ranking fourth and Regina Qu’Appelle health being 
numbered as 16 out of 57. 
 
Now another aspect of this last year which I think has been sort 
of a quiet but important feature of what we’ve been doing 
relates to our whole primary health care initiative. As many 
know, we set out in our action plan to have primary health care 
clinics in communities right across the province. We now have 
25 and more coming. We end up in that whole primary health 
care initiative to establish other things that support that. 
 
And one of the supports that we’ve been pleased to work on is 
the opening of the HealthLine which was officially launched 
last September. Since it started up in August, there have been 
thousands and thousands of people who have received the 
information and advice that they need which allows them to 
either go in immediately to a hospital for help or go and see 
their doctor later or deal with some of the issues in a 
knowledgeable way themselves. 
 
And this is the kind of thing that is there. We all know and have 
those numbers posted and until you’re in a time of need, you 
kind of forget that it’s there as a positive part of your 
community. And it’s located in Regina in I think member from 
Coronation Park’s constituency, and it’s doing very well. 
 
Another aspect that relates to public health is our whole 
initiative around the reduction in the use of tobacco. And this 
happens on a whole number of different ways. As set out in the 
Throne Speech and as affirmed in some of our budget plans, we 

plan to move forward with a smoke-free Saskatchewan by 
January 1, 2005. 
 
But this is just one other piece of a broader strategy that we 
have. As many know, our legislation from a couple of years ago 
brought in the 60 per cent no smoking seats effective January 1, 
2004. 
 
But some of the things that others don’t know so much about 
include our year two of our Young Spirits: Proud to be Tobacco 
Free. We have a whole program that works with young people 
in grades 5 to 9 who celebrate a tobacco-free lifestyle. And it’s 
really in those grades 5 to 9 where tobacco companies focus 
their attention, so we need to focus our attention to show that 
living without tobacco is clearly the best choice for them as a 
young person. 
 
We also have a Kids First program which has been dealing with 
many of young at-risk kids by working together with their 
families. And it’s in this area that our new budget will 
supplement some of this work as it relates to fetal alcohol 
syndrome disorder by continuing our work in building to make 
sure that this very preventable malady can be dealt with by 
prevention rather than having to deal with a lot of the 
challenges that we have. 
 
I was also pleased in the last year to have substantial numbers, 
or substantial expansion and review of the cancer screening that 
we do. And we launched a new cancer, cervical cancer 
screening program. This is a kind of thing that ends up being, 
once again, something that’s not extremely public but it 
becomes a lifesaver for many, many people who have issues 
dealt with sooner and therefore have less suffering for 
themselves and also for their families. 
 
Another area that’s not always emphasized relates to our 
northern health strategy. We have a strategy where we’ve been 
working together with the Inter-Tribal Health Authority, Health 
Canada, our three northern health regions, and all of the people 
there working together have been dealing with some of the 
specific challenges of how you provide health care in the North. 
This is once again something that often is quite quiet but ends 
up doing a very, very effective job. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Now there are many things that I can say about health 
education, all of the kinds of things that are happening there. 
But I think I will just say that we’ve been working very hard 
with Learning and with all of our educational institutions to 
provide the kind of education that our young people need, and 
also so that we can provide the workers that we need in our 
system as it moves into the future. 
 
Now there have been a few announcements that relate to access 
to services that I think remind ourselves of and talk about some 
of the things that we’re going to do. Last September we 
announced the renal dialysis services for Moose Jaw and area, 
and they are working hard to get that in place and we hope to 
have the opening sometime this fall. We also had previously 
announced the renal dialysis in the Battlefords area, and I was 
pleased to be able to go up there and make that announcement 
and actually see the place in operation because they have been 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

able to get all their work done. 
 
Also we’ve been working hard on our whole area of access to 
surgery. And our Surgical Care Network was launched just 
about two years ago. It had a whole bunch of initiatives in it and 
many of these ones are now coming to fruition. 
 
Last summer we announced that we would have a standardized 
patient assessment process. This announcement was on July 23 
in Moose Jaw because Moose Jaw had been piloting this work. 
And Saskatchewan is the first province in Canada to implement 
a standardized patient assessment process for all surgical 
specialities and we are now using that assessment process. This 
is then . . . The scores that come out of the assessment are 
integrated into the province-wide surgical patient registry. 
 
As we have been able to get information — and this is a very 
difficult area to get all the information we need — we have 
been now moving forward to the announcement that was made 
two weeks ago around target time frames for surgery. We’re the 
first jurisdiction in Canada which has set out the goals that we 
have as to when people can get surgery and when they can 
expect to get the surgery. And that is something that is funded 
in this budget that I’m in support of, and we look forward to 
seeing how all of this moves forward to improve care for people 
in our province. 
 
Last year our Saskatchewan drug plan was expanded to include 
107 new products. This drug plan includes about 3,500 
products, and it subsidizes the cost of prescription drugs for 
about 113,000 families. 
 
Last year we were also able to expand our vaccination program 
— and were not able to do quite all the things that we want to 
do — but we were able to add the pertussis vaccine to our 
immunization program so approximately 16,000 grade 8 
students will receive protection against pertussis, or whooping 
cough. 
 
We’re looking forward to some of the federal money in this 
whole area that will allow us to further expand some of the 
things that we are doing. 
 
Last August we announced that we were able to have nutritional 
products in the drug plan, and this was a long-standing concern 
of ours that these kinds of expensive foods would be available 
for those people that are . . . needed them. There’s about 120 
people that’ll benefit from the program — most of them are 
children. And so we’re very pleased about that. 
 
Last May we were able to announce that diabetic supplies were 
also to be added to the drug plan and that we’re looking forward 
to having a full year of experience with that to see what other 
kinds of things that we can do. 
 
Now in health care it’s continually a challenge to obtain 
sufficient resources, and I want to, here in this legislature, 
personally thank all of my colleagues from . . . who are 
ministers in other departments who have had to make some 
fairly tough choices this year to make sure that we have 
sufficient funds in health care. 
 
The challenge is that we’ll be also being . . . grappling with the 

amounts of resources we have in health care. And what it means 
for all of us in Saskatchewan is that we have to look at, how do 
we use our dollars to the best and most efficient way? How do 
we make sure that care is there for everybody when they need 
it? How do we fit into a national scheme which clearly has a 
goal of providing health care for all of us? 
 
I look forward to representing Saskatchewan, along with the 
Minister of Finance, in the discussions that are going to be 
taking place over the next few months as we prepare the 
background for the Prime Minister and first ministers when they 
have their health care conference. And that’s clearly, clearly a 
challenge. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, just before I sit down, I want to talk a little 
more about books. In Regina we have some challenges with the 
library and all of the issues that are there, and I think it’s very 
important that the city council and the mayor, who are part of 
the whole process of sorting out what citizens want, listen very 
carefully to the citizens of Regina. And it’s not going to be an 
easy task to come up with a solution, but it’s very clear that 
books and access to books is an important part of what happens 
here in this city. 
 
So I encourage all people who are concerned about libraries and 
access to information to be part of this discussion and make 
sure that voices are heard which will allow us to build on a 
very, very strong record in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now just before I sit down I want to talk about one other 
institution in Saskatchewan which has been around now since 
1993; that’s called the Saskatchewan Book Awards. And I 
thought it would be a very nice way to end my speech and have 
a little bit of fun, to give a book to each of the members 
opposite, which is a book that’s won a prize in the 
Saskatchewan Book Awards. 
 
And so I thought I’d start out with the member from Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. I am going to give him 
the 1999 book by Ted Godwin called Messages From The Real 
World. 
 
Then for the member of Cannington, the Book of the Year in 
2003 is my gift to the member from Cannington, a book by 
Donald Ward called Nobody Goes To Earth Any More. 
 
For the member from Melville-Saltcoats, I’m going to be giving 
him a book by Bill Waiser called All Hell Can’t Stop Us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m giving these books to them figuratively, 
because I’m actually encouraging them to go and buy their own 
books so they can see what they are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosetown-Elrose is 
concerned about which book I would give him, and it just 
happens that he’s next on the list. And the book for him is a 
book that won the award for fiction this year by J. Jill Robinson 
called Residual Desire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next member to figuratively receive a book is 
the member from Cypress Hills, and it’s a very straightforward 
book by Michael Hetherton called Grasslands. 
 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

For the member from Martensville, the 2003 sort of . . . book 
that won the award for scholarly writing is a book by Judge 
Ross Green and Kearney Healy called Tough On Kids. I thought 
you would like that one. 
 
For the member from Canora-Pelly, the book of the year last 
year, 2002, was the book by Guy Vanderhaeghe called The Last 
Crossing and I thought that might be appropriate for him. 
 
And for the member from Biggar, a poetry book that won the 
poetry award in 2001. It’s a book by Ken Howe of Regina 
called Household Hints for the End of Time. And for the 
member of Estevan, a book that was written by Randy Burton’s 
wife, Katherine Lawrence, and won a first-book award; it’s 
called Ring Finger Left Hand. 
 
For the member from Kelvington-Wadena, a book that won an 
award in the year 2000, and it’s by Maggie Siggins, and it’s 
called In Her Own Time. For the member from Wood River, 
this is a book that won an award for children’s literature in the 
year 2000, by Beth Goobie; it’s called Before Wings. 
 
For the member from Carrot River Valley, a book that was a 
book of the year in ’99 by Tim Lilburn, To The River . And then 
for the book for the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, it’s by 
another Brenda, Brenda Baker; and it’s called The Maleness of 
God. The book for the member for Moosomin, it’s another book 
by Tim Lilburn; It’s called Living in the World As If It Were 
Home. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the reason I’m doing all of this is just to 
remind people of just the rich array of very interesting books 
that win awards in Saskatchewan out of the hundreds that are 
nominated each year. 
 
Now the book for the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood is 
a book of poetry by Hilary Clark called More Light. The book 
for the member from Batoche is a book, children’s literature, by 
David Richards, called The Lady at Batoche. I thought that 
would be appropriate for him. And for the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, a book of scholarly writing by William Stahl 
called God and the Chip. 
 
For the member from Lloydminster, a book published by the 
MacKenzie Art Gallery called The Man Who Waits and Sleeps 
While I Dream. And for the member of Saskatoon Silver 
Springs, this is a book that was a first-book award in 1998; it’s 
called The Lavender Child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the member from Saskatoon Northwest, it’s a 
book that won the award for fiction in 1997, In the Misleading 
Absence of Light. 
 
And then for the member from Saskatoon Southeast, a book by 
Anne Szumigalski called Sermons on Stones. And for the 
member from Kindersley, a book that won the award for first 
book in 1996 by David Little, called Catching the Wind in a 
Net. And for the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford, a book by 
Connie Gault called Inspection of a Small Village. 
 
And a book for the member from Melfort who’s the House 
Leader, won the award for non-fiction in 1995, it’s called, 
Connie Sampson, Buried in the Silence. And another, a book for 

the member from Humboldt, his seatmate the Deputy House 
Leader, won an award for publishing and it’s called Waiting for 
the Light. 
 
And the book for the member from, oh I guess it’s the from 
Saskatoon Northwest, the book of the year 1994 by Bonnie 
Burnard, Casino and Other Stories. 
 
And I think I’ve just got a couple more left, Mr. Speaker. The 
member from Thunder Creek gets a book that was quite an 
interesting one from 1994. It was the first book written by Terry 
Jordan, and the title of the book is, It’s a Hard Cow. 
 
And finally the last book, the book of the year in 1993, and this 
goes to the hon. master of words and the member from Arm 
River-Watrous, and that’s the book by Dianne Warren called 
Bad Luck Dog. 
 
So I’d like to encourage all members of the Assembly, all 
members of Saskatchewan to get on the Saskatchewan Book 
Awards Web site and go in and take a look at all of these 
incredible stories and ideas that have been prepared in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I would also like to say is that the budget that we’re 
presenting this year is part of what it means to be 
Saskatchewan, in the same way that all these books are part of 
what it means to be Saskatchewan, and that’s to be practical, 
prudent, and have a plan that works in the four-year and 10-year 
range. And that’s what we’re doing and so that’s why I’m 
speaking in support of this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
sitting here and becoming enlightened about all the past winners 
of awards in the literary world, and I was thinking of one I 
might use for the member who just finished spoken. But I 
thought that there was probably something more that I could 
come up with that maybe lent more to the debate on the budget. 
And then I started thinking about books, and of course I became 
concerned and started to think about the books that really 
concern me the most which are the budget books. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And I started to think that, you know, we all sit here as 
members on both sides of the House and our politics lends us to 
be partisan in the way we look at things, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had 
a life in politics — federal politics prior to this one — and I’ve 
watched seven other budgets come down from the federal 
government and this is my first in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I’ve noticed over the years in every budget that I’ve 
sat through or listened to or watched, and I’ve been on the 
opposition side on every one so that gives me only the one 
perspective, but what I’ve noticed on every budget that I’ve 
seen and especially those that come directly after a general 
election — especially those that follow an election — such as 
the one we listened to last week, they’re generally always filled 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

or at least they contain some sort of a new idea, some sort of 
plan for the future, some sort of an idea that that particular 
government might have for growth of the province or the 
country or even a municipality. 
 
And even when I listened to seven federal budgets, Mr. 
Speaker, even though I didn’t always agree with all those 
budgets, they generally always had something in them, even if 
it was a small thing. 
 
And I remember the one time the federal government came 
down with a budget and they introduced the synchrotron project 
for Saskatoon, which is one that we all certainly know about 
here in Saskatchewan and know about in this Chamber. 
 
You know even if it was just that one particular item that was 
good for this province that came from the federal government, it 
was something that you could work on. It was something that 
you could build on. It was something that you could look 
forward to in that you’d had some hope for the future for 
Saskatoon and for Saskatchewan and, indeed, in fact for the 
country. 
 
Sadly I didn’t see that . . . anything that would lead me to 
believe, Mr. Speaker, in last Wednesday’s budget that there was 
any real hope for the future. I didn’t pick any one small item out 
of that budget that I could take to my constituents in Carrot 
River Valley and say, hey you know what, I didn’t like this, I 
didn’t like this, or I didn’t like that, but I really liked something, 
some small aspect about that budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I didn’t see anything. It’s a budget that manages 
decline, and that word’s been used before — it’s not my idea. It 
really manages the decline of Saskatchewan. I see no hope from 
the NDP government that would make me think that we are 
going to move ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I talked to a constituent of mine on the weekend, as I was 
driving home to Carrot River Valley, and she may have put it 
the best when she said that Saskatchewan is now, in her words, 
in a state of emergency. 
 
And they come from a farm family, Mr. Speaker. They operate 
a farm at just in between Carrot River and Arborfield. They run 
really a successful outfitting business, and the outfitting 
business is really booming in northeastern Saskatchewan. 
They’re good folks; they’re hard workers. And here they are 
saying, you know, she says to me this is a state of emergency 
that we are in in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I don’t think it’s a far stretch that whether you’re in 
agriculture, whether you’re in business, whether you’re in 
labour, whether you’re a teacher or a doctor or work in the 
health care field or any other type of business or industry that 
you might be involved in, I think that everybody sort of felt the 
same way after last Wednesday’s budget. 
 
They felt betrayed. They felt as though the government had no 
plan for the future, for their particular business or particular 
career that they were involved in. And that’s what really is, 
what really is the sadness or the shame, you know, involved 
with the budget of last Wednesday. 
 

I think what this budget comes down to — maybe more so than 
any other that I’ve seen — is the one word, credibility. The 
members opposite are going to try to go out and convince the 
public that they’re right, and that they have a vision, that they 
don’t really have a deficit and that they balanced the budget on 
some fund that is either imaginary or real depending on how 
you look at it. So that’s going to be their approach. 
 
On our side of the House we’re going to be doing the same 
thing in opposite. We’re going to be trying to convince the 
public and the media and anybody else who will listen to us, 
frankly, that we’re right and that there is a deficit and that we 
are about a billion-plus dollars in larger debt than we had three 
years ago. And it comes down to who the people are going to 
believe on this budget. 
 
Well the reaction that has come out in the last few days since 
the budget has come out, it’s pretty simple who they believe — 
they believe the truth. The truth of the fact . . . the truth of the 
matter is, Mr. Speaker, is that we are a billion and a half dollars 
further in debt than we were three years ago. 
 
The truth is we . . . This government during the election 
campaign of last November stated very clearly that they had no 
intention, no desire, there was no mandate to raise the PST. 
Unless I heard wrong last Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, the PST 
went up one point. I mean there is a direct turnaround on what 
the government said in their election campaign. They talked 
about being . . . They talk about always, they talk about being 
the protectors of the people. This is the birthplace of medicare 
and this is the place that we will stand on the foundations that 
medicare was built on. And they speak a real good line, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it’s in this Chamber or in the public or in the 
media. 
 
And yet we know there are going to be hospital closures — 
more. They said it. They said they were going to change the 
way health care is delivered. They said there’s going to be 
change to long-term care beds and changes to hospitals. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, rightfully or wrongfully maybe we’re lucky, 
maybe we’re not, but those of us who live in Carrot River 
Valley are probably maybe going to be a bit lucky here because 
we don’t have any more hospitals to close. They closed ours 
already. Truly we’re down to two hospitals in Carrot River 
Valley, one in Nipawin and one in Tisdale. Well I think maybe 
they’ll leave . . . hopefully they’ll leave us alone. They’ve 
closed all the rest . . . Hudson Bay, I apologize — three. 
 
But I just, I’m waiting for the other shoe to drop, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m not sure what to expect next. We’ve seen the complete 
reversal on so many of the things and so many of the policies 
that the NDP government has come out with. 
 
I want to talk for a minute, Mr. Speaker, about agriculture. 
Obviously it’s a huge area of interest in Carrot River Valley. 
We have some tremendously good land, some very highly 
assessed land and some very rich land in Carrot River Valley. 
And we’re very proud of that and we’re proud of the fact that 
farmers in that area and right across Saskatchewan have been 
able over the last number of years to overcome world markets 
and world adversities and droughts and crop, droughts and 
grasshoppers and other issues that we’ve had to overcome. And 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

they’ve done a tremendously good job about it. 
 
Now we listen to the budget and they close rural service 
centres, Mr. Speaker. Again, we in Carrot River Valley don’t 
have a tremendous amount of rural service centres left or even 
in place. We did lose the one in Nipawin and that’s certainly 
going to be a factor. My question that I got from some of my 
constituents over the weekend was, who is going to, how are 
they going to service the crop insurance when the service 
centres are closed — the crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker. 
And what are they going to do with the buildings, the physical 
brick and mortar that’s going to be left, in my case, in Nipawin? 
What’s going to happen to that rural service centre building? I’d 
like to have an answer to that, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not getting 
one. 
 
We talk about, you know, the CFIP program. And the Minister 
of Agriculture, you know, stood up last week and talked about 
how wonderful a job that he and his government had done as it 
relates to agriculture. Our member, the critic for Agriculture, 
last week, I believe it was, stood up and asked some questions 
about CFIP, and the minister said that that was it, there was no 
more money to put in. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, the government made commitments to the 
farmers, to agriculture, to Saskatchewan that they are not . . . 
they are reneging on, Mr. Speaker, less than six months from 
the time they made those promises. And that’s what people are 
going to remember. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you talk to people about the budget — and 
we all do of course on the weekends and when we’re not in 
session here — I don’t believe, I don’t believe it’s the things 
that they don’t physically see that are going to affect people as 
much as the things they do physically see. 
 
And the things that, what I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker, is that 
you can talk about a 1 per cent increase in PST, and I know it’s 
hard on business, I know it’s hard on labour, I know it’s hard on 
taxpayers. It puts pressure on everybody in this province. But 
what it really comes down . . . You don’t see that. It’s not a 
tangible thing. 
 
What you see though, Mr. Speaker, is when you want to go to 
the park on the long weekend in May and you can’t go because 
it’s not open. That’s what you see. You see the rural service 
centres that you’re going to drive by and you’ve been driving 
by for years and years — the ones in Davidson and Outlook and 
Nipawin and I could go on and on and on, Mr. Speaker — and 
they’re closed. On the May 1 they’ll be closed. 
 
Those are things that you tangibly see. And those are the things 
that will remind the taxpayers and the voters of this province 
every day that they can no longer — and perhaps never could 
— trust the government of the day. Those are the things that 
they’re going to see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Friday my colleague from Saskatoon Silver 
Springs in members’ statements talked about the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) Commerce department in their 
government studies class put together a program — it’s really a 
mock government — where they come up with and they 
produced budgets. There were three groups. And I was there 

that day as well, Mr. Speaker, and I listened very carefully, but 
there was three groups of students. Mr. Speaker, I have with me 
today copies of those budgets that I would like for anybody to 
have a look at if they’re interested in it. 
 
What I found tremendously overwhelming in listening to those 
young people for the three hours that I was there is the fact that 
a very few people, less than two dozen in each group, with a 
budget of zero and five weeks of time put together, in my mind, 
some awfully good ideas. They presented a budget that 
probably would, in my opinion at least, politically would 
certainly rival the one that we saw last Wednesday from the 
government across the way. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That wouldn’t take much. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — That’s true, it wouldn’t take much. But the 
difference, Mr. Speaker, the point I’m trying to make here is 
that we had less than two dozen people, with a budget of 
nothing, in five weeks time put together a budget that I think is 
better than the one that took the government millions of dollars, 
hundreds of people, the whole year to put together. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s no comparison in my mind. The Minister of 
Industry was there that day. I know he was in the, in the 
audience as well, and I hope he paid attention to the budgets 
that came through with these three young groups. The politics 
of those budgets, Mr. Speaker, were certainly ones that are near 
and dear to my type of politics. 
 
And that got me to thinking, Mr. Speaker, you know, that 
maybe the NDP government has a plan. Maybe their plan is, 
maybe their plan is that when they see all these bright young 
people that we’ve educated in our universities coming forward 
with what I consider politically sound ideas, such as the ones 
that were put forward in their budgets, maybe they want these 
young people to leave the province. Maybe they want them to 
go to Alberta or to the United States or to other provinces so 
that they never have to worry about them down the road. 
 
Because these are the people, Mr. Speaker, the young people 
that are talking with a vision. These are 19- and 20- and 21- and 
22-year-old young people who have an idea, who have a vision, 
who have a plan for the province to grow Saskatchewan. And 
their budgets, Mr. Speaker, are full of good, solid, sound 
political ideas. They are. So maybe I’m, maybe that’s . . . the 
only people the NDP government would like to remain in 
Saskatchewan are their supporters so that they’ll be in power 
forever. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? I think the people 
are going to trick them. I think they’re going to send them a real 
strong message in the next, at the very first opportunity that 
they get. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to . . . And it may not be very long, as 
one of my colleagues just mentioned. Mr. Speaker, I wanted to 
talk for just a couple of minutes about SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management), about the 
Department of Environment. Obviously again, if you live in 
Carrot River Valley, SERM issues are important because we 
have the forestry, we have a really strong outfitters business. 
And I think it’s just . . . we’re really on the edge of some 
excellent things. 
 
But when I, when I got the news release dated last Wednesday, 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

March 31 from the Department of Environment . . . I wanted to 
quote to the House, and this tells me a lot about what they’re, 
how much the government really thinks or believes in or trusts 
the forest fringe area. And I want to quote from that, from that 
news release. And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The province’s wildfire management program is being 
reorganized to focus protection on the things that are most 
important to people, and to allow fire to play a more 
natural role in the forest. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what I take that to mean is that we’re going to let 
the forests burn when they start. And again, that’s supported by 
evidence of downsizing in forest fighting on the ground forces 
— with the closure of SERM offices; with the downsizing of 
people who are with SERM personnel in general, who really do 
play a huge, important role in the forest. 
 
I think back to when the forest fires were burning just outside of 
Nipawin two years ago, or Prince Albert — both two years ago, 
Mr. Speaker. They had major forest fires, and we know that had 
not people stepped in to control those they would’ve turned out 
to be far more disastrous than even they were. And I guess it’s 
just another example of how much, how much the NDP 
government really cares about rural Saskatchewan in general. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talked about . . . I’m involved, my critic 
responsibility is Corrections and Public Safety, Mr. Speaker. I 
have been visiting over the last number of weeks and months 
facilities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Last week I went to visit the Regina correctional facility and 
some of it’s getting to be 90 to 100 years old, Mr. Speaker. 
There was nothing in the budget unfortunately that would lead 
me to believe that we have any change or hope for the 
correctional system in Saskatchewan. 
 
We know we’re in desperate need, desperate need for a new 
jail, a new correctional facility right here in Regina. And I 
didn’t see anything in the budget. That concerned me, Mr. 
Speaker, because I know that I have, we have some ideas, our 
party has some plans for what I consider to be a solid, much 
more solid system of corrections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the outset what I talked about was the idea of 
credibility and who the people are going to believe when this 
budget all shakes loose. 
 
And finally the last thing I wanted to speak about is, and I just 
wanted to touch on this, and I touched on it a few minutes ago, 
is about in the area of health care. And I think that for members 
opposite — whether they live in the cities of Saskatoon or 
Regina or whether they are a rural member or wherever they 
come from — I think they should think back to all the times, the 
hundreds, the thousands of times over the last years that they 
have stood up and said, we are the protectors of the people; we 
are the founders of health care; this is the birthplace of health 
care. 
 
And when they go to make the decision to close one more 
hospital, they should keep those things in mind. We know that 
that’s coming. We know that’s coming, Mr. Speaker. I do not 
believe any good, thinking NDP MLA could possibly allow the 

closure, the closure of one more hospital in Saskatchewan, 
whether it be rural or urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what this thing boils down to. It boils down to who you’re 
going to believe and what you’re going to do about it. That’s 
the two things that this budget comes down to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the evidence is clear that the government has betrayed us 
and that they have been not forthwith with the complete truth in 
their campaign of last fall, and I believe they’re going to pay the 
political price for it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Obviously from the words I have said today is that I will be 
opposing the budget, and I will be standing on behalf of my 
constituents in Carrot River Valley to proudly say that we 
oppose last week’s budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is a real pleasure to be able to enter into this debate on the 
provincial budget that was released on Wednesday. 
 
This provincial budget is an important budget. It is one that sets 
a new direction for Saskatchewan. It is one that will put us on a 
path to financial sustainability. It is one which addresses the 
priorities Saskatchewan people have identified, namely health 
care, education, and agriculture. Mr. Speaker, this budget is a 
good budget for Saskatchewan people and for our 
Saskatchewan economy. It is a budget which will take into 
account the balance that we need to strike in this House 
between financial sustainability and the demands for additional 
services. 
 
I enjoyed listening to many of the speeches in the House over 
the last several days of debate. I find that there’s a common 
theme, at least in the speeches by the members opposite. And 
that theme is this: spend more, tax less, complain a lot, offer 
few solutions. That is the approach that those members opposite 
have provided. 
 
The member from Carrot River Valley has just stood up and 
presented an interesting presentation to this Assembly on his 
views. His views, simply encapsulated, are spend more money. 
Not only just spend more money generally, spend more money 
on his particular issues of interest. Not a word about how we 
deal with financial sustainability across the province; not a 
word about how we deal with the revenue balance. He says, oh 
the PST increase, you know it’s an increase; what I’m worried 
about is how you spend more money on hospitals in my riding 
and how you spend more on my particular constituents. 
 
The member opposite stands up and says that there was nothing 
in this budget to deal with the $95 million expenditure to build 
more jails. These members opposite stand forward in this House 
and they bring a long list of grievances and they bring a long 
list of spending. And they bring nothing in terms of new ideas 
or credibility to the debate on this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it is 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

intellectually dishonest for the members opposite to petition in 
this House every day for a spending increase, to petition as they 
did against sales tax increases, to stand in this House in 
question period and talk about how they disagree with where 
government’s going because we are recklessly spending and 
talk about how there is a deficit in the province, and then turn 
around and condemn the government for having brought in 
expenditure management to deal with it, and to draw forward a 
long list of demands on behalf of themselves, their party, and 
their constituents for more services. 
 
It is not an approach that’s sustainable. And the members 
opposite, I think, owe their constituents and the members of this 
House more than that. I think it is unfortunate, I think it is very 
unfortunate that these members come forward with such 
darkness in their heart and their soul when it comes to 
understanding what the people of Saskatchewan had asked for. I 
think that it is a shame that they come forward with no creative 
solutions, no ideas on how to move this province forward other 
than trite suggestions in terms of spending more here on each of 
their critic areas, in each of their constituencies, and taxing less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no doubt, no doubt where they 
got their playbook from. And it doesn’t surprise me that it’s 
under this new Leader of the Opposition, the member for Swift 
Current, who learned all about budgeting when he was part of 
Grant Devine’s government, that they would come forward with 
exactly the same kind of plan that would see them pull taxes 
down and see them increase spending. 
 
Now how is it, Mr. Speaker, how is it that the members 
opposite believe that we can provide a sustainable financial 
framework over the four-year period when we see them calling 
for increased expenditures and lower taxes? Mr. Speaker, I do 
not understand how the members opposite can do that. And they 
have been short on solutions to bring forward in this debate. 
They call forward for more spending and they offer nothing in 
terms of solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand why the members are 
disappointed. I can understand why they are frustrated. I can 
understand why they are angry. But I cannot understand why 
they do not do more service for their constituents and bring 
forward workable alternatives and solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk today and into the evening tonight 
about some of the very good news items that are in this budget 
and some of the things that we’ve taken a look at to move 
Saskatchewan forward; why . . . how we have acted as a cabinet 
and as a government to help bring the budget back into balance. 
I want to talk about some of the difficulties that we face, both in 
terms of demands for increased expenditures, but also in terms 
of some of the disappointment that I know we all share in terms 
of the revenue parameters that we have to deal with and the 
pressure that it puts on Saskatchewan people and on our 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget was a difficult budget because it was 
put together based on tough choices. The members opposite 
will say every single choice we made was the wrong one, but 
they have not identified what the right choices are. All they 
have done is complain about the options that we have picked. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this budget contains record spending in health 
care. It contains record spending in education. It contains 
increases for agriculture. And it does so in a way that rebalances 
the spending agenda for this government. 
 
More than half of the government departments have either seen 
no increase or have seen a cut in their expenditures so that we 
can refocus our expenditure priorities on those priority areas the 
Saskatchewan people have identified. 
 
People have told us that they value the health care services and 
that they want more service there. People have told us that they 
value what is happening in education and they want to make 
sure young people have the opportunities that they should have 
available to them. 
 
People throughout urban and rural Saskatchewan have told us 
that they understand the pressure that is happening in terms of 
the agricultural industry, and the need for us to make sure that 
we have put additional resources in to deal with the crisis, 
particularly around BSE. Mr. Speaker, we have presented a 
budget, the Minister of Finance has presented a budget that 
addresses these initiatives. 
 
The fact of the budget is that in order to deal with expenditure 
increases, we need to do two things — we need to refocus the 
spending of the government, which means cuts in other areas, 
and we have needed to go and increase the revenue of the 
province. 
 
These two issues, I can tell you, have been difficult for the 
government to deal with. It causes a great deal of concern for us 
as we have to look at laying off civil servants, that we 
understand that the layoff notices that have been issued are 
troubling because these affect real people, these affect ordinary 
families. 
 
To the members opposite, these people may be as they, you 
know, talk about . . . The Leader of the Opposition, former 
leader of the opposition would refer to them in the most 
unfortunate terms. To us, we understand that civil servants 
provide good service to Saskatchewan people, and it obviously 
pains us when we need to reprioritize spending in order to 
support the core services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have done that with a heavy heart in terms of 
reducing the number of employees in the government. And it is 
difficult to know that several hundred people have lost their 
jobs as a result of the decisions that we have made. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is the responsibility of those members who 
sit on the Treasury Board benches, of those members who serve 
in the government to make the choices in terms of how we can 
move the budget in a direction that focuses on sustainability and 
that emphasizes the key priorities Saskatchewan people have 
identified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we talk about these issues, and tonight I notice 
that we are nearing our recess for dinner, I want to take up 
tonight the discussion that we have around particularly why we 
have put an emphasis on health care, what it is we are doing in 
education, our agenda for growth in terms of the provincial 
economy, and how this provincial budget moves that forward. 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

The members opposite have not yet provided us with any 
solutions. They have not yet provided us with anything other 
than trite slogans and an agenda which is as paper-thin as their 
blank policy statements are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that it is now being near the hour of 5 
o’clock that I would take my seat and I would prefer to resume 
. . . Mr. Speaker, the advice that I have received is that it is, 
according to the clock, 5 o’clock. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it being near the 
hour of 5 p.m., this House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................337 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................338 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................338 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................338 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................338 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................357 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................357 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Forum to Explore Saskatchewan’s Economic Potential 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................338 
 Special Olympics Western Canadian Curling Championship 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................338 
 Senior Couple Reunited 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................339 
 Making Education and Training a Priority 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................339 
 Junior Achievement Awards in Saskatoon 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................340 
 Nobel Prize Winner Donates Money to Luther College 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................340 
 National Wildlife Week 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................340 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Emergency Room Issues in Saskatoon 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................341 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................341 
 Whistle-Blower Protection 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................342 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................342 
 Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................342 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................342 
 Utility Rates 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................343 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................343 
 Opening of Provincial Parks 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................344 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................344 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 201 — The Whistleblower Protection Act 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................346 
TABLING OF CORRESPONDENCE 
 Board of Internal Economy 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................346 
MOTION 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................346 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................347 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................347 
 
 



 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................347 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................350 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................355 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................358 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................362 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................365 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................368 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


