















































Hansard: April 08, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 16A  THURSDAY, APRIL 8, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 465 
 April 8, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to stand and present this petition on 
behalf of constituents from the southern part of the riding of 
Cypress Hills. And the petition’s prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in that area, and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by constituents from the 
communities of Frontier and Claydon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed from members of the Elrose-Rosetown constituency 
regarding recent changes to the crop insurance program that 
result in a large premium increase for insured farmers while 
overall coverage is reduced. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Lucky Lake and Beechy, and I am pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise in the Assembly with a petition from residents of my 
constituency who are extremely concerned about the condition 
of Highway 43. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Vanguard, 
Regina, Swift Current, and as far away as Sherwood Park, 
Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to the possible reduction of services at 
Davidson, Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at their current level 
of service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, 
emergency, and doctor services available, as well as lab, 
public health, home care, long-term care services available 
to users from the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Hawarden, Davidson, and 
Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the poor cellphone service in 
their area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the regions 
encompassed in the constituency of Biggar. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens from west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with the care for senior citizens. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 
from Unity, Dodsland, and Cut Knife. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
no. 63, 65, 69, 72, and no. 76. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker presents the 
second report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
which is hereby tabled. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Regina Douglas Park, that the second report of 
the Standing Committee on House Services be now concurred 
in. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
and seconded by the member for Regina Douglas Park, that the 
second report of the Standing Committee on House Services be 
now concurred in. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Justice: for the fiscal year 
of 2003, what was the fee paid by the coroner’s office to 
Spectrum Transfer Company per transfer in the Regina 
area? 

 
As well, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I have another 
question that I shall give notice on day 21, as well, ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Justice: for the fiscal year 
of 2001 what was the total number of transfers done by 
Spectrum Transfer Company in the Regina area? 

 
I also have for 2002 and 2003 the same questions. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Health: what will be the 
anticipated cost to change the names of all hospitals in the 
Heartland Health Region, and is it expected to occur in 
this fiscal year? 
 

Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
an honour and a privilege to introduce 45 grade 6, 7, and 8 
students from Bruno. They’re seated in the east gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Neil Finch, Mr. 
Jeff Marshak, and Mr. Dave Willenborg, as well as two 
chaperones, Wendy Thiel, and Val Kirtzinger. 
 
So I would like everyone in the Assembly to welcome them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the members I’d like to introduce a 
constituent of mine sitting in the west gallery, Linda Brogden. 
 
Linda and I met up about five or six years ago I guess, in the 
’99 campaign, and really I have got to know Linda fairly well 
and I think her . . . me and really of . . . I really appreciate her 
advice and her help that she’s given me over the last five or six 
years. It’s solid advice. And her sons farm in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency, about 20 miles southeast. So I’d 
like everyone to welcome Linda here today with a hand of 
applause. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

Observance of Passover and Easter 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For two of the 
world’s great religions, Christianity and Judaism, the most 
sacred time of the year comes with the spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past Monday was the beginning of Passover, 
the eight-day observance commemorating the exodus of the 
Jewish slaves from Egypt. It is a special time for people of the 
Jewish faith marking as it does of the liberation of the children 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

of Israel from bondage. This celebration emphasizes freedom 
and tolerance of other people and has themes of rebirth, 
deliverance, redemption, and forgiveness. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for Christians, tomorrow is of course Good 
Friday followed by Easter Sunday, when many will celebrate 
the miracle of life out of death that is at the heart of the 
Christian faith. And Easter too has themes of rebirth, 
deliverance, redemption, and forgiveness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we prepare for our traditional spring break, it 
would do us no harm to take with us the central messages of 
this season as it derives from the shared history of these two 
faiths. Out of suffering comes wisdom, out of sorrow comes 
joy, and out of death comes new life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Easter Celebration 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again we find 
ourselves welcoming spring and all those warm and wonderful 
things that come with it. 
 
But surely, Mr. Speaker, it’s all in our best interest to remember 
that great prelude to spring, Easter. Mr. Speaker, while most of 
us can remember many of our Easters filled with memories of 
hunting for some carefully hidden chocolate eggs or finding that 
special Easter present so lovingly hidden by our parents or 
grandparents, most of us will also remember the feelings that 
accompanied those events. There was a promise of renewal and 
rebirth of hope. And what better time, Mr. Speaker, to talk 
about hope and the promise of better things to come than at this 
most joyous time of the year? 
 
As millions of people around the world flock to see The Passion 
of the Christ, I would ask all members to recall that it is this 
exact time of year that was depicted in this film. And as 
millions of people are reminded about the last 12 hours of 
Christ’s life, I’m also asking all members to recall the reasons 
for his suffering and the salvation that we are offered by his 
death, burial, and resurrection. 
 
To everyone wherever you may be this Easter weekend, as you 
celebrate with family and friends through special Easter 
services, may you know joy, peace, renewal, and the beautiful 
light of God’s love for all of us. To our Orthodox community 
celebrating Easter at this time as well, Chrystos Voskres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Invitation to Support the Budget 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The budget we are 
voting on today is a budget about priorities and values. It is 
about making conscious choices and taking action. It’s a budget 
that places a high priority on the services that matter most to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have told us they want 
quality health care to be our number one priority, and this 
budget has increased health care spending by 6.3 per cent to 
almost $2.7 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of this province have placed a high priority on 
learning. This budget will provide a 3.8 per cent increase in 
funding for education for our young people, including more 
dollars for K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) schools and more 
funding for post-secondary education institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that will provide an increase in 
funding for municipalities, create 200 new child care spaces, 
and provide more dollars for new and enhanced programs to 
prevent and diagnose fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This budget will invest $295 million to fix the roads and build 
better highways. It’s a budget that will invest in agriculture and 
affordable housing and in job training and creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget reflects the priorities of the people of 
Saskatchewan. These are the priorities of the people on this side 
of the House and they should be the priorities of the members 
opposite as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we invite all members to stand up today in support 
of this budget and in support of the priorities and values of the 
people of this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Opening of Provincial Parks 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
probably all of us in this Chamber at one point or another have 
seen the classic cartoon, How the Grinch Stole Christmas. We 
also remember that at the end of that program how the Grinch’s 
heart grew and he gave everyone in Whoville back their 
Christmas. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan for the past week 
we’ve been watching another cartoon play out, only one not 
quite so funny. Here in Saskatchewan we’ve been witness to the 
premier who stole summer. 
 
In this cartoon, to save the equivalent of one-three-hundredth 
that the NDP lost in the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) fiasco, the Premier tried to steal part of 
summer by announcing that parks would remain closed for an 
extra month this year — ruining many people’s vacations and 
jeopardizing the livelihoods of business people who depend on 
the provincial parks. 
 
Well now we see the Premier may be backing down on this 
ludicrous notion. On this one issue alone the Premier seems to 
have been forced to grow some senses. While the Premier 
probably now expects Saskatchewan residents to fall to their 
knees in thanks of his benevolence, I think he’ll be 
disappointed. I think every time Saskatchewan residents fork 
over their wiener roast tax and are forced to pay more for their 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

summer ale, they will be remembering this Premier and the time 
he tried to steal summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Recognition for Downtown Regina 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to share 
some great news with the Legislative Assembly. Regina 
downtown in the heart of my constituency, Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, was recently recognized both locally and 
nationally for its great shops, dining, entertainment, and vibrant 
public spaces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the April issue of Flare magazine reported on a 
tour of great indoor shopping spots across the country. They 
paid homage to the Cornwall Centre and went on to say: 
 

We also love Regina’s two less-traditional approaches to 
the mall: Old City Hall Mall has shops in a historic 
building beneath the city’s famous Clock Tower, and the 
pedestrian-only block along Scarth Street is home to the 
. . . Frederick W. Hill Mall . . . 
 

Downtown was also named locally as the best area in town to 
shop by the prairie dog magazine readers in their best of Regina 
survey for 2004. In addition, multiple downtown businesses 
were named best in their own individual categories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, downtown Regina with its cosmopolitan mix of 
retail shops, specialty boutiques, culture, entertainment, fine 
dining, great employers, casual cafes, pubs, coffee houses, and 
everything in between is truly one of Saskatchewan’s premier 
destinations. Congratulations to all the people, businesses, and 
organizations that make downtown Regina the best place to 
work, shop, live, and play. 
 
Special congratulations to Tracy Fahlman and the hard-working 
crew at the Regina improvement district, Regina Downtown, 
and to the prairie dog magazine on another excellent best of 
Regina survey and on their recent relocation to the F.W. Hill 
Mall. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Conditions Facing Saskatchewan Seniors 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the first half of 
this last century in this province that is mostly an agrarian 
province and we had people that had settled throughout rural 
Saskatchewan, these families, Mr. Speaker, lived in very 
primitive conditions: no running water, no electricity, no 
telephones. They picked rocks, they broke the land, they 
grubbed the land. They built schools, they went to school — at 

least uphill one way and sometimes both ways, Mr. Speaker. 
They worked, they saved, and they dreamed. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, these people are retired. Many of their 
children have been chased out of this province by socialist 
regimes. Almost all their grandchildren, Mr. Speaker, are 
unfortunately elsewhere. These pioneers, Mr. Speaker, are 
coming to the end of their time — a time that should be spent in 
a caring, appreciative environment. This Premier and this NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government is now taking away one of 
their last locations — long-term care beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what a shame. Mr. Speaker, what a tragedy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 

Good News from the Meadow Lake Constituency 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After listening 
to that I want to cheer you up. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
share with the Assembly this good news from the constituency 
of Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council along with two 
other First Nation organizations, the Prince Albert Development 
Council and the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation, has formed the 
Western First Nations Hospitality Limited Partnership. 
 
The purpose of this partnership, Mr. Speaker, is the purchase of 
three Super 8 Motels located in Meadow Lake, Prince Albert, 
and Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, this is an important partnership for 
the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. It will help build their asset 
base and provide benefits down the road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while looking for areas in which to diversify, the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council saw this opportunity to become 
involved in the potentially very lucrative hospitality industry, 
and they helped create this partnership to take advantage of this 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members of the House will join me in 
congratulating the members of the Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council and in wishing them and their partners every success in 
this and all of their future business endeavours. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Commitments Made by Government 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
there were a number of people in this province, there are a 
number of people in this province who were betrayed by the 
Premier and his budget, who couldn’t be here this morning, 
who couldn’t set up any kind of a picket line or a protest. 
 
Because the Premier promised to cut taxes in the last election, 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

and in this budget he’s raising taxes. He promised property tax 
relief and there was none in the budget. He promised to help 
rural Saskatchewan and this budget launches a vicious attack on 
rural Saskatchewan. The Premier promised to look after seniors 
and his budget will kick them out of their long-term care beds 
and increase the costs of their hearing aids, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There were a lot of people who were betrayed by the NDP in 
this budget. They weren’t able to be here this morning. They 
weren’t able to participate in a picket line or any kind of a 
protest. 
 
Will the Premier listen to these people as well? Will he keep his 
promise to those who couldn’t be here this morning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, later this day we will 
conduct an important vote surrounding the budget that is now 
before the legislature. In that budget vote which I will stand and 
proudly vote for, in that vote we will provide 160 million new 
dollars for the provision of health care in this province. We will 
provide in the neighbourhood of 45 millions of dollars for the 
support of education in this province. We will provide in the 
neighbourhood of $300 million for the rebuilding and new 
construction of our roadways and highways in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will see increases in support for farm families 
through increasing support in agriculture. We will see graduate 
tax credits for those young people who are graduating in our 
province. We’re going to see the formation of Green Teams. 
We’re going to see, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this budget, the 
formation of the Young Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan 
foundation. We’ll see as a result of this budget, Mr. Speaker, 10 
million more dollars for our municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is providing for the priorities of Saskatchewan 
people, and I and this caucus will proudly support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is obviously feeling the 
heat. He has changed his government’s position, changed his 
mind on three different issues in the last 24 hours alone. 
 
He’s changed his position on health care premiums; he was 
against them, he was for them, now he’s against them again — 
we think. He’s changed his position on shortening summer; we 
expect an announcement on that a little bit later. And this 
morning, faced with the prospect, faced with the prospect of 
crossing a picket line, he’s appointed a mediator in the 
SaskPower dispute. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a good start. It’s a good start. But this 
NDP budget is chock full of other broken promises. The 
question to the Premier is simple one: will he keep the promises 
he made to the Saskatchewan people in the election and since 
the election? Will he be true to his word, Mr. Speaker? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the term of this 
government the campaign commitments that we made will be 
the guiding principles and will be fulfilled in this term of 
government, Mr. Speaker. You can make no mistake about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The principal commitment, the principal 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, to build a green and prosperous 
economy; the commitment to provide the best quality public 
health care, publicly administered and delivered in this 
province; the commitment to open this province for its next 
generation, Mr. Speaker, are the commitments of this 
government. And those commitments will be fulfilled. 
 
Now I ask the Leader of the Opposition, what about his 
commitments? What about his commitments? Where are they 
today? What about his commitment to cut the corporate capital 
tax in half? What about his commitment? What about his 
commitment to get rid of small business? Where are those 
commitments today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
You know, they’re so ashamed of that kind of commitment, 
they’re so ashamed they have simply wiped them off their Web 
site. They’ve simply wiped them off their policy manual. 
They’re a group of men and women with absolutely no policy, 
no idea, and no future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
Thank you for that standing ovation to my colleagues opposite. 
Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about, let’s talk about those guiding 
principles . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I stand again, and I hope that you make that 
applause. Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the guiding principles 
promised by this NDP government before this election. 
 
They walked around this province and they knocked on doors in 
communities all over Saskatchewan and told voters to vote 
NDP because they would cut taxes; not raise taxes, Mr. 
Speaker, cut taxes. But once again the NDP snuck back into 
power and as soon as that occurred, the NDP broke his promise, 
and the Premier broke his promise and raised the PST 
(provincial sales tax) by $135 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last 24 hours this Premier has changed his 
mind about shortening summer, he’s changed his mind about 
health care premiums, and he’s changed his mind about 
SaskPower workers. 
 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

Will the Premier change his mind and scrap the NDP’s plan to 
raise the PST? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, during last fall’s election the 
NDP promised to protect health care, but now this Premier and 
his NDP government say hospital beds will close. This NDP 
budget says that whole hospitals will close, and as a result the 
longest surgical waiting lists in Canada will get even longer. 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP didn’t campaign for that, and 
Saskatchewan families didn’t vote for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier change his mind and support 
health care instead of gutting it? Will the Premier reverse his 
decision to close hospitals and hospital beds in this devastating 
provincial budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the budget that we’re 
bringing forward here as a government reflects the priorities of 
the people of Saskatchewan, and that reflection shows that 
health care is the number one priority. And we are going to be 
using the dollars that we receive in that budget in a careful, 
efficient manner to make sure that we are getting the best value 
for all the dollars that we spend, because that’s what 
Saskatchewan people want us to do. They want us to go and 
meet the needs that they have but they want us to do it in a 
careful way. That’s what we do on this side of the House and 
that’s what we’re going to continue to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Closure of Long-Term Care Beds 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. During last fall’s election, the NDP 
tried to scare our senior citizens into voting NDP. 
 
The Premier and his NDP candidates told senior citizens not to 
vote for the Saskatchewan Party because they would take away 
medicare. Mr. Speaker, that is one of the most despicable 
election scare tactics used by the NDP in that election, Mr. 
Speaker — despicable. Unfortunately, some seniors believed 
the NDP’s campaign mistruths. 
 
Now the Premier is presenting a budget that promises to close 
long-term care beds and kick seniors out of their beds in 

communities across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier change his mind about evicting 
senior citizens? Will the NDP reverse its budget decision to 
close long-term care beds in communities across this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of 
the House have a great deal of respect for our elders. We also 
know that they have much wisdom and they think very 
carefully about who they would support for government. And 
we very much appreciate the support that they provided to this 
government in the last election and in many elections because 
we know that they have looked at and they understand where 
these people who are opposite to us come from. And they were 
burned badly during the ’80s and they don’t ever want to be 
part of that again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 

Fees for Hearing Aids 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. The NDP budget targeted 
a number of seniors by hiking a number of fees including those, 
Mr. Speaker, for hearing tests, hearing aids, and fittings. 
 
It’s not really a big surprise, Mr. Speaker. The NDP didn’t want 
the senior citizens to even hear how bad their budget is. 
 
Will the Minister of Health reverse the NDP’s decision to target 
seniors by raising fees for hearing aids so that seniors can hear 
just how badly they were betrayed by this NDP budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
have asked us to look at everything that we do, and examine 
how and where we can find resources to provide needed health 
care across the province. We looked at all of the kinds of fees 
that are there, we looked at other aspects of what’s happening in 
health care, and we will continue to that because that’s what 
people in Saskatchewan have asked us to do. 
 
(10:30) 
 
This is part clearly of a national trend and an international trend 
where people are concerned about how much health care costs. 
And we are going to make sure that we use all of the dollars 
that we receive in our health care budget to the best effect 
possible, and we will ask people to pay a little more here and 
there if necessary. But what we want to do is make sure that 
they have long-term health care on a sustainable basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Support for Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Today the NDP will stand in the legislature and vote in support 
of a budget that punishes and attacks rural Saskatchewan. It’s a 
budget that closes rural hospitals and long-term care beds. It’s a 
budget that shortchanges rural municipalities. It’s a budget that 
closes rural service centres. And it’s a budget that increases 
farm fuel taxes. Mr. Speaker, that is not what the NDP 
campaigned on in the last election. 
 
Will the Premier stop his attack on rural Saskatchewan? Will he 
stand in his place today and scrap this devastating NDP budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
stood firmly behind rural Saskatchewan’s agriculture in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, for many years now the opposition has 
tried to drive a wedge between urban and rural Saskatchewan, 
and it’s not going to work. 
 
We have shown our commitment in rural Saskatchewan with 
$130 million last year over budget to meet the needs for farmers 
in this province; $55 million to meet the BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy) crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are fixing the roads in rural Saskatchewan on a 
basis that will help build the economy in rural Saskatchewan. 
There is not a leg for them to stand on when they talk about this 
government not supporting rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Education Portion of Property Taxes 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier told delegates at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities) convention that the status quo was not 
on as far as property taxes were concerned. The Premier 
claimed he understood the burden the education portion of 
property taxes places on property owners, and he made a 
personal commitment to change the status quo. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this budget is void of any relief for property 
taxpayers. Given that this NDP government appears to be 
reversing its decision on opening the provincial parks, will the 
Premier honour his commitment to property owners throughout 
the province and reduce the burden of education tax on 
property? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget contains $28 
million worth of new money to take pressure off the property 

taxes — $28 million. The members opposite should know today 
that when they stand in this House and vote against this budget, 
they are voting against that new money for property tax relief. 
 
The members on that side should know that they are voting 
against new money for school capital in their communities. The 
members opposite should understand that they have come 
forward in this time period and provided nothing, absolutely 
nothing that deals with their commitments or how they can 
operationalize and move forward with a solution on property 
taxes. Not a single positive solution. 
 
This government has solutions, this government has the money, 
this government has the support of Saskatchewan people, and 
we will move forward in that direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Provincial Income Tax Credits 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Finance. The NDP’s election platform made it very clear that 
they were going to index provincial income tax credits to keep 
pace with inflation. Now we find out again that when the NDP 
says one thing, it really means the opposite. 
 
This budget of betrayal de-indexed provincial income tax 
credits, which means provincial income tax is really going up. 
Will the Finance minister today take the lead from his 
counterpart in the Department of the Environment and take 
steps to reverse his decision to raise taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this budget is about 
supporting the priorities of Saskatchewan people. We 
understand when we listen to people that the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people are increased support for health care, for 
education, for important programs and services such as those 
that are being provided by the Department of Agriculture. That 
is what we are doing with this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We recognize that difficult decisions had to be made to provide 
for this support, but we remain committed to the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Fire Permit Fee 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it looks like the NDP has listened to part of the 
message on its ridiculous parks policy. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
wanted to shorten summer but they didn’t get away with it. 
Thanks to the tremendous pressure from the public and the 
Saskatchewan Party opposition, it now appears the NDP is 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

going to back down and open the parks on time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the NDP has decided not to shorten 
summer, will the Premier stand in his place and do the right 
thing and cancel the foolish wiener roast tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, our goal in 
Environment is to ensure that we have a sustainable park 
system for the people here in Saskatchewan. So we have heard 
the feedback from people this week about the park openings 
and we’ve heard them loud and clear. So this afternoon I will be 
making an announcement. 
 
But what we’ve also heard is that people expect when you use a 
resource you should pay for it. That’s a fair thing. And this is 
what happens over here; they say they want to get things for 
free and that it will be there — lots of stuff. But who will pay 
for these things? 
 
And so this is a sustainable thing, a sustainable fire permit fee, 
and it will be there. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Increases in Fees in Vital Statistics 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. The latest budget hikes for fees for vital events in our 
life has happened in this budget. Saskatchewan people will have 
to pay more when they welcome a new baby into their homes, 
when they join in holy matrimony, or when they lose someone 
they love. 
 
The NDP has chosen to hit Saskatchewan families with fee 
hikes for significant moments in their lives. Will the minister 
reverse his decision to raise fees and allow people to celebrate 
or mourn these events without having to pay more money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we’ve 
looked at the kinds of fees that are paid for various items that 
are provided in the Department of Health and the department of 
vital statistics, looked at the fees that are charged there, and said 
there are places where we can increase them slightly to cover 
the costs of providing certificates. And that is part of what we 
have done across government. We are going to continue doing 
that to make sure that we can afford all of the things that are 
priorities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Commitments Made by the Government 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it looks like the 
Premier is done listening. He listened just long enough to get 
his members into this Assembly to line up and vote, lock-step 
with him today on the budget. 
 
He’s not going to listen, Mr. Speaker, any more to taxpayers, 
even though he told them in the election that he would cut their 
taxes and now he’s raising their taxes. He’s not going to listen 
any more to seniors that he’s betrayed, Mr. Speaker, with the 
measures in this budget. And he’s not going to listen any more 
to rural Saskatchewan, to farm families that he made some 
specific commitments to in the campaign and has broken those 
commitments in this budget. 
 
He’s stopped listening, Mr. Speaker. And the question to the 
Premier then is this: why has he betrayed so many 
Saskatchewan people? Why should anybody in this province 
believe a word he has to say? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hear a high 
level of disappointment in the Leader of the Opposition’s voice 
today — that same level of disappointment I heard when they 
did not win the November election, when in fact their popular 
vote slipped. Now I hear a huge cry of disappointment in his 
voice today that they’re not going to win the vote and bring the 
government down. 
 
He talks about listening, Mr. Speaker, but I would invite the 
leader, the new Leader of the Opposition, to listen to these 
words — rather sage words, if I may say — quote: 
 

You learn a lot sitting in Opposition and I suppose, for a 
time, it’s rewarding. There’s less pressure on you in 
Opposition. You criticize the government, you throw out 
suggestions . . . (but) you don’t have to actually implement 
or be accountable for them . . . there comes a point (quote) 
where that . . . (begins to wear) thin . . . 

 
That’s a quote from the member from Rosetown, the former 
leader of the Saskatchewan Party. And I would suggest that the 
leader, the new Leader of the Opposition, listen to the former 
leader because it’s wearing pretty thin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Premier does . . . 
the Premier is hearing correctly if he hears disappointment 
today, if he hears disappointment from this side of the House 
and if he hears disappointment outside this legislature from the 
people of the province. People in this province, people in 
Saskatchewan are disappointed today because, at the very least, 
they thought they could take this Premier at his word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

Mr. Wall: — They are disappointed to realize that that Premier 
was prepared to go out on the hustings in a campaign and say 
anything to anybody just to get elected to cling to power. That’s 
what they’re disappointed about today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if all of that is not the case, then all the Premier has to do 
today in this legislature is stand up and explain to people, why 
did he make those promises he had no intention of keeping. 
Why? Why, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I just would like to advise that in 
their questioning and in their responses, that members should 
not do . . . cannot do indirectly what you cannot say indirectly 
and that is to impugn wrongdoing on the part of any member. 
And I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to keep that in 
mind in his questioning and would he please restate the 
question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the question is this, the question is 
this: the people of this province are disappointed in a Premier 
that simply, that simply has not been straight with them. And 
they want to know this: why, why in the world should they ever 
trust anything he ever has to tell them again, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Once again I just 
. . . Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I’m referring to 
the very last . . . Order, please. The very last several words of 
the Leader of the Opposition impugn a wrongdoing on the part 
of an individual, and I just bring that to his . . . Order, please . . . 
and that is the statement I was trying to . . . that was the issue 
that I was trying to get across, and I would ask him to pay 
attention to that. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 
campaign during which the people of Saskatchewan chose their 
government we went to the people of Saskatchewan with a 
very, very clear message — a message which said, if elected, 
we would set priorities. Those priorities would be to build a 
green and a prosperous economy right across this province, 
urban and rural, north and south. 
 
It was a priority which said we will use the resources available 
to us and our best creative thinking to provide the public health 
care, the publicly administered and financed and universally 
accessible health care — the concept that was born in 
Saskatchewan; that we would give rebirth to that concept. We 
would build the best we possibly could in Saskatchewan and for 
all Canadians. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we said to the people of Saskatchewan, 
particularly the young people of Saskatchewan, this would be a 
province where they can see their futures and where they can 
build their careers, where they can raise their families. Those 
are the commitments we made, Mr. Speaker, and we, Mr. 
Speaker, will have on occasion to take some tough decisions to 
meet those priorities, but this is the government that has a 
vision . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as regards to vote later today, 
admittedly, admittedly we are looking for a needle in a 
haystack, Mr. Speaker. Somewhere in that haystack of NDP 
betrayal and deception that is this provincial budget, we’re 
looking for one — for one — NDP MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) with the integrity to stand up and say 
that this budget is wrong. We’re looking for one NDP MLA to 
stand up and say it wasn’t right to promise people lower taxes 
in the campaign and increase their taxes in the budget. We’re 
looking for one NDP MLA to stand up and say, when we 
promise to help rural Saskatchewan, we ought to keep that 
promise. We’re looking for one NDP MLA to stand up and say, 
when we promise better health care, we ought to keep that 
promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(10:45) 
 
And that is the question we have today for the Premier and for 
the members opposite: will any of them stand up for 
Saskatchewan? Will they stand up for the truth? Or has the 
Premier ordered them to vote for a budget and break the 
promises they made to the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
mark my words. Count the moment every member on this side 
of the House, every member of this New Democratic Party 
government caucus will stand up for the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . and vote for this budget, mark my 
words about that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a question. I have a question for the 
members opposite. Will one of them stand up in this House 
today, will one of them stand up in this House today and vote 
for 160 million more dollars for public health care in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Will one of them stand up for new 
support to education? 
 
Will one of them stand up for new support for the rural and 
urban municipalities of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will they stand up and vote for these? No. They 
will stand up in a vote against new money for health. They will 
vote against new money for young people. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
the difference. That’s the difference. This is a government that 
is for something. That is a group of men and women that are 
only against everything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 19, The 
Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 19, The Land Titles Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, The 
Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 20, The Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Saskatchewan Association of School 
Business Officials Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 21, 
The Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 21, The Saskatchewan Association of 
School Business Officials Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government today to convert for 
debates returnable, questions no. 73 through 154 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 73 to 154 have been converted to 
orders for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member would like to introduce guests. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to all the members of this legislature, 18 
students from Waldheim School, grade 7 students there in the 
east gallery. And their teacher is Kristi Nelson and their 
chaperones are Erna Siemens and Russ Quiring and Kelly 
Block. And I look forward to meeting with them a little later on. 
 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

They’re here on an important day when they get to see who’s 
going to vote on which side in this particular budget. So I hope 
they enjoy the vote, enjoy the day, and remember for a long 
time the results of what happens here today. 
 
Would you join me? 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to ask for leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave for introductions has been requested. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Member may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, seated behind the 
bar on this side of the House — metaphorically, because there 
is no bar — is a former member of the Legislative Assembly. 
This is Gordon MacMurchy, who was the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, served for many years, and also served 
as Agriculture minister for the people of Saskatchewan during 
the 1970s. I would ask all members to join with me in extending 
a warm welcome to Gordon today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana, the Minister for Crown Management Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to join today in the last day of the debate on the 
budget. I am fortunate in that I’ve had the luxury and 
opportunity to listen to most members of the legislature’s 
speeches before rising to address this year’s budget. I may 
indeed even refer at times to some of the things that I have 
heard mentioned in this Chamber in the last few days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget is about setting priorities. Our budget 
is also about making difficult choices. That’s what you do when 
you are elected to govern. 
 
The people of this province, in the last election in November 

2003, clearly indicated to the people of this province that they 
wanted to see health care and education as their number one and 
two priorities. They also indicated very clearly that they wanted 
to ensure that our Crown entities, our Crown utilities, remained 
in public hands. 
 
In this budget we’ve increased our commitment to health care 
by $160.4 million. Mr. Speaker, for the first time ever health 
spending in this province is $2.7 billion in total. Mr. Speaker, 
that represents 44 per cent of every dollar that is spent in this 
province. 
 
Our budget also contains a $1.2 billion expenditure for 
education. And, Mr. Speaker, that is an increase of $45 million 
from last year’s budget, or 3.8 per cent. 
 
Our budget also, Mr. Speaker, will help address many of the 
issues that people in our province are concerned about. This 
budget will help establish a new MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging) unit in the city of Regina. Now I’ve heard members 
opposite say that we don’t need the MRI because we can’t staff 
it. And this is either a stubborn refusal to understand the issue 
or pessimism carried to an absurd degree. 
 
Perhaps the members of the opposition simply wouldn’t make 
this investment in the health of the people of our province. 
Perhaps they would abandon our ongoing efforts to recruit and 
retain health professionals. But to listen to them most days, you 
wouldn’t think so. 
 
Vocal members on the other side like to stand in their places 
and complain about socialism with one breath and then demand 
more funding for publicly funded and publicly delivered health 
care with the other. Where do you think medicare comes from? 
Their own political pedigree has no association with the 
mothers and fathers of medicare, but rather, Mr. Speaker, with 
the opponents of medicare in this province. 
 
The medicare battle in this province was bitterly fought. The 
heirs of those who opposed medicare from the very beginning 
are in this House today and the bitterness of that defeat has not 
left them. 
 
I’d like to speak for a moment about our budget’s investment in 
education and youth. We are providing opportunities for young 
people through employment programs such as establishing the 
Green Team, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve also established the 
Saskatchewan youth entrepreneur program. We have a record 
budget this year for the Department of Learning, a little over 
$1.2 billion. Our commitment, Mr. Speaker, to education and 
our young people in this province is clear in this investment and 
these practical and progressive initiatives. 
 
I’d like to concentrate on one piece of this investment in 
particular. Part of the increase in the education budget for K to 
12 will see the establishment of a new collegiate in the city of 
Saskatoon. Citizens were heard, priorities were set, decisions 
were made, and action is being taken. 
 
Although the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs has already 
committed to voting against the budget that provides for this 
new school, the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs was 
very involved in making this new school a reality. And I want 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

to commend him for that, and those that worked closely with 
him, for their hard work. And I would like that member to join 
with us, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, and support, 
follow through with the work that’s been done to establish the 
new school and vote for the budget that will make that new 
school happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now some members of the opposition 
have been up to their old tricks when it comes to pitting rural 
and urban people against each other, rural and urban 
communities against each other. They have argued during this 
debate that we have abandoned rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But let’s look at the budget. A $13 million increase for the 
Department of Agriculture, $6.2 million extra for the 
Department of Highways, and $10 million or 13.3 per cent 
increase in the municipal revenue-sharing grants. The priorities 
of this budget, of this government as reflected in this budget, 
are clear. We are not, Mr. Speaker, pitting one group against 
another. Quite the contrary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to make this point. There are many, 
many members in the Legislative Assembly on this side of the 
House that come from rural Saskatchewan and I want to assure 
the public that when decisions are made regarding choices and 
priorities that rural Saskatchewan is there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — One of the very positive measures in 
our budget is the housing strategy aimed at increasing 
independence and maintaining stable communities. There is 
little that gives people a bigger stake in our society and in our 
communities and in our economy than the opportunity to own 
your own home. This budget gives more people that 
opportunity and that incentive to strive for better things right 
here in our province — not packing up to move elsewhere but 
putting down roots right here in Saskatchewan. This budget 
helps people achieve that goal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Part of being a responsible government is being a responsive 
government. Petitions against the expansion of the PST base 
were presented in this House every day by members opposite. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to assure people that those concerns were 
heard and that is reflected in the provincial budget that we are 
going to vote upon later today. Now members opposite are 
demanding, they’re demanding that we implement the Boughen 
report. 
 
I suggest to members opposite that they can still get their cake 
without paying the PST, but they can’t have it and eat it too, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite don’t want any tax 
increases, they don’t want any fee increases on any of our 
services, they don’t want the government to gain any revenue 
through investments, but they sure want us to spend. It’s spend, 
spend, spend, spend, Mr. Speaker. Don’t tax, don’t increase 
fees, but spend, spend, spend. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they accuse us of being the tax-and-spend 
socialists. Well I just have to say, listening to the members 
opposite each and every day in this Legislative Assembly, what 
do we hear? We hear more money for health care, more money 
for parks, more money for agriculture, more money for 
education — more money, more money, more money — but 
don’t look at how you’re going to pay for things that they want 
in this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t suffice to say that they haven’t 
learned anything since 1999. It would be more accurate to say 
they haven’t learned anything new since 1989, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s fascinating about members of the 
opposition is that there has been a good deal of accusatory 
language coming from the other side of this House. In short, 
Mr. Speaker, they are accusing us of being less than truthful 
during the election campaign about the state of the province. 
 
They’re saying that their message of pessimism was the truth 
and our message of optimism was not. And they’re still wrong. 
Our message of optimism in the people of this province and in 
the province of this . . . of Saskatchewan is the truth. And their 
message of despair is pure political opportunism, Mr. Speaker, 
like we have not witnessed in many years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Even though they had their opportunity 
— they had their opportunity in November 2003 — they had 
their opportunity and their opportunity passed them by. And I 
say to the members opposite, get over it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — But they haven’t learned. But they 
haven’t learned. They’re still fighting the 2003 election 
campaign. They have a new leader — a new leader who says he 
wants to move on. A new leader that wants to stretch the 
imaginations of the Saskatchewan Party people. A new leader 
that wants to stretch his caucus, to think outside of the box, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But we spent the last four years listening to the members fight 
the 1999 election campaign over and over and over and over 
again. And presumably they had it right when they went to the 
people in 2003. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people have spoken and 
the people of Saskatchewan have elected the New Democratic 
Party to govern. And, Mr. Speaker, we will govern. 
 
There are clearly, Mr. Speaker, there are clearly two messages 
in the province of Saskatchewan. One message is of hope and 
one message is of mope, Mr. Speaker. Now I have taken some 
time, Mr. Speaker, to focus on some of the concrete 
improvements in this budget which will make the lives of 
Saskatchewan people better. And these items, Mr. Speaker, will 
not be lost on the people of our province. Although, Mr. 
Speaker, I doubt if the members opposite will understand that. 
 
They will continue to tell us our young . . . they will continue to 
tell young people to pack up and leave. And even one member 
in this Assembly indicated the other night in debate their own 
children pack up and leave. They will continue to denigrate our 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

province on the eve of this province’s centenary. And they will 
attempt to convince anyone who will listen that they would be 
better off someplace else. 
 
The good thing is that the people of this province will continue 
to ignore them. Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a line — a fine line 
admittedly, but a line nonetheless — between discharging the 
duties of an opposition member and standing in stark opposition 
to the province itself. The members opposite stepped a way, a 
way over the line a long time ago, and they haven’t looked 
back. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, their popular vote dropped 
like a stone in the last election. 
 
Now the new Leader of the Opposition says that he wants to 
change that. He says that his party needs to learn the lessons of 
the last election. The Leader of the Opposition wants to produce 
a new policy paper for his party, but if that document turns out 
to be anything like what we’ve heard during this debate, which 
is more of the same, members on this side of the House will be 
reminded of the last words of Oscar Wilde, “Either . . . (this) 
wallpaper goes, or I do,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that I will be standing in the 
Legislative Assembly later today, voting against the amendment 
that is so typical of the members opposite, and voting for the 
budget which is typical of a government that was elected to 
govern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into the budget debate today on the eve of the 
vote on the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it strikes me that there’s three basic observations 
you could make about the budget. The first one is that in terms 
of our economy and in terms of the province’s ability to be able 
to afford the quality of life issues that we want to be able to 
afford, whether it’s health care or education, or help for 
producers when they face things like BSE, or even issues like 
FASD (fetal alcohol spectrum disorder) that’s mentioned in the 
budget, when it comes to any kind of a plan that speaks to a 
long-term economic vision for Saskatchewan that’ll help us 
afford those things, this budget’s devastating. 
 
It’s devastating because it represents pages and pages worth of 
fee hikes; service fee increases which, Mr. Speaker, are like 
water torture on the economy; on our small business sector. It 
represents red tape. It represents the very, the very annoyances 
that turns away outside investment and investment from 
existing business. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this budget represents an increase, of course, 
in the PST, an increase in the sales tax. And you don’t only 
have to be on the west side of Saskatchewan to realize how 
devastating that can be for the economy. It’s only one point, 
some will say. It’s only one percentage point, a hundred or so 
million dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the psychological impact of that on the west side 

and anywhere else is huge. It’s big in industry and in the retail 
sector. It affects consumers, Mr. Speaker, as people on the west 
side and across the province are going to be even more incented 
to travel to Alberta to make their retail purchases. It affects the 
oil and gas industry. 
 
One strength of our oil and gas industry isn’t production, Mr. 
Speaker, not production. The NDP and the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) drove them to Calgary long ago. 
But one of the strengths is the service sector — the service 
sector in terms of oil and gas. And the PST, the PST hurts their 
ability to compete with those who would come in from Alberta 
and try to do work before heading back over the border. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget is devastating from another standpoint. 
Not just what it does, not just what’s in it, but what’s not in it, 
Mr. Speaker. What’s not in it is any indication at all that this 
Premier, and that Finance minister, and that NDP Party over 
there have any clue at all as to getting our province growing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Frankly there is reason to doubt whether they believe it need 
even happen. There’s reason to doubt whether or not the NDP 
actually believe that Saskatchewan’s economy could . . . should 
grow, that our long-term hope for the province is founded in a 
plan to get the province growing, to expand our tax base — not 
in higher taxes but in more taxpayers. And to that point, to that 
point, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out an amazing quote to 
members of the Assembly. I missed . . . Unfortunately, I wasn’t 
here for this particular reference by the member, the new 
member for Saskatchewan Rivers on April 7 in the budget 
debate. 
 
Here’s what he had to say. He said he . . . well he’s obviously 
not been paying attention because he says, and I quote: 
 

. . . I have to say that I hear no ideas from the other side of 
the House. 

 
Here’s what he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

What I hear instead is grow, grow, grow. Grow this 
province; grow the population; grow industry; grow the 
economy. 

 
That’s what the member for Saskatchewan Rivers had to say, 
and if he would have stopped there we’d all be applauding him 
and cheering him, but then here’s what he says. He says: 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is a meaningless mantra. 
 
That’s what that member from Saskatchewan Rivers had to say 
about our need to get our province growing. And there you have 
it. There’s the truth of the NDP. There you have it. They do not 
believe that this province needs to grow. People across this 
province wonder where is the vision in this budget for a 
growing economy so they could afford to provide the services 
they promised that they would provide to the people of the 
province in the election, or for that matter that any future 
government could be able to do that. 
 
Where do they believe the resources for that will come from if 
not from a larger tax base, if not from more taxpayers in his 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

constituency and in mine. If not from more taxpayers and a 
broader tax base and more economic activity, where is the 
future of funding of these services? How will we reduce MRI 
waiting lists in Saskatchewan? How will we bring, bring about 
meaningful FASD policy? How will we lighten the burden of 
education tax on rural ratepayers in the province of 
Saskatchewan? How will we do that if there’s no plan to grow, 
if there is just a willingness and a desire to manage the decline 
of the province? We find it unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, that that 
member would say these things, representing his party and his 
Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And I’ll say this, I’ll say this through you, Mr. 
Speaker, to those members opposite, that if they’re getting tired 
of hearing about the Saskatchewan Party talk about a vision for 
this province, if they are getting a little sick and tired of hearing 
us say grow, grow, grow, grow this province, grow the 
population, grow the industry, grow the economy as the 
member said, I’ve got news for him and for them. They are 
going to be even more sick of it in the future because that is 
exactly what we will continue to talk about, Mr. Speaker, across 
the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That is the long-term hope for the future of 
Saskatchewan. So the first thing, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
represents a budget of devastation in terms of our economy and 
in terms of the hopes that Saskatchewan families have that we 
can have a government in this province that can afford to bring 
the services that they deserve. 
 
It’s also, Mr. Speaker, a budget that I think that’s marked by 
ridiculous measures, ill-planned measures, silly measures, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’ve talked about them in the legislature, the 
member for Wood River and others. And thousands of 
Saskatchewan people have talked about those measures to save 
$100,000 on a six and a half billion dollar budget by a 
government that wasted $75,000 on an advertising campaign 
whose market is two people. They were going to close the parks 
in the province of Saskatchewan for a month. They were going 
to take a third of the tourism season away from those businesses 
who have made an investment and who employ young people in 
those parks. 
 
Somehow, somehow that made it past the cabinet meeting. 
Apparently the Minister of the Environment went into a cabinet 
meeting, if you could feature this, Mr. Speaker, and he said I’ve 
got a good idea, I can save us $100,000, roughly the equivalent 
of your advertising campaign. He would have said to the 
Minister of Finance, I could save you $100,000 and all we have 
to do, all we have to do is ruin the business here for those 
businesses in the parks and close parks for an extra month and 
delay summer in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s all we 
have to do, and we can save $100,000. 
 
And that is not the most remarkable thing, Mr. Speaker. The 
most remarkable thing is that all the cabinet ministers must 
surely have said that is a great idea, what an excellent idea, 
which of course would have set the stage for his next idea. I’m 
sure the Minister of the Environment said well, if you like that 

one, how about a wiener roast tax, Mr. Speaker? How about 
that? 
 
And instead, instead of the cabinet member saying well how 
will this work exactly? Will we . . . As the member for Wood 
River has asked, if your fire goes out when you’re starting it, 
will you have to repay for another $3 permit? And who will 
enforce this? Will we have sort of wiener roast kind of police in 
the parks to do that? Is this a good idea? Or maybe if we think 
people should be charged for wood, that they should be charged 
one time when they come into the park. How about that idea? 
 
They didn’t have that discussion I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, 
because the wiener roast tax is in the budget. So again the 
response from the Minister of Finance and the Premier of the 
province and the rest of cabinet was what another outstanding 
idea from the Minister of Environment. Unbelievable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And inasmuch as these represent $300,000 and certainly not as 
important in terms of the economy as a PST increase, and 
they’re not as important as the changes to health care or the fact 
that they’re going to close long-term care beds for seniors, but 
they have raised the ire and gotten the attention of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
(11:15) 
 
And we hope we’ve been able to help in that regard. We hope 
we’ve been able to highlight how ridiculous this policy is and 
we’ve encouraged people, through a campaign of our own, to 
get a hold of their NDP MLAs and tell them how ridiculous it 
is, this policy on the parks. And hopefully, Mr. Speaker, 
hopefully, hopefully later today they’ll make the right decision 
— not just on keeping the parks closed but on the wiener roast 
tax. 
 
Because I hate to disappoint the Minister of the Environment, 
but I don’t agree with him when he says, when he says he was 
asked in a media scrum after he announced this wiener roast 
tax, well what do you think people are going to think of when 
they’re sitting around their campfires having paid their $3 
wiener roast tax, what do you think they’re going to think of? 
Well they’re going to think of the quality of life in 
Saskatchewan, said the minister. And the minister also said, I’m 
sure they’ll also be thinking about how unfair equalization is, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what the people of the province are going 
to be thinking about at their campgrounds around the campfire. 
 
I think they’re going to be thinking about this. I think they’re 
going to be thinking about summer in Saskatchewan and how 
wonderful it is and how notwithstanding the NDP’s 
mismanagement of this province and the ridiculous parks 
policy, that we do have beautiful parks. I think they’re going to 
sit around that campfire enjoying it. 
 
And I also think, Mr. Speaker, that they will think a little bit 
about government when they pay that $3 wiener roast tax. But I 
don’t think they’ll be thinking about the federal government, 
Mr. Speaker, and equalization. I think they’ll be thinking about 
the NDP, waiting, Mr. Speaker, waiting for the day when they 
can exact a little bit of revenge for something so ridiculous as a 
wiener roast tax, Mr. Speaker. 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the . . . if the first theme of 
this budget is its devastation of the economy and the second one 
is it’s just patently silly, I guess the third theme is trust — is 
trust. 
 
We’ve asked a lot of questions on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve shown the people of the province, and the Premier in 
case he’s forgotten them, the promises that his government 
made in the campaign and since — not just the election of 2003, 
but comments that were made in January of this year, comments 
that were made weeks ago, comments that were made at 
SARM. We’ve shown him those, and then we’ve highlighted 
how this budget systematically breaks those promises. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the Premier enjoys this 
particular line of questioning. I don’t think he enjoys having the 
trust issue raised. I don’t think he enjoys having people wonder 
if they should have trusted him, or an opposition that asks that 
question: why, why would people trust him? He simply has to 
stand up and explain the question. 
 
I don’t think the Premier likes it, but you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? From about 140 years ago there’s some advice from 
Abraham Lincoln to the Premier. If he doesn’t like this line of 
questioning on trust, Mr. Lincoln said: 
 

Truth is generally the best vindication against slander. 
 
If the Premier doesn’t like the questions, and if the Premier 
doesn’t like the concern that’s being expressed by the people of 
the province that he said one thing in the campaign and he’s 
doing another thing, there is some vindication against slander as 
the quote said, and the vindication is the truth, Mr. Speaker. The 
vindication is simply to have told people the truth and to 
continue to do that. 
 
When I was looking at that quote there was quote right next to it 
also from Mr. Lincoln and I’ll just finish with this on this 
particular part of the speech. He said, Mr. Lincoln said: 
 

We must not promise what we ought not, (we must not 
promise what we ought not to) lest we be called on to 
perform what we cannot. 
 

That’s also some pretty good advice, I think, for the Premier in 
the wake of his budget. The Premier who made some pretty 
clear commitments only months ago in a campaign, and whose 
budget that he just stood up and cheered loudly in question 
period, systematically breaks those promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have through our campaign — our own 
campaign on the budget — we have received many, many 
e-mails and they speak to the three issues that I’ve raised, Mr. 
Speaker. They speak to the fact that this was a budget of 
devastation in terms of our economy, in terms of the future of 
this province. They speak to the fact that this was a budget of 
ridiculousness, of silliness, Mr. Speaker. And these e-mails also 
speak to the fact that people feel betrayed, people feel betrayed 
by this Premier and by this government. Here’s one to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that I received: 
 

Dear Mr. Wall, 
 
I am a young (30) (year-old) person who has spent almost 
his entire life in Saskatchewan, and I love this province. It 
makes me heartsick to see my friends constantly leaving 
for greener pastures, most to Alberta. It is time to change 
the way this province is run and hopefully you (he’s 
talking to me, hopefully you) are someone that is willing 
to listen and if you get the opportunity, to make some 
changes. 
 
The latest NDP budget, as you know, is terrible (says this 
young person). Not only do they continue to pretend they 
are balancing the budget but at the same time as (they are) 
running a deficit they are raising taxes. It seems they will 
not do what needs to be done for fear of being voted out. 
This province needs a premier with the courage to do what 
is right rather than caving in to special interest groups that 
are never satisfied anyway. 

 
Here’s another one, Mr. Speaker, from a gentleman: 
 

I’m one of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the member 
from The Battlefords on a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Far 
be it from me, a brand new member in the Legislative 
Assembly here, to question the veteran member opposite on the 
use of privilege here in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. But I was 
reading Beauchesne’s this morning and I just found a comment 
in here about unsigned letters should not be read in the House. 
Beauchesne’s 498: 
 

When quoting (from) a letter in the House, a Member must 
be willing either to give the name of the author or take full 
responsibility for . . . (its) contents. 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, Beauchesne’s says in 499: 
 

Telegrams should not be quoted in the House . . . 
(because) there is no way of ensuring the authenticity of 
the signature. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this may not be a telegram but I would venture to 
say that in this new era of technology, e-mails and telegrams 
remain the same. Beauchesne’s has required that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Would the 
members just please allow the member to put his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. All 
I’m suggesting, Mr. Speaker, is that if we were to follow 
Beauchesne’s in this issue, that any quotation from a letter must 
also contain the name of the author of that letter when the 
quotation is being read. And if the member would . . . any time 
he refers to an e-mail that he gets, indicate to the Chamber who 
has written that e-mail, I think it would benefit the debate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the . . . Order. I recognize the 
member for Melfort on the point of order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think it is been a long-standing practice of this House and other 
Houses in the British parliamentary system that information like 
letters can be tabled or not tabled at the discretion of the 
member who has them. 
 
In the past government members have quoted from documents 
that they have not tabled as well as some that they have. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think that it’s fair to say that there’s a 
compulsory demand for the tabling of information that may 
indeed include some sensitive material that is not for public 
consumption, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I thank the 
member for raising the point of order and I thank the House 
Leader from the opposition for speaking to it. 
 
We have a fairly long-standing practice here of what we have 
allowed and not allowed in terms of quotations. So I have to 
consider this in line also with what the member has raised in 
Beauchesne. I believe at this stage that this may require some 
clarification and I would just like to defer my ruling on this for 
a while and bring it back on a later date. 
 
And the member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll continue to read these. These are e-mails. Of 
course the member may know that it’s difficult to sign e-mails. 
You can electronically sign them, but it’s difficult generally to 
sign them. I’ve noticed when I myself have tried to sign my 
e-mails, my screen gets messed up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s ironic though that it would be the member for 
North Battleford that would stand up and intervene in this 
debate. He who represents people on the west side of this 
province who will be devastated by an increase in the PST . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — . . . that he’s going to stand up and vote for, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He represents a community, Mr. Speaker, he represents a 
community that still waits, that still waits for word for 
infrastructure help in his community, a community that he was 
the mayor of. And he wants to stand up in this debate. He ought 
to stand up and defend his decision to support a PST increase 
on the people of North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — In fact I was in North Battleford, I was in North 
Battleford last night. We met with some of the councillors in 
North Battleford and some other people. And I’ll tell you what 
the people in North Battleford are wondering, how in the world 
that their MLA could vote for an increase in the PST when like 
Swift Current, when like Swift Current in those communities on 
the west side of the province, such an increase is particularly 
devastating. That’s what his constituents are saying. He ought 

to spend more time reading their letters instead of reading 
Beauchesne, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’ll also . . . I want to 
share with you another e-mail we got from a gentleman. He 
says, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Wall, I’m one of . . . (those) . . . I’m one of . . . (those) 
that voted NDP last fall and last weeks budget . . . 
 

And here, I’ll try to . . . so the members can see that it’s an 
email, said: 
 

. . . that voted NDP last fall and last weeks budget proves 
to me that these jokers haven’t got a . . . (unparliamentary 
word) clue how to get the province finances in order, (Mr. 
Speaker). 
 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, we have 
another one from a lady who was concerned about a particular 
program. 
 

Attention: Brad (it says), I was approved for the Family 
Farm Opportunities Program (in) January of this year. I 
just received a registered letter stating the program has 
been . . . terminated March 31. 
 
What is wrong with this government? Why do they call 
their department Rural Revitalization? (They’re) not 
revitalizing anything in the rural areas of our province, 
(Mr. Speaker). 
 

Mr. Speaker, here’s another one: 
 

Hello Brad, I’ve been getting a handle on how the budget 
will ultimately affect a health care region. 
 

The . . . (inaudible) . . . at my health care region, Mr. Speaker. It 
says: 
 

It would appear that the NDP has made it abundantly clear 
that they felt health care was a priority. Sadly, their efforts 
will come far short. 
 

Mr. Speaker, from a former health care professional. 
 
And here’s an amazing one. It’s an exchange of e-mails from 
earlier this week between the member for — that I’m copied on, 
Mr. Speaker — between a constituent of the member for 
Sutherland, Saskatoon Sutherland, and one of his constituents. 
He says in his letter, Mr. Speaker, the constituent to his MLA 
and I quote: 
 

Mr. Addley, I watched with great anticipation the budget 
that come down today. I have to say I’m gravely 
disappointed in the budget. The biggest area I have a 
serious problem with is an increase in the sales tax. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to highlight his concerns for the 
budget, and then says: 
 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

Please give me some reason why I should consider staying 
in this province rather than moving back to my home 
province of Alberta. In today’s budget, I do not see any 
reason for me to stay, but I am hoping someone 
somewhere can give me a good reason to not leave. 
 

That’s what this gentlemen said. He’s a CGA (certified general 
accountant) and he wrote to his MLA, the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
First of all, he didn’t get a response back right away and I was 
able to just send off a quick one thanking him for copying me 
on his note to the member and then inviting him to copy me on 
the member’s response, which he did. And the member finally 
did respond. 
 
And here’s the member’s . . . And this is the NDP answer to the 
question, “give me a reason why I should consider staying in 
the province.” And here are . . . There is about seven points 
here, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to pick a few of them out. Here 
are the reasons why. Here’s the NDP vision for the province 
and the reason why young people should stay in Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s one reason: 
 

Labour Standards in Saskatchewan guarantee workers that 
they receive at least 3 weeks of paid vacation. 

 
That’s one reason. Yes, that’s one reason. And the member . . . 
And the member for Centre chirps, for Regina Centre chirps, 
but you see that’s true. Three weeks vacation is good in the 
province of Saskatchewan. But generally speaking, you need a 
job first, Mr. Speaker. You need a job. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Talks about the minimum wage in Saskatchewan 
is 60 cents higher than in Alberta. Talks about how 
Saskatchewan workers are paid time and one-half for overtime 
hours. It talks about . . . there’s no health care premiums, 
ironically enough, even though the Premier’s now talking about 
health care premiums. 
 
In Saskatchewan, our young people can afford to drive a 
vehicle. Maybe that’s a fair point. But then it goes on to say 
many, many residents in Saskatchewan have access to the 
Internet. That’s another reason, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in Saskatchewan, quote, “I can use a pay phone for a local 
call for 25 cents.” Why in the world would you need an 
economic plan in your budget if you can make a local phone 
call at a telephone booth for 25 cents, Mr. Speaker? 
 
There you have it, Mr. Speaker. There’s the NDP plan. There’s 
their answer to this young gentleman who wants a reason, who 
wants a reason to stay in Saskatchewan. 
 
And let me just say this in closing, Mr. Speaker. The good news 
is this, the good news is this, is most young people — like the 
constituent of the member for Sutherland — most of them do 
want a reason to stay. 

They want a government here in the Legislative Assembly that 
will give them a meaningful reason to stay. They want a 
government that’ll be straight with them — a government that 
doesn’t say one thing in an election campaign and do quite 
another when it gets . . . when it finally wins. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they want a government and a political party that 
understands, for the first time in six decades, that we need to 
build an enterprising and entrepreneurial economy; that we need 
to, we need to set loose the powers that entrepreneurs currently 
in the province offer to our economy; that we need to reduce the 
barriers to growth. 
 
And they’re not all taxes, Mr. Speaker. Some of them are 
infrastructure issues. Some of them are red tape and the fee 
hikes we’ve talked about. 
 
They want a government that understands and believes that our 
hope, the hope of this province, rests in a party and in a 
government that understands that this province must grow, Mr. 
Speaker. It must grow. 
 
And so I would say this to the member for Saskatchewan Rivers 
who, on behalf of his colleagues, said that all we talk about in 
the Saskatchewan Party is grow, grow, grow — grow this 
province, grow this population, grow industry, grow the 
economy. I want to tell members opposite that it’s because of 
our belief in that principle that, in order to afford the health care 
we need, social services we’d like to provide, an education, and 
support for producers when they need it — in order to afford 
those things for Saskatchewan families, we must grow. 
 
And to the extent that this budget doesn’t even breathe a word 
of a plan for growth in Saskatchewan, I’ll tell you what, Mr. 
Speaker. Members on this side of the House are looking 
forward to, in moments, taking their feet and voting against this 
budget, taking to their feet and standing up for Saskatchewan, 
standing up for a basic principle of telling the truth to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
We will not be supporting the budget, and we invite members 
opposite to honour their conscience and stand up for 
Saskatchewan as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Last Mountain-Touchwood 
has requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
your gallery are four gentlemen, some of whom got up very 
early this morning to be with us here today. They are Morris 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

Prescesky, from Mayfair; Grant Berger, from Central Butte; 
David Strain, from North Battleford; and Morris Tokaryk, from 
Richard. 
 
Some of the gentlemen from the North Battleford area tell me 
that they left at 4 o’clock this morning to be here out on the 
steps of the legislature to participate in the APAS (Agricultural 
Producers Association of Saskatchewan) media event, and I 
would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Once again the member for Walsh Acres has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 
through you, and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 
two very good friends of mine, Lily Olsen from the Grain 
Services Union, and Frank Mentes with the Canadian Union of 
Public Employees. 
 
They are both very hard-working people in the labour 
movement and very dedicated and have contributed a lot to my 
campaign and my deliberations over many years of questions. 
And I thank them for their guidance and thank them for being 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
The Speaker: — The question is before the Assembly. I would 
like to advise the members of the Assembly that the Minister of 
Finance is rising to close debate on the budget speech. And if 
there are any members that wish to speak, they should stand. 
Other members that wish to speak to the budget debate, they 
should stand at this time. 
 
There being none, I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to begin by thanking my family, friends, 

constituents, my colleagues — indeed people from across 
Saskatchewan — for supporting me in my new role of Finance 
minister and for their support for this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I felt honoured to stand in the 
House last week and deliver the budget on behalf of the 
government. Although it was a very difficult budget to prepare, 
we met the challenges head-on, producing a balanced, 
responsible budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, although the 
opposition chooses to disagree, this was the 11th consecutive 
General Revenue Fund balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — A budget with a new four-year 
plan to build on this province’s success. A budget that will 
generate a $42 million surplus at the end of the four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — A budget, Mr. Speaker, that 
preserves our vital public services, including health and 
education — the top priorities of Saskatchewan people — while 
improving our summary financial results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members opposite: how could they not 
invest more in these public priorities? The people of 
Saskatchewan have clearly told us what their priorities are. And 
we are striking a delicate balance between responsible spending 
on our central programs and services with reducing the gap 
between expenditures and revenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite denounce the PST increase. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, tough decisions were necessary to protect 
health care in Saskatchewan. Yes, there were increases to taxes, 
fees, and charges, but again I say we are striking a balance. 
These essential services which are growing more costly by the 
year must be paid for, Mr. Speaker. And it would be 
irresponsible of this government to invest in these programs and 
services without being able to pay for them. 
 
Consider, Mr. Speaker, that the additional revenues — $136 
million from the increase in the PST — will not, will not cover 
the estimated the $160 million increase in health care funding, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, this was a difficult budget to prepare. 
Ordinarily the Department of Finance staff has months and 
months to prepare. This year they had far less time, and as a 
consequence they logged a tremendous amount of hours, many 
long days and nights to prepare for the budget. I would like to 
take this opportunity to say how much I appreciate their 
dedication and expertise, and to thank these public servants — 
indeed all public servants — for the valuable service they 
provide to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I am privileged to 
work with this department. I am proud of their work, and I am 
honoured to be the Minster of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, over the past few 
days, criticism of this budget has flown freely — particularly on 
the other side of the House. But as I said in the budget address, 
the role of government is not always to do what is popular but 
to do what is right, to do what is needed to meet the needs of 
the people of Saskatchewan. And that is what we have done 
with this budget. We are meeting their needs while being 
fiscally responsible and building on the strong Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that Saskatchewan led 
Western Canada in gross domestic product, GDP growth last 
year. That’s a sign of growth in the economy, Mr. Speaker. We 
led all of Western Canada. 
 
Government forecasters are predicting Saskatchewan’s real 
GDP growth will reach 2.6 per cent this year, and this forecast 
reaffirms the strength of our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now private sector forecasters are even more optimistic about 
Saskatchewan’s economic performance this year. They are 
projecting between 2.8 and 4 per cent growth rates for GDP. No 
matter who’s providing the forecast, Mr. Speaker, the optimism 
is there for our future. We look forward to a strong economy in 
2004, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I might say that 
we’re coming off a remarkable year in the oil and gas industry. 
Although the price of oil is expected to decline this year, 
Saskatchewan’s oil production is expected to increase. The 
same is true for natural gas. The price is projected to decrease 
but sales volumes are expected to increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And potash sales are expected to surpass last year’s record 
sales. 
 
Last year’s crop harvest was below the 10-year average but it is 
expected to increase this year. We will continue, Mr. Speaker, 
to support farmers throughout the trying times. You can count 
on us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another excellent indicator of the strength of our 
economy is debt as a percentage of GDP. This is what credit 
rating agencies use to gauge our economy and our fiscal 
performance. Debt as a percentage of GDP, Mr. Speaker, is 
forecast to decrease to 33.2 per cent this year and to continue to 
drop to 31.5 per cent in four years time. 
 
Now what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? To put that into 
context, and by way of contrast, I would like to point out that 
debt as a percentage of GDP was nearly 62 — 62 per cent in 
1991. And, Mr. Speaker, by any measure — by any measure, 
with the exception of the opposition of course, Mr. Speaker — 
this is a remarkable turnaround, especially considering the 
shambles of an economy that we inherited from the government 

that was supported by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that 
the opposition can and do use all kinds of figures to talk about 
debt. And I give them credit for their energetic, heavy-duty 
ciphering, Mr. Speaker. However, the people of Saskatchewan 
are far less interested in their grand theories. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are far more interested in the 
assessment of the credit rating agencies. These agencies make it 
their business to know about our debt. They have to know what 
they are doing — their livelihood depends on it. And, Mr. 
Speaker, these credit rating agencies support the fact that 
Saskatchewan has experienced a remarkable turnaround, Mr. 
Speaker — nothing less. And it’s time for the opposition to deal 
with the reality in Saskatchewan as opposed to denying that 
reality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we are committed to 
prudent fiscal management. This budget is a beginning of a new 
four-year plan that invests wisely to strengthen fiscal stability, 
sustainability, and the future of this province. 
 
As I mentioned, at the end of the four-year plan we will have 
generated a $42 million surplus. We are progressively 
improving. For example, we are improving our summary 
financial results by over $380 million from two years ago. We 
are weaning ourselves from relying on the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, our rainy day account. 
 
Yes, we are using the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to balance the 
budget this year. We say that. And the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
is a popular topic with the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. But 
I would also like to point out that we put money back into the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund two years ago. We have not drawn 
from it every year. And the practice of having such a rainy day 
fund is employed by most other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also introduces a summary financial 
plan. This is a consolidated look at all government departments, 
Crowns, agencies, and boards. And it is yet another step in a 
long line of changes this government — not that opposition, 
Mr. Speaker — has made to improve accountability, 
transparency, and financial reporting. We have also introduced 
interim reports, summary financial statements with the public 
accounts, and department performance plans. 
 
Delivering a balanced budget this year was not an easy task, 
Mr. Speaker. We had to balance our fiscal management with the 
needs of Saskatchewan people. And Saskatchewan people have 
clearly told us they value the traditional, high-quality social 
programs for which this province is known. And they expect, 
for example — in fact, they demand — comprehensive health 
care and comprehensive education services. And so after careful 
consideration we introduced new revenue measures — changes 
to taxes, fees, and charges — to help pay for these vital 
services, health care in particular, Mr. Speaker. 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, this budget includes $223 million in new 
operating spending. The majority of that, $160 million, 72 per 
cent, is supporting health care. A record $2.7 billion investment 
— health care is Saskatchewan’s number one priority, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Health care now accounts for 44 
per cent of all of our government spending. And among other 
things, Mr. Speaker, the money this year will be spent to 
enhance programs and services, to reduce waiting lists for 
surgeries and MRIs, to purchase a new MRI for Regina, and to 
help attract and retain qualified health professionals in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the birthplace of medicare and 
this government remains firm in its commitment to public 
health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — This budget, Mr. Speaker, 
contains funding for programs to help our farmers. This 
government is providing $1 billion over five years in provincial 
support for the agriculture policy framework and income 
support programs. This year we are fully funding crop 
insurance and providing $99 million to the Canadian 
Agricultural Income Stabilization or CAIS program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also committed to our social agenda. This 
budget contains help for working families by adding 200 new 
daycare spaces. It supports families with low incomes. And to 
further protect low-income families, we are enhancing the 
Saskatchewan sales tax credit to help offset the increased sales 
tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue providing opportunities for children 
and youth, the future of this province. This budget includes a 
3.8 per cent increase in education funding, totalling just over 
$1.2 billion. There is funding for new participants to enter the 
Kids First program. 
 
We are investing $2.2 million into youth employment through 
the centennial student employment program. We are continuing 
to help students find jobs, Mr. Speaker. This year its investment 
will create nearly 600 employment opportunities for students in 
Saskatchewan. And this budget also announces and launches a 
new summer student employment program called the Green 
Team. It is for young people interested in environmental 
management and energy conservation. To help keep our 
talented graduates in the province, we are increasing the 
post-graduate tax credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had to make sacrifices in this budget, but not at 
the expense of our vital public services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a vision for this province, a vision that 
involves continued economic growth and success for 
individuals and communities across Saskatchewan. That is why 
for the third consecutive year we are providing an additional 
$10 million in revenue-sharing grants for municipalities. This is 
a 13 per cent increase over last year. 

That is why we are investing almost $300 million to fix the 
roads and build better highways. And that is why we are 
spending $211 million on job creation and job training, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this budget reflects 
our commitment to sound financial management. This budget 
reflects our commitment to the priorities of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
This budget also reaffirms our commitment to the promises 
made in the Throne Speech, including education and 
opportunities for our young people, building a green and 
prosperous economy, providing the best public health care in 
Canada, and making Saskatchewan the most affordable place to 
live and raise a family in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. We know where we are going. We 
can see the road in front of us. We are securing our financial 
future. We are committed to the long-term prosperity of this 
great province. We are committed to responding to the needs of 
all of our people, Mr. Speaker — a clear plan, a clear 
commitment, not to be confused, Mr. Speaker, with the 
backward-looking and confused picture presented by the 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who are watching the Legislative 
Assembly will know from a great deal of experience that the 
opposition is only there to criticize in the Legislative Assembly. 
And it doesn’t matter what you do; they criticize. It’s darned if 
you do, darned if you don’t. 
 
We saw again another example today. At one time we on this 
side of the House, this government decreased the PST. And the 
Leader of the Opposition said the impact of that was, I quote, 
“pathetic.” Pathetic, Mr. Speaker. Today he says the increase in 
the PST, the Leader of the Opposition says it’s devastating. 
Darned if you do, darned if you don’t, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
nature of opposition. 
 
But with this budget, with this budget, I fear that the opposition 
has reached a new low. How can they stand there, how can they 
stand there with straight faces and on a daily basis say, spend 
more. Spend more on this. Spend more on that. Spend more on 
everything, Mr. Speaker. And at the same time say, tax less. 
Don’t tax this. Tax less. And at the same time say, balance the 
budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, how they can do that is beyond me, 
and it’s beyond anyone in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the reality. And it’s not credible. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, frankly we had expected more, and I think 
the people of Saskatchewan expected more. I believe that the 
people of Saskatchewan, they elected in their wisdom a 
legislature with almost equal representation. And I believe that 
the people of Saskatchewan did that because they believe in 
turn that this will promise better government. And they are 
right, under the circumstances that we have here with the tight 
legislature, to expect responsible, constructive opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But that’s not what they see. Just more of the same: a group of 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

angry, bitter politicians given to mean-spirited attacks; a group 
consumed with their election loss. And as I listen to their 
speeches, Mr. Speaker, it is clear, and that is the theme that 
emerges — looking back, fighting the last election, not looking 
forward. No, looking straight back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am reminded, I am reminded — and I’m not as 
versed in popular culture as the Leader of the Opposition — but 
I’m reminded of watching this American television show, The 
David Letterman Show, and a character called Larry “Bud” 
Melman. And on this one episode, it seemed to me that Larry 
“Bud” Melman was reporting to this David Letterman about 
something called the Larry “Bud” Melman bus line. And he 
said, you know Dave, in reporting to this Mr. Letterman, that 
this is a bus line where the seats are nailed in backwards. And 
the motto of the bus line is: the bus line where you can watch 
where you’ve been but you can’t see where you’re going. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that the opposition? But unlike Mr. 
Larry “Bud” Melman, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that opposition 
is not yet ready for prime time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we believe in 
Saskatchewan. We believe in this province. We want to build 
on our successes and help Saskatchewan people turn their 
dreams and plans into reality. Our vision for this province 
includes a future of opportunity, continued growth, and success. 
This budget moves us forward to that future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment. I will be 
supporting the motion. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The questions before the Assembly or the 
motions . . . is the motion moved by member for Regina 
Douglas Park, and seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That this Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
And the amendment moved by the member for Canora-Pelly, 
seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose: 
 

That all the words after “that” be deleted and the following 
substituted: 
 
the current Premier and cabinet have betrayed 
Saskatchewan voters with the 2004-2005 provincial 
budget and therefore this provincial government does not 
enjoy the confidence of the Assembly. 

 
I will put first the vote on the amendment. That is the 
amendment moved by the member from Canora-Pelly, and 
seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the amendment? 
Those members who favour the amendment say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

The Speaker: — Those who oppose the amendment say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members 
for a standing vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:57 until 12:03. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
amendment to the main motion, the amendment moved by the 
member for Canora-Pelly, seconded by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose: 
 

That all the words after “that” be deleted and the following 
substituted: 
 
the current Premier and cabinet have betrayed 
Saskatchewan voters with the 2004-2005 provincial 
budget and therefore this provincial government does not 
enjoy the confidence of the Assembly. 

 
Those who favour the motion please rise. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 

Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Morgan 
McMorris Eagles Gantefoer 
Harpauer Bakken Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Brkich 
Weekes Kerpan Merriman 
Chisholm Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion please rise. 
 

Nays — 28 
 

Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the 
amendment, 28. Those opposed, 28. 
 
The Speaker: — The Clerk has announced that there’s an 
equality of votes for and against the amendment. In these 
circumstances it is my duty, pursuant to rule 26(2), to give a 
casting vote to break the tie. 
 
According to parliamentary practice the Speaker votes 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

according to certain procedural principles, and not for or against 
the substance of the matter, in order to avoid any imputation on 
the impartiality of the Chair. 
 
An amendment to the budget motion is traditionally viewed as a 
question of confidence and in this case is worded as an explicit 
motion of non-confidence. In general, the principle applied to 
amendments is that decisions should not be taken except by a 
majority and that where there is no majority, the main motion 
should be left in its existing form. In a vote that is a test of the 
Assembly’s confidence in the government, the decision of 
non-confidence should be clearly stated by a majority. It would 
not be appropriate for the vote of the Speaker alone to overturn 
the status quo as determined at the last election. 
 
I therefore vote against the amendment and declare the 
amendment defeated. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The motion before the 
Assembly then is the original motion moved by the member for 
Regina Douglas Park, the member for . . . and seconded by the 
member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the members 
for a standing vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:07 until 12:08. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The motion before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Regina Douglas Park, 
seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 

Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion please rise. 
 

Nays — 28 
 

Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Morgan 
McMorris Eagles Gantefoer 
Harpauer Bakken Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Brkich 
Weekes Kerpan Merriman 
Chisholm Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 
favour of the motion, 28; those opposed, 28. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Clerk has announced that there is 
an equality of votes for and against the motion. In these 
circumstances it is my duty pursuant to rule 26(2) to give a 
casting vote to break the tie. According to parliamentary 
practice, the Speaker votes according to certain procedural 
principles in order to avoid any imputation on the impartiality 
of the Chair. 
 
The vote on the budget motion is traditionally viewed as a 
question of confidence. The principle that applies in this 
instance is that important decisions should be taken only by a 
majority. Matters of confidence are of such importance that a 
decision of non-confidence should be clearly made by a 
majority. It would not be appropriate for the vote of the Speaker 
alone to overturn the status quo as determined in the last 
election. 
 
I therefore vote in favour of the budget motion, and the motion 
is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
Assembly to move several procedural motions to refer estimates 
and supplementary estimates to the various standing 
committees. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave of the Assembly to make several motions. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

The Speaker: — Granted. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates to Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates, 
being: 

vote 74, Information Technology Office; 
vote 33, Public Service Commission; 
vote 53, Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation; 
vote 165, Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan; 
vote 159, Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan; 
vote 154, Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation; 
vote 152, Saskatchewan Power Corporation; 
vote 153, Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 

Corporation; 
vote 150, SaskEnergy Incorporated 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 

And that’s seconded, Mr. Speaker, by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 

 
The Speaker: — On the motion moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Douglas Park and seconded by the member . . . or 
pardon, Regina Douglas Park and seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, will members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who are opposed to the motion say 
nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the members 
for a standing vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:14 until 12:17. 
 
(12:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The motion 
before the Assembly is the motion moved by the member for 

Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates, 
being: 

vote 74, Information Technology Office; 
vote 33, Public Service Commission; 
vote 53, Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation; 
vote 165, Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan; 
vote 159, Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan; 
vote 154, Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation; 
vote 152, Saskatchewan Power Corporation; 
vote 153, Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 

Corporation; 
vote 150, SaskEnergy Incorporated 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 

 
Would those members who favour the motion please rise. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

Nays — 28 
 

Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart   
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, during the vote. I 
would ask for all members to maintain silence except for those 
that are voting. 
 
Wakefield Morgan McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Kerpan Merriman Chisholm 
Dearborn Hart Kirsch 
 
The Speaker: — The Clerk has announced that there is an 
equality of votes for and against the motion. 
 
In these circumstance it is my duty pursuant to rule 26 to give a 
casting vote and break the tie. According to parliamentary 
practice, the Speaker votes according to certain procedural 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2004 

principles in order to avoid any imputation on the impartiality 
of the Chair. 
 
In general the principle applied to motions is that when no 
further discussion is possible, decisions should not be taken 
except by a majority. The Speaker alone should not change the 
status quo, which is to leave the estimates in Committee of 
Finance. 
 
I therefore vote against the motion and declare the motion 
defeated. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House will stand 
adjourned until Wednesday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:21. 
 



April 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

CORRIGENDA 
 
On page 414 of Hansard No. 14A Tuesday, April 6, 2004, 
reference to “Yen” Martel in the ninth paragraph of Mr. 
Addley’s speech should read “Yann” Martel. 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 
 
 
On page 424 of Hansard No. 14A Tuesday, April 6, 2004, the 
line reading: 
 
And there’s a powerful Cree word, in Cree . . . (Cree) . . . which 
means a good life. 
 
should read: 
 
And there’s a powerful Cree word, in Cree, mītho pimacīsiwin, 
which means a good life. 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................465 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................465 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................465 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................465 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................465 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................465 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................466 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................466 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................466 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................466 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................466 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................466 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................481 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................482 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................474 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................475 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Observance of Passover and Easter 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................466 
 Easter Celebration 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................467 
 Invitation to Support the Budget 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................467 
 Opening of Provincial Parks 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................467 
 Recognition for Downtown Regina 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................468 
 Conditions Facing Saskatchewan Seniors 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................468 
 Good News from the Meadow Lake Constituency 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................468 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Commitments Made by Government 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................468 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................469 
 Provincial Sales Tax 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................470 
 Funding for Health Care 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................470 
 Closure of Long-Term Care Beds 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................470 
 Fees for Hearing Aids 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................470 
 Support for Rural Saskatchewan 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................471 
 Education Portion of Property Taxes 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................471 
 Provincial Income Tax Credits 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................471 



 

 Fire Permit Fee 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................472 
 Increases in Fees in Vital Statistics 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................472 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................472 
 Commitments Made by the Government 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................472 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................472 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................474 
 Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................474 
 Bill No. 21 — The Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Act, 2004 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................474 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................474 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................474 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................475 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................477 
  Taylor (point of order) .............................................................................................................................................................479 
  Gantefoer (point of order)........................................................................................................................................................480 
  The Speaker (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................................480 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................482 
 Recorded Division (Amendment) ................................................................................................................................................485 
 Recorded Division (Motion).........................................................................................................................................................486 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Estimates to Committee 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................487 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................487 
CORRIGENDA ................................................................................................................................................................................489 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


