















































Hansard: June 14, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 56B  MONDAY, JUNE 14, 2004, 7 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1611 
 June 14, 2004 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. The committee will come to order. First 
continue with Executive Council, administration (EX01). I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. At the break we were 
talking about a couple of health care issues. One was the 
out-of-province review, and the Premier indicated that his 
minister is indeed reviewing the program. And we look forward 
to the results of that because we really do believe that there is 
some improvements that are needed with respect to the 
out-of-province review program, especially in terms of 
communicating with health care providers in the province, so 
they understand the processes that are at work. 
 
And he also touched on how he believes the quality care 
coordinators are the answer to this issue we have. When we’re 
proposing a health care commissioner or, as the cancer society 
has proposed, an ombudsman, and again I guess we’re a little 
bit reticent about that because these quality care coordinators, 
that system has been in place now for some time and has 
resulted in the very difficulties and challenges that we’ve been 
bringing forward here to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
But I would say this, that it does seem to be a sense amongst the 
government benches that these are issues that need to be dealt 
with, and we’ll continue to ask questions and try to highlight 
the need for improvements in those areas. So the bottom line of 
course is so people can get the health care that they deserve in 
the province and that the information is readily available. 
 
There were some other items in the Premier’s Throne Speech, 
the Premier’s government’s Throne Speech from this session 
that I also was encouraged by. There was a reference to 
continued programming in FASD (fetal alcohol spectrum 
disorder). I would want to be on the record joining my 
colleague, the member for Kelvington-Wadena, who has done a 
lot of work on this issue. I’d want to be on the record as saying 
the need in the province really is, among other things, in terms 
of diagnostics for FASD . . . and we’ve highlighted again cases 
where this has been prevalent. And so, notwithstanding the 
reference to FASD in the Throne Speech, those are the things 
that we will be looking for, although we were glad that it would 
rate mention in the Throne Speech and hope that it continues to 
be a priority with specific reference to diagnostics. 
 
Also referenced in the Throne Speech was the uranium 
industry, and the Premier was touching on it in an earlier 
answer, that soon we would be hearing more about an 
expansion of a uranium . . . I’m guessing the expansion of 
uranium mining in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I guess what I want to gather from the Premier . . . and the 

Premier also referenced earlier on that I’ve been going around 
the province talking about our economic vision for 
Saskatchewan, referencing the fact that Saskatchewan can and 
really should be a centre for excellence for all manner of energy 
generation on the continent. I would ask this of the Premier 
though, in addition to mining . . . and I understand that this is 
probably the announcement that’s forthcoming, an expansion in 
the extraction of the mineral, or of uranium I should say. I 
would ask this: what is the Premier’s position on further 
development of that industry in Saskatchewan? I’m thinking of 
refining. 
 
Members of this House will know that we have unfortunately 
— not without the help of a current MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) that’s sitting here today — chased away 
some economic development that would have resulted in the 
Warman area that involved further refining the ore. You know, 
Mr. Chairman, I think everybody in Saskatchewan understands 
that one of the challenges we faced in the province over the last 
six decades and longer is that we seem to be satisfied to export 
the raw resource and don’t necessarily put a premium on 
refining or value-added. I think this is especially true on the 
issue of uranium ore, and the evidence of course is the fact that 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) partisans have chased out our 
only opportunity for a refinery. 
 
I want to get the Premier, if he would, on the record. What is his 
opinion? What are his views, not only in terms of the expansion 
of uranium extraction in Saskatchewan and mining, but also in 
the further development of all of the various cycles of this 
powerful and potentially very positive industry for our 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think as all members know, 
the mining of uranium and the export of uranium is a very 
significant activity in our province, providing very significant 
economic benefits to the whole province, but particularly to our 
northerners. We as a government are very proud of the work 
that we’ve been able to accomplish with the industry in the 
employment of northerners in that industry. We’ve taken the 
levels of northern employment there from relatively modest 
numbers to very substantial numbers. We’re very proud of that 
and proud of the work that the industry has done. 
 
In Saskatchewan, as we’ve mined uranium, we’ve done so with 
every consideration being given to environmental stewardship 
and safe practices within the mining of uranium. And as we 
move towards the potential development of Cigar Lake, of 
course that will be done with all appropriate environmental 
health and safety scrutiny. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition asks the question about further 
potential for the refining of uranium in this province and 
references back to a decision that was made in the late 1970s or 
early ’80s. I would remind the Leader of the Opposition, if he’s 
not aware of this, that the mining industry — whether it be 
refining and so on, uranium industry — is federally regulated. It 
was a federal process that, at the end of the day, did not approve 
the refining of uranium in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that said, Mr. Chair, we recognize the reality of the state 
of the industry in Canada today. And when we are in 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

conversations with the mining industry, with the uranium 
industry and the players in that industry which we are regularly, 
they tell us that the refining capacity in this nation is fully met 
with the refining capacity that exists today in Ontario. And the 
industry itself is not pushing for further refining capacity. This 
is clearly not something I think that the Leader of the 
Opposition would suggest that the Government of 
Saskatchewan initiate or do. And when the industry itself is 
saying that they have sufficient refining capacity, the likelihood 
of expanding that capacity here in the province is very, very 
thin. 
 
And again to remind the Leader of the Opposition that when the 
decision was made back in the late ’70s or early ’80s, that was a 
federal government decision. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well you know, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s also 
fair to say that . . . and if you talk to those who are in the 
uranium business here today, and one of the them of course the 
largest one on the planet, a former Crown corporation or at least 
a former . . . the product now of a joint venture and then the 
IPO (initial public offering) or a privatization of two former 
Crowns, Eldorado Nuclear, the federal Crown, and SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) a 
provincially owned Crown set up by the Premier’s party . . . 
will know that there is a sense that as a result of what happened 
in the late ’70s and early ’80s . . . And the member for 
Greystone I think would probably agree with this were he given 
the permission to. The refinery, the proposed refinery at 
Warman certainly did not feel welcome in the province of 
Saskatchewan as a result of the work that was done by NDP 
activists. And I would argue the Government of Saskatchewan 
. . . and there is a reason that that refinery, that that capacity is 
in Ontario and not here. 
 
And I think it’s unfortunate. This is a home to a third of the 
world’s supply of uranium right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. There must be a reason that none of it, not any 
ore at all is refined here in the province. 
 
And I don’t think you can blame federal regulation for that. The 
environment and the atmosphere here in Saskatchewan certainly 
has something to do with that. And the Premier talks about how 
there’s no need for further refining capacity now in Canada. 
You know these things of course change. 
 
Oil wasn’t over 40 bucks a barrel a number of months ago 
either. And oil and gas companies headquartered in Alberta or 
even here in the province certainly have changed their own 
development and exploration plans because of the price. 
 
Things change and the question to the Premier is simple. 
Notwithstanding whether currently, immediately today is a 
demand for refining or not, would his government support and 
work with any company that was interested in refining, further 
refining this resource in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, again if 
the Leader of the Opposition wants to review history from the 
1970s about the mining or the refining of uranium in this 
province, he will know — and the record is very clear — that 
the provincial government at that time, led by then premier, 
Allan Blakeney, was very much a proponent, very much a 

proponent; very much a proponent of the mining industry. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, the community itself, the 
community of Warman, the community of Saskatoon, the 
community of Saskatchewan, many members of the community 
opposed it. Some were New Democrats; there’s no doubt about 
that. But I expect that some were members of other political 
parties, including the Conservative Party or the Alliance, 
Reform, Saskatchewan Party. Citizens of the province 
expressed their views. I think that’s an appropriate, that’s an 
appropriate thing. 
 
Now if in fact circumstances change in the industry or in the 
world demand or so on, it would be the industry who would 
step forward to indicate that. As with any proposal made by 
industry, there are the processes and the regulations, the proper 
environmental concerns, and so on. Those processes are in 
place, and if the industry believes there is a potential for the 
further refining of uranium and the industry steps forward and 
says that, of course they would be given the due consideration. 
 
My conversations lately and the conversations that this 
government has had with the industry would indicate there is 
no, at this time, demand for any further refining capacity. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well I am not sure; I 
don’t know what to read from the Premier’s answer. 
 
I mean he . . . you know, understandably this is a hypothetical 
question; I understand that. And the Premier’s answer was 
based on hypotheticals as well, fair enough. But he’s saying that 
. . . but then he said if the industry stepped forward and the 
industry wanted to make the investment and if the industry met 
all of the standards. Now I am putting words in his mouth. If 
this is wrong he can certainly answer, clarify for the record. But 
I am assuming what he said was, if the industry met all of the 
standards, that he would give it, the government would give it 
due consideration. 
 
I think it’s a yes or no question. If all of that happened — if 
there is an upswing in demand, there’s an increased demand for 
refining of the ore, and if they meet all the standards and it’s 
private sector money, yes or no? Would the Premier support 
that development in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s the difference. 
Mr. Chair, here is the difference. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition would have me stand in the 
House tonight and give some blanket approval to a process of a 
hypothetical notion that there’s going to be some further 
demand for refining. I’ll repeat. The industry believes that the 
marketplace, the world marketplace requires greater refining 
capacity. The industry would make that known. The industry 
would make some decisions about where they believe that 
refining capacity was most appropriately placed. And the 
variety of processes exists, some very stringent processes, and 
fair enough. Which process would, again, I expect, engage 
some community involvement. It happened in the ’70s; the 
government at that time was a proponent of the industry 
proposal. 
 
But we’re not here, I think, to speculate in hypothetical 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

situations down the road. What I think is more important is to 
be discussing those issues which are not speculation but very, 
very real — very, very real. We have a vibrant mining 
community and mining economy in this province. 
 
I want to just share with members present a number of quotes 
from the mining industry itself, from the: “The Saskatchewan 
NDP government has been a long and ardent supporter of the 
mining sector and industry in general.” 

 
Quote from an article entitled, “Saskatchewan Mining Moves to 
the Front Burner,” again from the Canadian Miner: “The 
Saskatchewan government has put a good basket of incentives 
together that reflect the realities in the industry,” referring 
specifically to the potash industry. 
 
A quote again from autumn 2003 from the Canadian Miner: 
 

When ministry officials in Saskatchewan were comparing 
the incentives offered by the province with other 
jurisdictions in Canada, they made an interesting 
discovery. When you add up all the items in the incentive 
shopping cart, Saskatchewan is not only competitive. It is 
one of the most attractive provinces to explore and operate 
mines. 

 
Mr. Chair, this government, its Department of Industry and 
Resources, its current minister has worked very diligently with 
the mining industry to see progress in that industry, to see 
Saskatchewan take its rightful place as one of the leading 
mining jurisdictions in Canada, whether it be in uranium or coal 
or potash. And with our great potential in diamonds, with the 
other precious minerals, this province is very much a mining 
province, and we intend to keep it that way, and in fact see 
progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well what you didn’t hear in any of that, Mr. 
Chairman, what you didn’t hear in any of that was the Premier 
just standing up and saying, look, if the private sector wants to 
make an investment, if they think the demand is there, and if 
they meet all the environmental regulations and standards set 
forth by the government to do it, that we would say yes. I didn’t 
hear him say that. 
 
He didn’t say it, Mr. Chairman. His ideology, I don’t think, 
would let him say it. 
 
(19:15) 
 
In fact, you know it’s interesting. We have heard from uranium 
mining executives in this province, a great deal of concern 
about that Premier’s comments and that Premier’s reference to 
nuclear energy — which of course is a major source for our 
uranium, whether we like to admit it or not — that this was the 
dirtiest form of energy, the dirtiest form of energy. 
 
Imagine how that resonated in the head offices around the 
world, head offices that may want to invest still more money in 
our province. Companies that may want to invest in 
Saskatchewan would hear the Premier of the province say that. 
And then today or at some point in the future, they’ll read into 

the record that even if there’s a market for refining . . . And you 
know, I guess the Premier wonders about what relevance that 
has here. 
 
It has everything to do with the future of Saskatchewan, of 
course; not just with respect to mining uranium but with respect 
to coal and with respect to oil and gas. It has everything to do 
with this government’s view of those industries and with this 
government’s commitment to — with this government’s 
commitment to the future development of those industries. 
 
It apparently wants to cherry-pick. Yes to this, but no to 
uranium. And the Premier should just stand up and say yes or 
no to the answer: if all of those conditions are met, what signal 
will he send? And he may want to take to his feet, Mr. Chair, 
and clarify for those that will read these words in the future or 
perhaps are watching the proceedings, exactly what he meant 
when he referred to nuclear energy as the dirtiest energy. 
 
Here in the province of Saskatchewan, our Premier, the Premier 
of the province that is home to a third of the world’s, a third of 
the world’s uranium supply, would say that — this same 
Premier whose economy, whose budget is dependent on those 
very same sources of energy to purchase, to purchase refined 
uranium that comes from a province, that comes from the 
province of Saskatchewan. And he tells the world and tells 
those located here, head office here, present here, that he 
considers it dirty energy. He may want to clarify that for them. 
 
We in the Saskatchewan Party think there’s great potential with 
this industry, frankly. And the Premier’s always wanting to 
know what we would do. Well for instance, Mr. Chairman, we 
would send a positive signal to this industry, to the people that 
mine the ore in the province — that employ many, many 
hundreds and thousands of people in northern Saskatchewan 
and all over the province — we would send a message to them 
that, for example, if there was a demand for excess refining 
capacity, and if there was a private sector company willing to 
invest, and they met the standards, we wouldn’t even hesitate. 
The answer would be yes. We want to add that value here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There was another reference as well, I believe, in the Premier’s 
Throne Speech which I welcome as well; to clean coal, to coal 
gasification, a clean-coal technology. And again, you know, 
depending on who you talk to, we could have up to 200 years 
worth of coal resource here in the province. And I guess we 
would ask the Premier this question: what specifically is he, 
what specifically he’s got planned in this regard. Again we 
would want to be there in support of any project in terms of coal 
gasification or clean-coal technology in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Morin: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Chair: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the member for 
Regina Walsh Acres. 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to introduce two 
members in the Speaker’s gallery, Jackie Shanks and her 
brother, Ricky Shanks. They are two young constituents of 
Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
They have many, many talents besides the wonderful sports that 
they are involved in and very adept at. They are excellent at 
driving to Saskatoon to pick up signs when they are late during 
an election. They are very good at accompanying me in door 
knocking, very good at pushing out a half ton truck when it got 
stuck in the snow, etc., etc. So I understand they’re studying 
very hard for their exams right now — they’re in high school — 
and I wish them the best of luck, and welcome them to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well again you 
have a circumstance where you can believe the Leader of the 
Opposition, who would try and paint the picture of a province 
that is very unhospitable or unwelcoming to the mining 
industry, when the facts are just the opposite. And the facts are 
recognized, not just by this government, not just by the people 
of Saskatchewan, but those who are most well acquainted with 
the industry, representatives of the industry themselves in their 
own publications. 
 
Perhaps I need to quote again to the Leader of the Opposition, 
what he just recognized, the truth of these words, the truth of 
these words. Here, another quote from the Canadian Miner 
magazine, talking about Saskatchewan: 
 

The province is also competitive internationally. When 
you take . . . account (of) the fuel tax credit for mining and 
exploration, Saskatchewan is in the same league with 
Venezuela, one of the most attractive countries in the 
world for mining and exploration. Another advantage the 
province has to offer comes from an unexpected quarter, 
(no) health care premiums. 

 
Now isn’t that interesting. Now, Mr. Speaker, I could read 
quote after quote after quote, not from partisan politicos, but 
from the mining industry itself. From the Canadian Miner 
talking about the potential of diamond mining in this province, 
quote: “The Saskatchewan government is pro-industry . . . ” Mr. 
Chair, they have all the rhetoric, we have all the action, and the 
action is providing . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . a burgeoning industry in our 

province. 
 
Now when we want to talk about energy sources that come 
from beneath the ground, coal remains a significant resource. It 
remains a significant resource today in our capacity to generate 
electricity, and we believe, as technologies improve, it can be 
and will be a valuable energy resource for many, many years 
into the future. The Leader of the Opposition talks about a 
200-year supply of coal. I’ve heard estimates of 3 and 400 
years. We have a valuable resource. 
 
Our Power Corporation, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 
is very much a part of the clean coal coalition, those who are 
working at the technologies, it may be gasification, it may be 
cleaner technologies in the burning of coal. Members will 
know, citizens will know that the Power Corporation has 
invested significant dollars in cleaner burning technologies in 
our existing coal-fired electrical plants. 
 
That said and that resource recognized, we’ve also recognized 
other resources, energy resources that come from above the 
ground. And we have taken over the last three years some 
extremely significant steps forward in harnessing the power of 
the wind; a clean technology, a technology where three years 
ago we were not generating 1 kilowatt hour from the wind. 
We’ve done the pilot work with a 15-kilowatt project and now 
we’re moving into a 150-kilowatt project, Mr. Chair, a very, 
very, very significant expansion of wind-generated electricity in 
this province. 
 
Now we’ve also looked at the other opportunities for 
generation, whether they be solar. We have our Research 
Council doing some exceptional pioneering work on the globe 
in terms of the utilization of hydrogen as an energy source. We 
do see for this province a future that has very much a future 
with energy as we talked about in the Throne Speech, utilizing 
those resources which come from beneath the ground, the 
traditional resources of oil, gas, uranium, coal, the mining 
sector, but also looking at these new sources which come, many 
of them, from above the ground. And, Mr. Chair, this province 
will be, will be a leader in energy. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chairman, you know you ask for 
. . . here the opposition is saying that this reference in the 
Throne Speech is a positive thing, and what are the specifics 
around it. Is it just a sentence in the Throne Speech or is there 
something that SaskPower is doing, something specific that the 
government is doing other than the involvement in the clean 
coal coalition which, you know, I certainly have heard 
testimony of in the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
You know, there is potential, we know, of a pilot project on 
coal gasification. What’s the government specifically doing on 
that? Are they working with the federal government? These are 
the kinds of questions that we have for the Premier and the 
specifics that we’re looking for and hope that he has. Or are 
they only references in the Throne Speech? And I guess I’d ask 
him to provide those then, if not today, at his earliest 
convenience to the opposition so we can determine our support 
for that kind of, that kind of initiative. 
 
It’s interesting the Premier would want to quote a number of 
sources on the issue of mining. It was about three weeks ago or 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

so that I had the good fortune to meet with a certain mining 
sector in Saskatchewan, and they did highlight the fact that 
there continues to be great potential in this province, and they 
highlighted a certain degree of pride in the investment and the 
operations they currently have here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But do you know what they said, Mr. Chair? They said that the 
incremental tax rates in the province results in the fact that we 
in Saskatchewan, we leave a lot on the table. And of course 
there’s a number of things that will go into the incremental tax 
rate. 
 
What the industry was saying is that there’s significant capacity 
that goes untapped in Saskatchewan today because of these 
incremental rates. And specifically, Mr. Chairman, the 
incremental tax rates would be made up of any number of 
things depending on the industry. There could be the resource 
surcharge, there could be the corporate income tax, the capital 
tax, yes, that the Premier kind of mocks that anybody would 
want to reduce a tax that actually penalizes investment — but 
they highlight that fact, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And you know what else they said? They said that when they 
go to their boardrooms to advocate for more investment in the 
province of Saskatchewan, the challenge that they have, the 
challenge that they have is that the incremental tax rates here in 
Saskatchewan are higher than they are in, say, New Brunswick. 
They’ve also got . . . this one company also has an operation in 
New Brunswick and the incremental tax rate . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Hon. members, order. I 
would like to be able to hear the member who has the floor. 
Would the members please come to order. I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. They’re very 
frustrated by the fact that these incremental rates here, to 
expand capacity, actually are more punitive and higher here in 
Saskatchewan, where there is a head office, for example, for 
one of them, than they are in New Brunswick or in Florida or 
near the Dead Sea. 
 
And of course what we lose when we don’t, when we’re not 
competitive on this front is we don’t lose just the incremental 
revenue, if we were to lower those incremental rates and 
generate that revenue for the General Revenue Fund. We don’t 
just lose the revenue. We lose the economic activity and the 
jobs and we face the prospect of these companies having to take 
their additional investment dollars elsewhere. 
 
So there is much work to be done. There is work to be done, 
and I think that’s precisely the point. We’re going to get to it a 
little bit later on this evening. Precisely the point is the 
government does seem to be quite happy with things the way 
they are. The Premier seems quite happy with the fact that a 
province with all of the riches we have to offer, all of our 
natural endowment and our human resource, is a have-not 
province. He seems to be happy with that. 
 
And we’re going to get to that in a moment, I think, Mr. 
Chairman. But I would ask for some specifics from the Premier 
on the coal gasification project. Surely if he would include this 
in the Throne Speech there must be something that is backing 

those things up, and we would ask for specifics on that tonight 
here, Mr. Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well it is somewhat confusing when the 
Leader of the Opposition seems afraid to identify the industry 
which he speaks. I’ll identify the industry — it’s the potash 
industry. Just days ago I sat down with the leaders of the potash 
industry in this province. I’m not afraid to admit it. I’m not 
afraid to say it. I don’t know why the Leader of the Opposition 
is. 
 
Now the facts are these, Mr. Chair. There are two mineral 
resources in which Canada — Canada — leads in the world. 
They’re both based in Saskatchewan. One of them’s uranium 
and one of them’s potash. We lead the world. 
 
We are today seeing record numbers in terms of potash 
production. We’re seeing a very good price for potash on the 
international markets — very good. We have seen expansion of 
that industry. About a year ago we made some change to the 
regime regarding investments in the potash industry. The 
industry has taken advantage of those changes. We see the 
expansion that’s happening in Rocanville, Saskatchewan right 
now. 
 
We also are aware, Mr. Chair, of the difference in royalty and 
taxation regimes around the world. The industry tells me as well 
that when their boardrooms are making capital decisions, of 
course they look at that as one of the factors. But they also look 
at the factor of the ready access to the potash which is here, they 
look at the infrastructure which is here, they look at the quality 
of the potash which is here, and they look at the skill of the 
Saskatchewan workforce that’s mining the potash. 
 
To deal with the matter of the taxation regime, the potash 
industry themselves understand and will say to me, we 
understand your need for revenues to provide for health care, to 
provide for education, infrastructure, highways, and so on. We 
understand your need and we understand the investment needs 
of the industry. 
 
Therefore again not just rhetoric but action, we are working 
with the industry. We are working with the industry today and 
in the days ahead to review the entire package to ensure that the 
people of Saskatchewan get their fair share of return for the 
resource which belongs to them, and equally makes it possible 
for the industry to prosper and to invest, to employ our people, 
and to keep us in a leadership position in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(19:30) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . or, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, sorry . . . Mr. Chair. I would like to ask a few questions 
of the Premier this evening. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’ve been talking recently, several members of 
our caucus, about the whole issue around addictions and about 
specifically crystal meth. And so this evening I’d like to ask 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

you, with a bit of preamble, what your plan is to address this 
serious concern? 
 
Mr. Premier, in the United States they formed an 89 member, 
bipartisan congressional caucus to fight and control 
methamphetamine. And I’d like to quote from a letter that was 
written some two years . . . on October 2002 regarding this 
serious concern in the United States at that time. And I quote, 
and they’re writing to the director of the Office of National 
Drug Control Policy. And the caucus bipartisan group writes, 
and I quote: 
 

We ask that, when crafting future drug policy, a greater 
focus is placed on the drug methamphetamine. 
Methamphetamine is quickly becoming one of the most 
dangerous drugs in the United States. Production 
nationwide continues to skyrocket. This statistic should 
cause great concern as it shows it highly addictive. 
Methamphetamine has become a mainstream drug. 

 
And then it goes on to talk about how it, “ . . . permeates into 
virtually every aspect of life, it is not only the person that is 
directly using it.” But it goes on to say that: 
 

Families and communities are also torn apart due to this 
illicit drug. Meth use often leads to other crimes such as 
domestic violence, child abuse, and theft. In addition, meth 
has dangerous impacts on environment. 
 
Methamphetamine production leaves behind 5 to 6 pounds 
of toxic waste per pound of meth produced. Meth lab 
investigations require special health and haz mat 
procedures and specifically trained investigative personnel 
to collect and handle evidence seized. 
 
In crafting the drug policy, the legislators from the United 
States ask that specifically these points were addressed: 
law enforcement, environment, child welfare, treatment 
and prevention. 

 
And, Mr. Premier, specifically they talked about prevention. 
They asked that the United States government devote specific 
accounts to meth prevention education, rather than a more broad 
drug prevention education. And it secondly encourages states to 
integrate meth education for both students and parents into 
anti-drug education class. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, this goes directly to what the Saskatchewan 
Party has been calling on the government to address, that there 
be specific education component in the curriculum by this fall 
directly related to meth and also that there be education broadly 
spread across the province in the form of, hopefully, public 
meetings for students and parents with law enforcement 
involved, with those that work in addiction services involved. 
 
Would the Premier please address this and tell the legislature 
what steps the Premier’s going to take to be proactive in the 
fight to stop people, and especially our young people, in 
becoming involved with this deadly drug? Will he hold public 
education meetings? Will he ensure that the curriculum 
specifically addresses this issue this fall? And will he entertain 
the idea of a special joint committee of the legislature to look at 
further avenues we can take to address this serious issue? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the members, members 
opposite have identified in the course of this sitting a particular 
concern around crystal meth — a concern that is shared by this 
government, a concern that I’m sure is shared by the people of 
Saskatchewan, a concern that is shared by all of us I think who 
are parents or work with or have involvement with young 
people. 
 
Now the facts again are that as early as 1998 it was the current 
Minister of Health, then in his capacity as attorney general, who 
brought together attorneys general from a variety of provinces 
and began discussions about this very specific drug problem. 
We have now incorporated into our educational curriculum — 
the Minister of Learning tells me beginning as early as grade 4 
— education to our young people around the use of drugs. 
 
Now we understand and the opposition understands and I think 
most in Saskatchewan understand the particular, the particular 
addictive qualities of this drug. But I think it’s fair to say that 
there are many other substances that our young people are 
exposed to that can create as much havoc in their lives or in the 
lives of their families as crystal meth. 
 
I represent a constituency where there is a significant amount of 
sniffing of other substances, creating some very, very difficult 
circumstances. We all will know families in communities, in 
neighbourhoods where alcohol remains the drug of choice. We 
all know that there are a variety of substances that affect our 
young people. 
 
Yes, we need to provide information about this drug. But we 
equally need to be providing information about all of those 
substances which affect our kids particularly — if I may say — 
which affect any citizen of our province. 
 
Now we’re taking some very, very direct steps to try and get at 
some of this during this session. One of the pieces of legislation 
that’s been under debate in this session is the safe communities 
Act where, through the passage of this piece of legislation, we 
will put into the hands of our enforcement agencies, the police, 
the ability to move in and shut down some of these homes 
where these drugs are being produced right in our 
neighbourhoods. The police forces are very appreciative of this 
tool that this legislature will provide for them to deal with those 
who are profiting from the production of this kind of substance 
in our neighbourhoods. 
 
The Minister of Learning has committed to continuing the work 
of education through the school curriculum, but has committed 
also that we’re not simply going to put all of our efforts into 
one, because our young people are faced with a barrage of drugs 
and unhealthy lifestyle opportunities and temptations. 
 
And if I may say, Mr. Chair, it seems to me we need always to 
be asking the question: what is it that turns a young person to 
look for a substance to alter their experience? What is it? 
What’s going on? And there are some deep-rooted causes here. 
 
And yes, we must treat the criminals that are providing it. And 
yes, we must treat and help those who are currently or are 
tempted to use the substance. But we’ve got to look a little 
deeper, in my view, Mr. Chair, to what is it that motivates a 
young person. What is it in their peer pressure? What is it in 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

their experience? 
 
And I have concluded, Mr. Chair, that the work that we’re 
doing to try and lift people out of poverty, out of dependence, to 
lift people into employment and education, the work that we’re 
doing in housing to stabilize neighbourhoods and provide 
families with quality housing, these are just as important in the 
long run. 
 
Ah, the Leader of the Opposition may smile. But these, in my 
view, are as important, as important as the urgent work that 
needs to be done when a young person is facing the choice of 
the unhealthy lifestyle. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. And I appreciate the 
fact that your government is going to take this issue very 
seriously. 
 
One of the other points that were made by the US (United 
States) congressman was the whole issue of treatment. And 
under the heading treatment, they make the following points, 
that they make funds available specifically for meth addicts 
because meth has its separate and unique characteristics. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, it is well known in the province of 
Saskatchewan amongst addiction workers and law enforcement 
agents and those that are seeking treatment for addiction that we 
have a great lack of facilities that are directly related to 
supporting our youth and to helping them with addictions. At 
one time in the province, we had a separate facility for youth — 
White Spruce — which was closed by your government. And 
I’m asking you, Mr. Premier, what specific steps are you taking 
as a government in order to address this serious lack of 
facilities, both for detox and for in-patient treatment? 
 
I’ve had occasion in the last month to speak with several 
addiction counsellors that indicate that there are no facilities 
available for detoxing young people. The only avenue is to send 
them to an emergency ward in the hospital. Many young people 
unfortunately end up under law enforcement because of a lack 
of facilities for them to go to, to detox, and to be helped from 
the point of . . . (inaudible) . . . to detoxification. And then once 
that happens, there is yet a lack of resources where they can go 
for ongoing treatment so that they can actually kick the habit, 
and also for their families to be involved because this is a 
family issue, not just the person who is directly addicted. 
 
Could the Premier indicate what steps you are taking as a 
government to address this problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I would not want the member 
to leave any erroneous impression on those who may be 
observing the proceedings tonight. My view is there is room for 
debate on whether or not we are providing sufficient resources 
for either detox or rehabilitation resources that are in-patient. 
There is room for debate there. 
 
But I would not want anyone to be left with the impression 
there are not services available today for young people in 
Saskatchewan for both detox and rehab work. In fact for detox 
and rehab there is a very exceptional program that’s provided at 
the Calder Centre in Saskatoon, the Calder Centre adolescent 
program. 

There, there are 12 beds devoted to the in-patient treatment of 
youth. And of those 12 beds, 9 are geared toward services for 
chemically dependent youth that may be referred from addiction 
services across the province, and there’s a very highly qualified 
multidisciplinary staff at Calder. I’ve been there many times. 
 
In terms of more southern, there are detoxification facilities 
available here in the southern part of the province, at the Angus 
Campbell Centre in Moose Jaw and at the Regina, at the Regina 
detox. Mr. Chair, you will recall, others will recall there was a 
treatment facility at White Spruce in Yorkton, a 45-bed facility 
that at its maximum, at its maximum only achieved about a 
15-bed utilization — at its maximum. 
 
What we have done over the last number of years is to try and 
bring the services closer to the family and closer to the young 
people. And so there are many, many more community-based 
services today in Saskatchewan than were just a few years ago. 
And I think the literature would say and the professionals would 
say that oftentimes the community-based service, where you 
can work with young people in their own community as 
opposed to removing them from their community, can be the 
most effective treatment. 
 
Now I agree that there is yet room for debate, yet room for 
discussion. Should we be looking at further in-patient treatment 
for youth? I think it’s a good question. 
 
Members will know that we are working on a facility in 
Saskatoon for detox for adults. That work is underway, but 
again I think we have to be more sensitive to sometimes where 
the problems exist. And often the problems are existing in 
community, and the more services that we can bring to the 
family and the child, the neighbourhood, in community, I think 
we’re going to be more effective. 
 
So, fair enough? I think we could debate further the need for 
further in-patient treatment, but I do not want anyone to be left 
with the impression that there are not programs and facilities 
available tonight if a young person needs that kind of help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I believe that if you 
speak with people across the province that work in addiction 
services and families who have tried to find help for the young 
people, you would find quite a different response from them, 
that there is not a timely access to addiction services. 
 
When people are crying out for help and when they’ve made the 
decision that they want help, they need it now because the time 
frame, if you talk to addiction counsellors, is often very short 
when they make that determination. And if you lose them 
during that time, the chances of getting them back and wanting 
that help are very slim. And so it is very, very important that we 
have access to timely services in the province. 
 
It’s also true that under 12 years of age there is no place for 
detox. I spoke directly with an addiction counsellor that works 
with young people, that helps them after that age, but when 
they’re under 12 years of age the only place they can send them 
is to an emergency ward in the hospital, Mr. Premier. 
 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

(19:45) 
 
And I also heard you speak about community-based 
organizations. And as anyone that deals with addictions in this 
province knows, that since 1993, I believe it was, when 
SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) 
was dismantled in this province, we have seen a continual 
decline in the services that are provided by community-based 
organizations because of the government putting these services 
under the auspices of regional health authorities. And there’s an 
ongoing struggle between the local health authorities and the 
government: the government saying they’re not responsible to 
make these decisions about what services are provided and the 
health region saying that the government is holding the purse 
strings so they don’t have any control over it. 
 
We have seen several areas where funding has been cut in the 
last budget to addiction services in the province. And so for the 
Premier to say that we have adequate services and that the issue 
of youth and where there’s facilities is adequate is, I believe, 
not a true statement in regard to that we do have a timely 
access. And it’s certainly something that needs to be addressed. 
 
And I would ask the Premier, I would ask him if he would be 
willing to meet with the Saskatchewan Association of Boards of 
Addictions that have had this concern ever since SADAC was 
dismantled, and speak to them and work with them in trying to 
address the seriousness of the lack of services and the lack of 
community involvement and the lack of input from people that 
have walked the walk and know what we need to have in order 
to address addiction services adequately in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I wish the member opposite 
and members opposite generally, when they want to make . . . 
reflect comments that are made on this side of the House, would 
reflect them accurately. 
 
I did not say at any point in my comments that I believe that all 
the services available today are adequate. In fact I think I 
indicated just the opposite; there is room for discussion and 
debate here. 
 
Now I spent some fair bit of time serving both as associate and 
then as minister of Health. And I spent a fair bit of time 
speaking with people in the field of addictions and young 
people. And there is a debate in the professional community 
about the most appropriate and effective services, whether they 
should be community-based or institutional-based. 
 
I don’t particularly have the expertise to settle that debate, but I 
can tell you for sure there is a debate in the community. Would 
I be willing to meet with the folks in the addictions 
communities? Yes. In fact, had circumstances been different, 
this past week I was planning to meet with members of that 
community. A family death prevented me from attending to that 
meeting. Absolutely. 
 
This is not a matter that we, I think, we should engage in a high 
level of partisan finger pointing or anything else. We all are 
searching for the right solutions. There is a debate, I know in 
the treatment community, about what those right solutions are. 
 
We did have a stand-alone, drug-alcohol commission 

throughout the 1980s into the early ’90s that was brought into 
the more general delivery of health because at the time it was 
suggested that that would in fact provide more effective 
treatment. We have had the experience of those years, and again 
there is a debate whether that is in fact the appropriate way to 
go. 
 
Now I think we also need to recognize that there are limits to 
what we can provide to individuals. We need the individuals to 
make some conscious decisions for themselves. We need to be 
making changes in family support and family structure and 
neighbourhoods and the kind of influences that get young 
people and adults into addictive behaviours. 
 
It is, it is not simply a matter of adding more facilities. I mean 
you just simply turn on any media and see the influences on our 
kids. Influences that weren’t there even, even 10 years ago. You 
can now, I am told in this legislature, find sites on the Internet 
that give all sorts information. That kind of information wasn’t 
available to our young people even, even 10 years ago. 
 
So Mr. Chair, there are so many factors to this. My view is that 
we need to take it seriously. I see the results in . . . well we all 
see the results in our own constituencies, sometimes in our own 
families. The appropriate solutions are not always simple. But I 
tell you I commit myself and this government to finding the 
best solutions that we can find for our young people and adults 
wherever they live in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, and I appreciate your 
concern for this issue because it is a serious issue, and it is not a 
partisan issue. 
 
Notwithstanding the outside influences that everyone in society 
is faced with today, whether it is the Internet or TV or music or 
whatever, as a government we have an obligation to help those 
that need help. And as we know from talking to those that work 
in drug squads, that 80 per cent of the crime — in their 
estimation — in Saskatchewan is directly related to addictions 
of one sort or the other. So if we address the serious issue of 
addictions and we help those that are addicted, then we will 
reduce the cost to justice. We will also reduce the cost to the 
health system and to the social services system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Premier, just a . . . the last question 
I’d like to ask you with regards to addictions is about the 
mattress detox or the brief detox — it’s called by various names 
— in Saskatoon, which is adjoined to Larson House. This 
facility was promised in 2001. It is my understanding that the 
facility is now built but the indication is that it will not be in 
operation until September. 
 
I’d like to ask you, Mr. Premier, why this facility is on hold, 
why it is not being opened as we speak. When the facility is 
built . . . and is this government committed to the ongoing 
operating expenses of this facility in the years to come? Or will 
this become an expense of the Saskatoon Health District 
whereby if budgets are cut, they will have to make cuts 
accordingly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I understand from the 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

Minister of Health that the member of Weyburn had this, a very 
similar discussion with the Minister of Health during his 
estimates. 
 
He indicates to me that the people involved with the detox 
centre in Saskatoon are today working out the various protocols 
that I guess would involve health care providers, law 
enforcement agencies, and so on — that that work does take 
some time. I think we’d all like to hurry it up, but also we want 
it done right. And so the prediction is or the prognosis is that it 
should be completed and the facility opening in September. 
 
And as we open that facility, it will have the ongoing support of 
the Department of Health through budgeting to the Saskatoon 
Region. This is not something that we’re opening, and then 
we’ll withdraw funding for in some early or future time. We see 
this as a permanent addition to addictions treatment for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we think it’s a good partnership. Lots of good work’s been 
done; I’m told a little more needs to be done. But everyone, I 
think, anticipates now a September opening. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to the Premier. 
Premier, this year’s budget contained a number of surprises, one 
of them being the closure of the Echo Valley Conference Centre 
in Fort Qu’Appelle. This caught the valley community by 
surprise, as you can well imagine. They certainly feel that this 
facility is a historic and important facility in their community, 
and they have asked to work with your government to see if that 
facility can be saved from the wrecking ball, Mr. Premier. 
 
When the announcement was made that this facility would 
close, your minister responsible suggested that the annual 
savings would be in the neighbourhood of 800 to $900,000 per 
year. Yet during the consideration of estimates of the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, officials 
from that corporation suggested that the savings would be more 
in the order of $500,000 a year. 
 
What the valley community is asking, Mr. Premier, is this. 
They’re saying six months isn’t enough time to come up with 
some viable plans for that historic facility. It’s a facility that has 
about 200 acres. It has probably a dozen buildings. It’s a facility 
that has a long history in this province, and it’s a facility that’s 
hugely important to the area. 
 
The valley leaders met with the Minister Responsible for Sask 
Property Management Corporation in early May and presented 
the minister with a brief. And I’d like to quote from that brief, 
Premier. And I quote: 
 

The Valley Community commits itself, to cooperate and 
work with your department to review the total structure 
and operation of . . . (the Echo Valley Conference Centre) 
and, within two years to advance recommendations and 
policies to return its operation to an acceptable financial 
footing. If such a review and study does not bring these 
results, then the Valley Community would no longer 
object to closure and in fact would assist it. 

That seems like a very reasonable position and a very 
reasonable suggestion. And my question, Premier, is will you 
consider the valley community’s request? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there are many of us in this 
province who have a great deal of affection and some very, very 
good memories about the Echo Valley Conference Centre. 
Many of us have spent a significant time in that facility — 
whether it be through government or through community 
groups, through church groups, through labour groups. And we 
all understand, I think, the historic significance of the facility in 
the treatment of tuberculosis. 
 
Now over the last number of years the costs of operation have 
become virtually prohibitive. They have just risen. I think it is 
$1 million a year thereabouts we’re losing in terms of the 
facility. This is the information that we have. 
 
Now in a very difficult budget, when we are trying to find 
resources for health care and for education, for all the areas that 
the opposition would have us fund — while we should be also 
reducing taxes, I’m told — you ask your various departments to 
look for areas where we believe there can be some monetary 
savings without significant hurt to the general public. 
 
It has been proposed that we would end our involvement with 
the Echo Valley Conference Centre. However this does not 
necessarily mean that a wrecking ball comes in to tear down the 
facility. I’m told that SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) is very willing to work with 
proposals, with community groups. I know there’s a number of 
groups that are interested in working with the facility. The local 
community of Fort Qu’Appelle, members of the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour have talked about work that could be 
done. It has been our assessment that a six-month period is time 
to start bringing forward some of those proposals. As those 
proposals come forward, we’re not looking for absolutely 
finished, detailed proposals but some substantive ideas and 
proposals. Let them come forward. We’ll want to work with the 
community. We’ll want to work with various groups to look at 
proposals and options for that facility and that piece of our 
history. 
 
But, Mr. Chair, this government’s ability to keep funding the 
facility at a loss of 1 million or whatever it is a year, that is just 
not a sustainable in the long run. So we encourage . . . we give 
it a time frame of six months before any closures would take 
place, to look at proposals, and I’m encouraging those proposals 
to come forward. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the Premier talks about $1 million of 
annual losses when in fact Mr. Koop from the Sask Property 
Management Corporation, the individual that’s responsible for 
the operation of that facility, estimates that the annual cost 
savings by closing down the Echo Valley Conference Centre 
are more in the neighbourhood, the real savings are more in the 
neighbourhood of $550,000, and he stated that in the Crown 
and Central Agencies Committee on May 12. 
 
Mr. Chair, the Premier mentioned that the losses recently are 
unmanageable. Well the facts are that that centre has been 
losing money for a period of 8 to 10 years, that if that facility 
has been losing money of that magnitude over the last 8 to 10 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

years, why didn’t this government — the Premier and this 
government — consult with the community some five or six 
years ago? 
 
In fact, I’d like to quote from a letter from Mr. Don Anderson, 
executive assistant with the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour, and I quote. He says, “Why didn’t SPMC talk to users 
in the valley community about this matter two or three or four 
years ago?” 
 
(20:00) 
 
And that’s a very valid question. Why didn’t this government 
talk to the valley community about this facility? It’s a historic 
facility; it’s just not another office building that you shut down 
at the blink of an eye. This government knew that that facility 
was losing money and yet they didn’t even have the decency to 
talk to the community and the users of that facility, Mr. Chair. 
 
So it’s certainly not an excuse that . . . a tough budget and that 
this was a spur-of-the-moment decision. In fact, SPMC, at their 
request, they only renewed the contract with the Department of 
National Defence for the sea cadet program for one year. Prior 
to that, they always signed a five-year program, and the sea 
cadets certainly would have signed a five- or ten-year program 
if they knew that that facility would be in operation. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, this lack of consultation is certainly something 
that this government doesn’t do. We see it in the closure of 
health facilities. We see it in the closure of conservation offices 
across this province where they haven’t even got the decency to 
go and talk to the community. They find out the day of the 
budget at 12 o’clock, Mr. Chair. 
 
And all this community is asking for is, give us a little bit more 
time; talk to us; give us two years; and if we can’t come up with 
a plan, we’ll help you shut the thing down. Will you do that, 
Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, for the last number of years 
we have been making some investments in the Echo Valley 
Centre with hope that more activity would occur there. The 
information that I have indicates that the occupancy rate is only 
about 33 per cent now, that significant capital improvements are 
required. I’m told here that a capital injection of 4.7 million 
over the next five years would be required for building 
upgrades, another million required for some cosmetic upgrades 
and the addition of 30 private washrooms to bring the facility to 
a medium-quality standard for facilities of its kind. 
 
And I repeat: decisions are not easy when you’re in 
government. But you don’t have the luxury of opposition who 
will say spend more, spend more, spend more in health; spend 
more in highways; spend more in education; spend more at the 
Echo Valley Centre; spend more in the Department of the 
Environment; spend more everywhere. And at the same time, 
have the Leader of the Opposition stand up, well you’ve got to 
reduce the royalties in the mining sector, and you’ve got to cut 
the provincial sales tax, and you’ve got to lower the income 
taxes. And it just isn’t working with that kind of a theory. 
 
So what we’ve said — the minister has said it on many 
occasions — we’ve extended an interim period here of six 

months to look at options. If options are there, we’re more than 
happy to sit down with the community or with the SFL 
(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) or other interested parties, 
with the Department of National Defence, to see if there’s a 
workable option. 
 
But it’s very difficult, it’s very difficult for this government to 
go to the people of Saskatchewan and say — as they demand, 
rightfully so, more resources for MRIs (magnetic resonance 
imaging) and CT (computerized tomography) scans, and on and 
on it goes — that we can simply magically produce those 
resources without looking at some current expenditures. 
 
We are willing — the minister has said it on many occasions; 
I’ve said it publicly — we’re willing to look at options that 
might exist. But I find it very difficult to commit to ongoing 
funding down the road without any sense that there will be a 
plan because we can find ourselves two years down the road 
having spent yet another million or two, and be no further ahead 
than we are today. 
 
So I think if plans can come forward in a timely fashion, the 
minister has indicated SPMC is more than willing to sit down 
and work with communities and groups. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, 
a few weeks ago in the paper there was some writing that you 
were musing about the possibilities of changing our electoral 
system, and perhaps going to something along the line of 
proportional representation. 
 
I wonder if you would care to elaborate a little bit more what 
you were thinking in that area, and what kind of a time frame 
you were looking at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, there’s been a 
significant amount of discussion about proportional 
representation in Canada. It’s the fact of the matter now in most 
parliamentary democracies outside of the United States, 
Canada, and Great Britain. Therefore, I think as legislators we 
all would give consideration to proportional representation. 
 
I have not proposed any particular move in that direction, but 
when asked, of course, I’m willing to look at proportional 
representation as an option. I think we all should be, and could 
be. 
 
Now it’s not all, it’s not all one-sided either. There are very 
solid arguments, I think, that I could make for proportional 
representation. I think there’s some very solid arguments that I 
could make opposing proportional representation. I’m sure the 
member from Cannington could make the same arguments on 
both sides. 
 
So he asks if I have indicated publicly an interest, or a 
willingness, to discuss this, of course it’s being discussed across 
the country and around the globe. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Premier. Well 
certainly one of your federal colleagues, Mr. Nystrom, has 
certainly been promoting the idea of proportional 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

representation. 
 
There was some interesting commentary on this particular issue 
in a Randy Burton column over the weekend in the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix that I think we should keep in mind that if we . . . 
when we look at electoral reform, especially if we happen to be 
looking at proportional representation. 
 
And Mr. Burton talked about the possibility of Paul Martin 
forming or electing a minority in this particular time and that it 
wouldn’t necessarily be incumbent on him to resign as Prime 
Minister, but that he could carry on as Prime Minister with the 
support of perhaps the NDP and perhaps the Bloc Quebecois. 
And that as long as there was no vote of non-confidence, that he 
could carry on that way indefinitely. 
 
And David Smith, the political scientist professor at the 
University of Saskatchewan, had some comments about that 
particular issue. And I would like to read some of those 
comments, Mr. Chairman. I would like to quote Dr. Smith: 
 

The only time you could go back to the people 
immediately is if you had a tie and I don’t think that’s 
going to happen because we don’t just have two parties . . . 

 
And he’s talking about the federal election, the possibility that 
two political parties could be equally tied and therefore the 
House would be hung and the necessity in place then to go to an 
election. He’s stating that that would be unlikely to happen 
because we have more than two political parties. Dr. Smith goes 
on to say, and I quote: 
 

It’s shaping up to be a big constitutional evening. My 
concern is a lot of people won’t understand why this is 
happening because they don’t understand how the 
constitution works, Smith said. 
 
It may also feed cynicism about our political system and 
the constitution’s role in it, Smith believes. 
 
There are growing calls for a whole range of changes to 
the way our system works, including fixed election dates, 
elected judges and proportional representation. 

 
And Randy Burton’s column goes on to say: 
 

If for example, Canada did have a system of PR where 
seats are allocated according to how many votes a party 
gets, the scenario we’re staring at right now would happen 
much more regularly. 
 
Given the nature of the situation, it’s little wonder that 
Harper is starting to talk about the need for a majority 
government. 
 
The alternative scenarios are enough to make even a 
separatist’s head hurt. 

 
That’s the end of the quotes, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, clearly 
according to Dr. Smith, that you get into a very difficult 
situation under proportional representation where no party 
forms a majority, that there is a great deal of uncertainty in the 
system and that the Prime Minister, in this case, Mr. Martin, 

could retain the position of Prime Minister even though he 
would not necessarily have the largest party in the House of 
Commons. 
 
I wonder if you would care to comment on that, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m not quite sure where the 
member is going with this conversation. I’m not sure if he’s 
promoting proportional representation as something that 
government should be pursuing here, or arguing against 
proportional representation. I think he has the capacity to make 
a good argument on both sides of that equation. 
 
And yes, we are involved in a federal election where the 
outcome, if we were operating on a proportional scheme, might 
have one way and if it — in the traditional way that we vote in 
Canada today — it may come out differently. I mean, it’s an 
important discussion, it’s an important discussion, but it’s not 
something that many citizens, if I may say, are approaching me 
about. 
 
We are having some debate in this legislature, as you know, by 
a motion introduced by the former leader of the opposition . . . 
or a Bill, that would fix election dates. I find it rather interesting 
that the Bill that’s before the House around a fixed election date 
would fix the election date on the third Monday of October, 
each and every four years, the third Monday of October. I’m 
surprised that the Saskatchewan Party particularly would 
recommend the third Monday of October. Given the for once 
wet spring that we’re having, I think there could be a large 
number of Saskatchewan people involved in the harvest right 
through a campaign that would be leading up to the third week 
of October. 
 
So I’m never just sure where the Saskatchewan Party is coming 
from on electoral reform. Are we for proportional 
representation or against proportional representation? Are we 
for having elections during a harvest period or at the finish of 
harvest period or opposed to having elections during a potential 
harvest period? So I would . . . I’d encourage the member to 
keep up the discussion. I’m interested in what Mr. Burton has to 
say in The StarPhoenix and Dr. Smith. It’s an interesting 
debate, but I say it’s not something that my phone is exactly 
ringing off the hook on. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Premier. I’m glad 
that you asked what I thought about it because I think what we 
need to be seriously looking at — if you’re going to open up the 
electoral debate on what kind of electoral system we have — 
that we should be taking a very serious look at the single 
transferable vote, otherwise known as the preferential ballot. 
 
And most people in this House are familiar with that. Both of 
our political parties have run their leadership campaigns 
utilizing that form of democracy and it works very well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so we would be interested in taking a very serious look at 
that kind of a change, if a change is being proposed by the 
Prime Minister . . . by, excuse me, the Premier. And we would 
be interested in discussing that for a possibility of using it in the 
next provincial election. 
 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

If you have any comments on preferential, Mr. Premier, versus 
proportional? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — A preferential ballot is one technique by 
which a proportional representation can be achieved. I know 
there are jurisdictions who have the preferential ballot system. 
Not a simple system, but it can be workable. It’s been 
demonstrated to be workable. 
 
Again I’m unclear of the position that the member is taking. 
Are you encouraging government to do this, to move to 
proportional representation, preferential ballots, or are you 
suggesting we should think about it? Are you saying we 
shouldn’t do it? I’m unclear of the position being taken tonight 
by the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Premier. I think 
there is a difference though between proportional and 
preferential, that one is not somehow a part of the other. 
 
Last couple of times that there has been electoral changes in this 
province, changes to The Election Act, it’s been done in 
consultation with the opposition in preparing those particular 
changes. And I understand that there is a process underway at 
the present time to an all-party committee to take a look at the 
elections Act. Would the Premier commit to consulting with the 
opposition prior to even exploring any changes in the voting 
system that we currently have in place? 
 
I understand that there’s a possibility that there’s discussions 
going on at the present time between the NDP and the Liberals 
as to how proportional would work, and I wonder if the Premier 
would either confirm or deny that that’s happening. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I can confirm the following. If the 
member is speaking about discussions that may be happening 
between the federal Liberal Party and the federal New 
Democratic Party, I know nothing of it. It may be. 
 
And to my knowledge, as Leader of the New Democratic Party, 
I am not engaged with any discussions with the Leader of the 
Liberal Party or anybody in the Liberal Party about proportional 
representation here. But I will commit this, if we were to 
engage in such a discussion, absolutely we would consult with 
the opposition before launching into any kind of a public 
discussion. 
 
We’ll all have our private discussions. We’re all approached by 
journalists and that’s fair enough. But before we would enter 
into any kind of formal review of the electoral system in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we would do as we have always 
done, and that’s engage whoever happen to be in opposition at 
that time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. A few years 
ago a change was made in the selection of the Chief Electoral 
Officer, that it went from being strictly a party appointee to 
becoming a officer of this legislature. But the returning officers 
in all of the constituencies continue to be appointed by the 
political party in power. 
 

There has been, in the last couple elections, some serious 
deficiencies in some areas relative to that — to the returning 
officers and to the deputy returning officers, Mr. Premier. And 
it affects both sides of the House. It affects all the political 
parties that are running for election. 
 
Have you been considering changing that to appointing a 
full-time returning officers within the constituency so that they 
can be trained up properly, so that they can be prepared to hit 
the ground running when a writ is dropped? 
 
I know that the last time we had a discussion with the Chief 
Electoral Officer, it was a serious problem for her in preparing 
for the election in having people that were prepared, who 
understood how to carry on an election because they’re 
basically volunteers. The names are on the list. They start the 
training a month before the election is called. They find 
something else to do, and you don’t have the trained people in 
place any longer. 
 
There needs to be a change made, Mr. Premier, so that we have 
a system that actually works and works efficiently for everyone, 
that all of the electors are placed on the electors’ ballet, on the 
enumeration and so that the election is run properly. 
 
Is there some considerations being made to change the electoral 
Act to allow for full-time returning officers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No, Mr. Chair, at this time we are not 
looking at any change to appointing paid or full-time returning 
officers. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, I think 
tonight I finally found something that I agree with the Premier 
on. It’s took a long time but if I heard his comments right 
tonight, and remembering that we have free votes on this side of 
the House, Mr. Chair, and I heard the Premier say that . . . I’m 
not sure whether he said he likes the thought of having set 
election dates every four years, but he would question having 
them in October. And I remember after the fall election last 
year, Mr. Premier, in November — in fact I think it was 6th, 
7th, 8th — digging posts out of the ground. And the only think 
that made it better, Mr. Premier, was the smile on my face 
knowing that I’d won Melville-Saltcoats after the boundaries 
had changed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Premier, it takes a while, but we finally 
agree on something, although I don’t know if you like fixed 
election dates. 
 
Mr. Premier, after what we’ve had happen in this session . . . 
and I go back to 2003 SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) convention, 2004 SARM convention, 
election in November, and the one thing that keeps sticking in 
my mind . . . and I noticed the other day it kept happening again 
where rural representatives, reeves, councillors, administrators, 
started to begin to ask the question: what does the word “status 
quo is not on” mean? 
 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

And I guess tonight, Mr. Premier, I would like you to explain 
those words because I think I’m missing something in there. 
They sound quite simple, but something is wrong here. And 
those people aren’t getting the message, and I know members 
on this side certainly aren’t getting what you meant by that 
because something is not working right. Would you like to 
explain those remarks, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I understand why the member of 
Melville-Saltcoats had such a big smile on his face after the 
November election. Yes, he did win the seat, but I think the 
smile got on his face when his own party tossed Mr. Schmidt 
out of the running so that he could win the seat. 
 
Now the member is correct. When I addressed the SARM 
convention a year and a half ago, I indicated to that convention 
that this longstanding issue, longstanding issue of the matter of 
the education portion, the education funding that comes from 
the property tax base — this longstanding issue — we were 
taking it on and taking it on in a real way. 
 
Now I’ve repeated this. I’ve told this story on a number of 
occasions just in the last week. When I first sought public office 
in this province, we debated the matter of the education 
property tax at that time, which was some 20 years ago. It was 
there before this. It got worse in the ’80s. We tried to deal with 
it through the ’90s by injections of new money into K to 12 
(kindergarten to grade 12) education, $125 million more to K to 
12 education in the last few years. Thirty million dollars more 
injected to revenue sharing in the last few years has not made a 
significant impact on the share of the property tax that’s going 
to education. 
 
So I said to the SARM delegates, the status quo is not on; we’re 
going to begin the process of change. And the first change of 
the status quo was to appoint the Boughen Commission to do 
the work of the Boughen Commission, to look at the whole 
funding of education. Now the Boughen Commission reported. 
 
Members opposite one day say we should implement the whole 
Boughen Commission. The next day they say, well we 
shouldn’t implement it at all because it has this tax provision in 
it. In fact the member from Melville-Saltcoats said he’d vote 
right against that even if it meant maintaining the education tax 
on the property. That was the first step. 
 
We took much from the Boughen Commission. A great deal of 
work was done in the Boughen Commission, a great deal of 
public discussion. But the opposition and its leader and its 
members day after day told, whatever you do, do not tax the 
restaurant meals. They said that day after day after day. They 
said day after day after day, do not increase the taxes. So you 
see, we were instructed by the opposition not to follow the 
Boughen Commission’s recommendations. 
 
We have decided, Mr. Chair, to build a platform where 
substantive change can be made in the delivery and the 
governance of education in this province. We’ve decided to take 
the very courageous step of a reform of school governance and 
district governance in this province. 
 
Now the opposition doesn’t like it. I understand that. They 
don’t like change. They’d like us to just be back freeze-framed 

decades ago, but that’s not the way we look at it. We look at a 
world that’s changing, and we’re going to change with it. We’re 
going to build a more equitable distribution of educational 
funding in this province. We’re going to build better 
governance. 
 
Mr. Chair, then as we add these new resources, we can be 
assured that those resources will in fact begin to make a real 
shift, a real shift in the funding of education from the property 
tax base. Now if anyone says that things have not changed in 
the last two years, they’ve not been very aware of the 
undertakings of this government. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I conclude my remarks by saying as follows. 
We didn’t get here overnight, and we’re not going to solve this 
problem overnight. And I know the opposition would love us to 
devote 50 or 100 million or perhaps $300 million out of this 
year’s budget because that’s the way they operate. Just spend, 
just spend, just spend. Cut the taxes and balance the budget. 
With that kind of economic thinking, with that kind of fiscal 
planning, that isn’t going to solve anyone’s problem in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, there 
has been change in this province for the last two or three years. 
We went from balanced budgets for the first eight or nine years 
of the NDP government, and then we went under this Premier 
to — what? — three deficit budgets. We’re on four now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So there has been change. And the Premier 
said we don’t like change. Mr. Chair. We don’t like that kind of 
change. We believe in balanced budgets. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I would go on to say . . . and I’m really 
questioning the Premier. These are important questions to the 
people of rural Saskatchewan, but they are important questions 
to every homeowner, business owner, property owner in this 
province because we’re talking education tax. In the last 12 
years, we’ve downloaded education tax onto the property owner 
from 40/60 to 60/40, and I know the Premier’s going to get up 
and say it was never that high. Well it was that high. It was very 
close to 60/40. And now it’s even gone past 40/60 the other 
way, Mr. Chair. 
 
And Mr. Chair, I want to ask the Premier about the last election 
because I know it got him votes because people trusted him at 
that point. They may not now, but they certainly did at that 
time. And I think it depended how people voted. They weren’t 
sure about the new party because the NDP kept saying don’t 
trust those guys. Trust us because we’re good for our word, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Well I want to give a quote, and it’s not exactly a quote, Mr. 
Premier, but I think it’s very close to what you said. You said 
we have room to receive the recommendations of the Boughen 
Commission on the funding of education tax within the 
resources available. Now as a taxpayer and a voting person in 
this province, I would take that that he could start to deal — and 
that’s all the people are asking out there — deal with that 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

problem with the resources he had available. 
 
And he goes on to say our platform is affordable, practical, and 
realistic. Well I guess my question, Mr. Chair, is what’s with 
that? What happened to that? Where did that go, because the 
people of Saskatchewan filled these galleries, Mr. Chair. They 
wanted to know what happened to that promise, and I want to 
give that Premier the opportunity tonight, with nobody in the 
gallery but people watching out there, to explain to rural 
delegates, reeves, councillors, and administrators . . . and I’m 
sorry, one person, and I apologize for that, and he’s quite 
interested. He probably wants to know what I want to know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — In fact I think he wants to know what 
reeves, councillors, and administrators, in fact every property 
tax owner out there that paying education tax, what they have to 
say. 
 
I want to give the Premier an opportunity to explain how you 
can have an election and promise to deal with something, and 
within minutes forget what you said, what you promised, and 
said well, it’ll be four years to election if we can hang on, and 
don’t trust them guys over there. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you explain to this province what you meant 
by those comments in the election campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I indicated during the 
campaign, through our policy platform, on platforms across the 
province, that we intend to govern this province for four more 
years, for four more years of good fiscal management, of four 
more years of good fiscal management. 
 
Now again . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I knew that would 
wake them up, you see because there’s a group of people, 
there’s a group of people in Saskatchewan who wouldn’t know 
good fiscal management if they ran right into it. And they’re all 
right over there. 
 
You see, Mr. Chair, they talk about poor fiscal management, 
but what does Standard & Poor of New York City talk about? 
Well they talk about balanced budget. They talk about strong 
fiscal management. They talk about economy that has potential. 
They talk about a strong economy today. And what is the 
result? They give this province and its people a credit rating 
upgrade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s what you get from Standard & 
Poor. 
 
You get this political rhetoric from the members opposite day 
after day after day, till the people of Saskatchewan don’t even 
listen to it anymore,. But I’ll tell you; they do listen to Moody’s 
of New York City. They do listen to Standard & Poor. The 
member from Melville-Saltcoats, the member from . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Now you see, the authority of fiscal 
management from Kindersley is coming right out of his seat. 

Well perhaps the authority on fiscal management from 
Kindersley would like to stand in his seat and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan why he knows more about fiscal management 
than Moody’s of New York or Standard & Poor of New York. I 
wonder if he would stand on his feet and explain how he is so 
much wiser than the bond rating agencies. Perhaps the member 
from Melville-Saltcoats could explain why he knows so much 
more. 
 
Or perhaps the Leader of the Opposition could explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan why the Saskatchewan Party who, 
when they had the opportunity to govern Saskatchewan, put us 
in the hole where we had a rate of debt to GDP (gross domestic 
product) of 61 per cent — a basket case in all of Canada. 
 
Now the pattern of this party in government and the pattern of 
this administration and the pattern of this Premier, is to set 
priorities, to work out plans that will bring reality to those 
priorities. We set out a priority to renovate the personal income 
tax system in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. We put that plan in 
place. It took us four years. It took us four years. And if I may 
say, the inequity there is not as long-standing as it has been on 
the property tax. 
 
We have put a plan in place to renovate, to reorganize the 
government’s delivery of education to make it fairer. And as we 
work through, we have set as our next priority in tax reform, the 
reform of the education portion of the property tax. 
 
Now I know members opposite would like us to spend the 
money right now. They’d like us, I guess, to spend $300 
million. Although interestingly enough, the member who raises 
the questions tonight, when asked by his local press what about 
the Boughen Commission, what about the recommendations of 
the Boughen Commission, well the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats said, I quote: 
 

The . . . (Saskatchewan) Party is firmly opposed to 
increasing taxes, and would have no choice (no choice) but 
to block any provincial sales tax increase, noted 
Bjornerud, even though it may mean the retention of the 
education tax on agricultural property, at a time (the) 
farmers badly need tax relief. 

 
And then he says, “It puts us in a very precarious position.” 
Well I tell you, they are in a precarious position in the eyes of 
the people of Saskatchewan when on a daily basis they say cut 
the taxes, cut the taxes. But then one after another they come 
into this estimate, they come into this House, they come into 
question period, saying spend more, spend more, spend more. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, and I appreciate 
the Premier’s sense of humour because I notice he even 
couldn’t say good fiscal management without a smile on his 
face. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Chair, the Premier talks about patterns, 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

and the only pattern I’ve seen in this province in the last three 
or four years under his premiership is three or four consecutive 
deficits, and the provincial debt’s gone up $1.5 billion. That’s 
the pattern we have in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Under the previous NDP premier . . . and I didn’t agree with 
him very much of the time. I learned great respect for him 
because he had — what? — eight or nine balanced budgets. 
That ended quickly when this Premier won the leadership of the 
NDP. And now he says trust us because I’m credible. What 
were his words here? I can’t remember. He goes on to say just 
believe me; just trust me, Mr. Chair. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, the Premier goes on to say, and I’ve heard him 
say this at SARM convention and that . . . he said changes 
won’t happen overnight. He said the problem didn’t happen 
overnight. You bet they didn’t, Mr. Chair. It took 12 years of 
NDP government to cause the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The problem wasn’t there when this 
government come to power. But the problem was developed 
when this government blamed everybody from Grant Devine to 
the federal government. And I think they actually blamed the 
farmers in this province because that’s who they mainly asked 
to balance the books in this province. And that’s when the 
60/40 flipped to 60/40 the other way. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, the Premier can stand in his place and say we 
have a plan; we have a way we’re going to fix the education tax 
on property. Well if he has, we haven’t seen it. The farmers and 
the rural representatives surely haven’t seen it because they 
wouldn’t keep filling the galleries here if they had any idea that 
there would be any relief with the education tax on property. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, I’d like to ask you, and I want to give you a 
chance tonight, Mr. Premier, because you said at SARM 
convention you said the status quo is not on. You had an 
opportunity tonight to explain yourself, and you did a really 
poor job of it because even I didn’t understand it, and I was 
listening, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, you went and you said at 
SARM convention, you said at the election . . . in fact you said 
at the election, don’t trust the guys on this side of the House. 
You know I almost voted for you because I wasn’t sure about 
these guys. I was beginning to waiver. 
 
I went to my care home. I went to my care home and I got 
leaflets put out by some of your supporters. And they said in my 
care home — and my mom is in there, and if I don’t get it right 
she’ll straighten me out, Mr. Premier — but the leaflets said 
don’t trust the Sask Party because if the Sask Party gets in, you 
know in the Saltcoats care home what they’re going to do? 
They’re going to privatize the laundry. They’re going to 
privatize dietary. And you know, I almost believed that, Mr. 
Premier, except then I found out that you had already done it. 
You done it. You beat us to it, Mr. Premier. And you know, the 
funny part is with that rhetoric there was actually workers that 
believed it. 
 
And the funny part was to start with they were my supporters 
until I straightened them out. And as you know, I won the seat, 
Mr. Premier. 

So, Mr. Premier, you know I think what it boils down to . . . and 
I think all the SARM delegates were asking, and I think 
everybody on this side of the House knows that the last 
election, the aftermath boils down to integrity, honesty, and 
trust. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, you know how far I can go on this one, and I 
don’t dare go too far. But Mr. Premier, you know where I’d like 
to go because we have people in this province that believed 
you, Mr. Premier. The last election they believed that Premier 
and I don’t think . . . Does anybody on this side think that it will 
work again? Absolutely not. And I think, Mr. Premier, you 
know it won’t work again. We got to manufacture some new 
idea that people might fall for because after 12, 13 years of an 
NDP government, there is a limit to what anybody can put up 
with. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’d like to go over some of the headlines in the 
paper over the last few years. This one is from the Leader-Post 
and it’s actually . . . they’re talking to Neal Hardy and the 
headline is, “It’s becoming harder (and harder) to trust the 
NDP.” 
 
They go on here . . . and here is a quote from Neal Hardy, Mr. 
Premier, the president of SARM, and he summed it up in a 
question of trust and he said, “Sometimes people have to keep 
their word.” Well I agree with Mr. Hardy on this one. I think 
most Saskatchewan voters and Saskatchewan taxpayers would 
believe in this. 
 
And then I go on to quote Murray Mandryk, and I know you are 
a fan of his, Mr. Premier. I am too. And it says, and this is 
Murray’s quote, not mine, Mr. Premier: 
 

“Somehow there’s a line of trust there and I think they’ve 
reached that line of trust.” 

 
This has been the problem with the Lorne Calvert 
government has faced since November 5 election. 
 

And you know what he is talking about there, Mr. Premier. We 
all do. And now the public of Saskatchewan is certainly 
catching on what he talks about. I go to another quote later in 
the same column and it says, and I quote, Mr. Chair, so I am 
within the rules. 
 

(Shame on Calvert for the William Jefferson Clinton-like 
weasel-wording we heard from him in Thursday’s 
question period (I’m quoting, Mr. Chair) suggesting that 
his “status quo is not on” commitment could be interpreted 
to mean the government planned to address this issue in 
years down the road.) 

 
SARM delegates didn’t understand it that way. I was at the last 
year’s convention, and I was at this year’s convention. And the 
Premier made that comment in his speech, his address to the 
delegates, nearly 2,000 of them, Mr. Chair. That’s not what they 
got out of this. 
 
They got that that Premier was going to honour his commitment 
in the election and start to deal with it. All they wanted the 
other day, Mr. Premier, was you to go out on the steps — and I 
reiterate — you go out on the steps, not your Minister of 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Government Relations with his wee little bit of arrogance. They 
wanted you, Mr. Chair, to go out on those steps and say to 
them, we can’t solve your problems all this year. That’s not 
what they were asking. They knew you couldn’t, Mr. Premier. 
What they were saying is, we can find $42 a barrel for oil. We 
can find a few bucks for the education tax. We will start to 
reverse the direction that my government has taken this in. We 
know we were wrong to do it. We will right that wrong, and we 
will start to address that problem. 
 
Mr. Premier, why did you not go out and tell them what little bit 
of what they wanted to hear, that you actually could afford a 
little bit of money for rural ratepayers, in fact urban and rural 
ratepayers to honour your last fall’s election promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, for pure entertainment 
value I go with the member for Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — He makes his points. He makes his 
points. He makes his points with flourish. He makes his points 
well. The trouble is, the trouble is he rarely touches on the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask hon. members 
to follow the rules of parliamentary procedure, and I would 
caution members to stay within those rules. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well let me say this, Mr. Chair. The 
member stood a moment ago and made the claim that 12 years 
ago, 1991, the funding for education was 60 per cent provided 
by province and 40 per cent provided by the property taxes. 
Well that, Mr. Chair, is not accurate. It is not accurate. And if 
you’re going to base your argument on inaccuracy, it’s not 
going to be a very strong argument. The fact of the matter is in 
1991 the province contributed about 45 per cent, and the 
property tax base about 55 per cent. That’s the fact. Now that’s 
the fact. 
 
Now we admit that it’s skewed and in fact the division has 
grown, even with the injections of money that this government 
has found for both revenue sharing and the K to 12 system. Mr. 
Chair, in the last five years, five years, 125 million new dollars 
that we found for K to 12 education, in the last three years 
another $30 million for revenue sharing — now the member 
opposite says it’s not enough, it’s not enough. 
 
Well I understand that, but would he . . . Would he or his leader 
define tonight what is enough, how much? How much more 
should we spend on K to 12 education in this budget year? How 
much more in this budget year should we spend on property tax 
relief? 
 
And while they’re at it, they can give us the number . . . they 
can give us the number on how much we should be spending in 
this budget on health because apparently it’s not enough. How 
much in this budget should we be spending on agriculture 
because we’re told on a daily basis it’s not enough? How much 

more on highways? And after they total all this up — my little 
running total is that I think they’ve spent about 300 million in 
this session alone. 
 
Now what they should then do is tell us where these dollars are 
going to come from because they clearly reject, they clearly 
reject any tax increase, and they say in fact we should be cutting 
all the taxes. 
 
Is it, Mr. Chair, what the Saskatchewan public concluded, that 
the only way you can run that kind of fiscal management of a 
government is that if you start selling off the assets and selling 
them off very quickly? Is that how they intend to fund this 
more, more, more, cut the taxes? There is only one way. You 
either borrow your way into that kind of fiscal management — 
that’s what they did in the 1980s — then when they ran out of 
borrowing power, they started selling in the 1980s. 
 
It’s the same old right-wing economic philosophy that got this 
problem into big problems, that got this problem into a situation 
where we are not able to fund education as we would like or 
health care, got this problem reflected in this year’s budget 
where we are spending — get this, Mr. Chair — over $600 
million in interest payments on the debt that their philosophy 
ran up in government. Do you know what we could do about 
the property taxes in this province or health care or education if 
we had access to that $600 million that we take from the people 
of Saskatchewan and pay off to the bond dealers and the 
bankers on account of the debt that they ran up on the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
That kind of economic philosophy, which is promoted today by 
the Saskatchewan Party, as it’s been promoted by their 
predecessors in this province, the Conservatives. It’s the same 
kind of economic kind of theories that we see reflected in the 
Alliance and the Conservative parties. What does it do? It 
handicaps people for generations. 
 
You know, Mr. Chair, we today have a credit rating upgrade 
from Standard & Poor. A credit rating upgrade that it’s taken 
this province since 1986 to return to the situation we enjoyed in 
1986. 
 
It’s taken — what’s that, that’s 18 years — 18 years of work on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to put this back right in 
terms of our credit rating in the American agencies, 18 years. 
That’s how long you pay after you have that kind of philosophy 
governing the province. 
 
We have set out a plan. We have made it a commitment. We 
have set out a plan to address in a fundamental way, in a 
fundamental way, the funding of education in this province. 
 
And I’m going to conclude by this. And you know, our first 
goal in reform of property taxation with the funding of 
education, our first goal is to provide for our young people 
quality education. That’s what we’re about. And that’s what this 
whole plan is about — to fund sustainable, quality education for 
the young people of Saskatchewan because that’s the key to 
their future and it’s the key to all of our futures in this great 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Chair, the Premier said in his 
comments there that all the opposition here wants him to do is 
spend. That’s not quite right. What the opposition and people of 
Saskatchewan would like that Premier and that government to 
do is honour the commitments they made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Whatever they promised to do in the last 
election, including dealing with the education tax on property 
— both urban and rural — all they’re asking is deal with it 
because again, I quote: 
 

(We have) . . . room to receive the recommendations of the 
Boughen Commission on (the) funding of education 
(within the resources available). 

 
That Premier knew how bad a shape this province was in. Mr. 
Chair, he helped get it in this shape. He knows exactly how bad 
it is in this province. But he didn’t let on one word about that 
when the election was on. He goes on to say, and I quote again, 
Mr. Chair, “We are very confident in our budget revenue 
projections.” 
 
So he’s talking about what state the province is in, based on 
what we see happening in the economy. In fact I’m confident 
now . . . and down the road for several years . . . And on 
November 6, Mr. Chair, that went out the window. That 
promise, that commitment he made to Saskatchewan people 
went out the window. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’d like to talk . . . and I brought this up, Mr. 
Premier, in . . . and I know that due to time we have to hurry 
here because as some of us get older, our bed time is coming 
quick, Mr. Premier. But I got another few questions to ask you. 
 
I want to bring up a thing that I brought up in question period 
the other day, and I think it’s a good comparison, Mr. Chair. I 
think it’s a very fair comparison. I have a ratepayer that lives in 
Saskatchewan, farms right along the Manitoba border. He has a 
quarter of land on the Saskatchewan side; he has a quarter of 
land on the Manitoba side. The education tax portion on the 
Saskatchewan side is $477. The municipal tax together with the 
education tax, his total on the quarter is $848, Mr. Premier. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Now I’ve heard you talk about European subsidies and 
American subsidies and how it’s not fair for our farmers. Well 
one of the questions I have for you, Mr. Premier, is how come 
the land on the Manitoba side, the total tax bill, between 
education and municipal added together, is $418? Very 
comparable quarters owned by the same farmer 99 feet apart. 
You know what the difference is? . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No. Actually it’s not, Mr. Premier. It’s a socialist 
government on both sides. So what is the difference? 
 
Mr. Premier, the difference is about 450 bucks to farmers in 
Saskatchewan that pay 450 bucks a quarter more than farmers 
in Manitoba. That’s not fair. If the subsidies aren’t fair that the 
Europeans have and the Americans have, you better take a look, 
Mr. Premier, because somebody’s not treating our farmers very 
fairly. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Premier, before I sit, I have to ask you 
a little bit about agriculture because your Ag minister today has 
been chirping a lot over there. And I don’t know what he’s got 
to chirp about, because I wouldn’t be bragging if I was Ag 
minister for an NDP government. 
 
The CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) program, Mr. 
Premier, you’re always complaining about the federal 
government never giving enough in Saskatchewan and we agree 
with you. They don’t pay what they should to the province of 
Saskatchewan. But you know . . . And here comes the Ag 
minister. We’ll be clued in now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We asked to include the negative margins in the new plan, Mr. 
Chairman. We asked the federal government and we agreed 
with that. Everybody that represented farmers on this side said 
this is a good thing. APAS (Agricultural Producers Association 
of Saskatchewan) said, that’s a good thing. SARM said, that’s a 
good thing. They also said, let’s increase the cap. The cap was 
too low. I believe it was — what, like $100,000 — should have 
been higher, we agreed with that. 
 
Finally though, what the government of the day in 
Saskatchewan didn’t expect is the federal government caved in 
and they said, okay, we’ll include negative margins; we’ll 
increase the cap. And do you know what our government had 
the nerve to say, Mr. Chair? Oh we don’t like that; now we’re 
not signing that. 
 
You know why they don’t sign that? Because they won’t stand 
behind the farmers of Saskatchewan. They haven’t for 12 years 
and they have no intention under this Premier of standing 
behind our Saskatchewan farmers today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And you know, I’ve heard this Premier 
make speeches. I’ve heard that Ag minister make speeches. And 
I’ve heard a number of others that didn’t know what they’re 
talking about on that side about agriculture make speeches. And 
they blame everybody else. They blame the European subsidies. 
They blame the American subsidies. 
 
We got the BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy). We got 
drought. We’ve got so many things going against our farmers in 
Saskatchewan. And you know, Mr. Chair, we’ve got a little rain 
this spring and there’s a little optimism out there. The only 
thing that are holding farmers back is that NDP government 
because it’s the only government in Canada that’s not standing 
behind their farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Chair, the CFIP program which is 
winding down right now is $25 million short in Saskatchewan. 
And they say, don’t go to the west and compare with Alberta. 
Okay, we’ll quit. We’ll go back to Manitoba under the other 
socialist government in this country, and they’re honouring 
their commitment — they don’t like it, and we don’t blame 
them — but they’re honouring their commitment to farmers in 
Manitoba, Mr. Chair. 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Now we come to the new CAIS (Canadian Agricultural Income 
Stabilization) program, and as I talked before, the federal 
government made the changes they want and they still don’t 
want to go into it. And, Mr. Chair, I want to tell you tonight — 
if you don’t know already, and I’m sure you do because we 
brought this up enough — that there’s a shortfall in 
Saskatchewan’s funding from about 130 to $150 million. And 
that’s the Saskatchewan share. And that’s the problem our 
farmers have to try and survive in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, you know as well as I do, it hurts to have to 
try and find that money, although mind you, you spill more than 
that in the Navigatas, the SPUDCOs, (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) all around the world. I think 
you went into . . . didn’t you go into an Australian telephone 
company? That’s helping our rural people in Saskatchewan. 
Wasn’t that to the tune of $40 million? I think it was $40 
million you wasted down there. Navigata — we got what, 
another 25 million? 
 
Mr. Premier, if you had the will to help farmers in this province, 
I believe you could do it, even in the situation this province is 
in. Mr. Premier, I will stop at this point because I know you’re 
wearing thin. But I would want you to stand up tonight and 
explain to the farmers in this province why this is the only 
province in Canada that doesn’t have a government that will 
stand behind them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, again we’ve been subjected to 
a flight of rhetoric from the Sask Party that does not reflect the 
realities. And they know it and the people of Saskatchewan 
know it and the farming people of Saskatchewan know it. They 
know that this province stands behind its producers — if you 
use per capita financial support — at a level higher than any 
other province in the country. Far higher than any other 
province in the country. 
 
Now the member of Melville-Saltcoats draws comparisons with 
Manitoba. I’m curious, Mr. Chair, if before announcing these 
comparisons, that the . . . if the member has done any real, 
significant research. He compares two tax notices. I mean, are 
these tax notices on land of equal assessment? Has he . . . are 
we comparing apples to apples? 
 
Perhaps he’d like to compare the budgets of our two provinces. 
The budget of course of the Government of Manitoba, having 
never been subjected — the people of Manitoba having never 
been subjected to this group of men and women in government, 
today have an interest payment on their public debt which is 
half, about half of what the Saskatchewan people have to pay 
on their interest on their public debt to meet what that group of 
men and women inflicted on the province. About half — that’s 
about $300 million difference. 
 
He will know, if he’s paid any attention to current debate about 
equalization, that our neighbours to the east last budget year 
received $1.2 billion in equalization, while this province 
receives $120 million in equalization. He will know, he will 
know that the province of Manitoba has the payroll taxes that 
do not exist in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Now if he’s comparing apples to apples, I think he should also 
then compare the costs of the APF (agricultural policy 
framework) expenditures, province by province. I think he 
would have the people of Saskatchewan believe that the 
agricultural economy and particularly the grain sector in 
Manitoba is something equal to Saskatchewan’s. Well it’s not, 
and he knows it. It’s significantly smaller. 
 
In fact, in terms of APF expenditures, under the CAIS program 
Manitoba is expected to provide $143 million for that program 
— 143. Mr. Chair, guess how much Saskatchewan’s expected 
— $529 million. Guess how much Alberta is expected — $334 
million. Now he is saying, he is saying, as is the federal 
government, that the citizen of Saskatchewan should provide 
per capita five times the level of funding of other Canadians 
when our agricultural production both feeds the nation — the 
nation, not the province — it feeds the nation, and our 
agricultural production contributes significantly to the balance 
of payments to gross domestic product of the nation of Canada. 
 
Now if he’s arguing that the federal government should not bear 
the responsibility for the food production that feeds all 
Canadians and for that . . . Well the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats said we should do precisely what the federal 
government says we should do, put in $529 million in the CAIS 
program. 
 
Now how is it that this opposition that claims to represent 
Saskatchewan people, every time we want to support 
Saskatchewan farmers, will take the line of Ottawa? Why is it 
every time when we’re fighting for fair trade support for our 
agricultural producers, they won’t stand with us? How is it 
every time we fight for improvements in programs, they won’t 
stand with us? Why don’t they, just for once, why don’t they 
just for once, Mr. Chair, stand up for the people of 
Saskatchewan, stand up for the producers of Saskatchewan as 
we have stood up for them and will continue to stand up for 
them? 
 
And before I take my place, note this, Mr. Chair. In the most 
recent budget of the Government of Saskatchewan, only three 
areas of expenditure, only three, received increase. One, health 
care; two, education; and three, support for agriculture. 
 
We stand behind our agricultural producers. I invite the 
Saskatchewan Party to join with us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re getting to the end of 
the Premier’s estimates, I guess, for this particular sitting of the 
Legislative Assembly. And you know, if people happened to 
endure this from its beginning — watching it on television or 
those who may want to review the public record — even the 
printed word I think, Mr. Chairman, will highlight the fact that 
there just isn’t a lot of zip over on that side of the House. 
 
There’s not a lot of enthusiasm over on that side of the House. 
There’s no discernible energy on that side of the House. I don’t 
hear coming from that side of the House any vision, any 
long-term vision for the province. It’s all the Premier can do . . . 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

four questions it took to drag out of this Premier even the 
remotest semblance of an admission that we need to get our 
population growing in the province of Saskatchewan. That the 
fact that we have not grown in population since 1929 — long 
before we discovered how naturally endowed we are as a 
province, long before that — the fact that our province hasn’t 
grown since then doesn’t even seem to faze this Premier. 
 
It doesn’t seem to faze this government. We have members of 
his government, members of his government caucus saying, we 
don’t need to grow; they’re tired of hearing about growing the 
province. The member from Regina Wascana who said it’s not 
realistic to set a growth target of 1 per cent of the national 
average. 
 
This Premier, Mr. Chairman, this government is just devoid of 
any vision at all. Instead, they simply want to continue to do the 
same old things that have gotten us to where we have gotten 
over the last six decades. Yes, including under other different 
political parties in Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact this very budget . . . well the Minister of Finance laughs. 
He laughs. If you look down at the quotes of the Finance 
minister from the past or the Premier from the past when he was 
a critic — remember those days, Mr. Chairman? — he was an 
ardent critic against any kind of gambling expansion. Now he’s 
wholly dependent on the revenue, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But if you take a look at the public record, you take a look at 
the public record, this government is repeating the same 
mistakes we have repeated, our governments have repeated for 
six decades. Relying on the same tired old approach. 
 
Even in this budget, Mr. Chairman, even in this budget, the 
Premier will want to acknowledge this. He’s got 50 million 
more dollars to directly risk into businesses in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s their plan to get things growing. He 
couldn’t unequivocally say that a uranium . . . private sector 
uranium company, who had the means and satisfied all of the 
safeguards and were willing to build a refinery in the province, 
he couldn’t even bring himself to say unequivocally that they 
would be welcomed here. 
 
But he’s got $50 million more for what? For more SPUDCOs, 
Mr. Chairman? For more SPUDCOs, $28 million. Maybe for 
Navigata outside of our province, over $20 million. He maybe 
has more $8.9 million for agdealer.com. Remember that? 
 
Or maybe he’s got $2 million for Clickabid. Remember that 
one, Mr. Chairman? That was the NDP’s attempt to compete 
with that tiny little Internet company known as eBay, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Maybe he’s got $12 million more for the Future is Wide Open 
campaign which became very, very apparent in the end that it 
was more about their plans to try to get re-elected than it was 
ever about growing the province. And they have 50 million 
more dollars to directly risk in business. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan Party has been 
encouraging the people of this province to start asking the Dr. 
Phil question, and they are. They’re now asking us, you know 
the question: how’s that working for you? Mr. Chairman, it has 

let this province down and it’s not just this Premier’s fault. It’s 
not just his predecessor’s fault or the one before that or before 
that. For six decades we’ve been doing the same thing. 
 
There is one political party in this province that gets it. Not 
because we have the answers to all of its problems. Not because 
there are any magic wands or easy solutions but because there 
are examples around this world of labour governments, 
conservative governments, who have employed certain tactics 
and turned their economies around, turned their countries into 
comeback economies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, the 
good news is this. Even though there’s no zip over there and 
there’s no energy over there, there doesn’t seem to be a vision, 
the good news is this, Mr. Chairman: the people of the province 
understand that there are things we can do. That there are things 
that we can do to turn this province around so that this province, 
this province that we love, will be the comeback province, Mr. 
Speaker, in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So that we will be a have province, Mr. 
Chairman, a have province. So that we don’t need to rely on 
assistance any more from other jurisdictions. So that our 
government one day will have the resources that it needs, Mr. 
Chairman, so that it is not having to rely on some other have 
province to help producers with BSE or to help keep promises, 
help keep promises that the Premier might have made in a 
campaign about providing property relief. 
 
(21:00) 
 
You know, I’ve got some interesting quotes here for you, Mr. 
Chair. I just want to run them over, run through them quickly 
for you, and it won’t take a lot of time but they’re interesting. 
 

. . . if this government were sincere in wanting to help the 
households and the homes and the families of 
Saskatchewan, then I say it would get its hand(s) out of the 
hip-pocket, the wallets, the purses, and the bank accounts 
of Saskatchewan people. 

 
An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 
 
Mr. Wall: — The Premier said that in 1990. 
 

The problem in this province is that . . . (the) government 
has spent way, way (way) too much. 
 

The Premier said that, 1991. 
 

. . . I’m very afraid that those same visitors from Alberta 

. . . that same carload will some day return home, and 
they’ll be telling their friends and neighbours: avoid 
Saskatchewan; they tax you to death over there. 

 
Do you know who said that, Mr. Chairman? Well it was the 
Premier, as a matter of fact. The Premier said that. 
 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

. . . if they think that they can go (if they think they can go) 
to the people of Saskatchewan and say, we need more 
money, then you . . . better clean up your own act first. 

 
And do you know who said that, Mr. Chairman? Well as a 
matter of fact, the Premier said that as well in 1991. 
 

So their question is, where are you going to go and get the 
money, Mr. Speaker. The question they should be 
answering is: where are you going to save the money. 

 
Guess who said that? It was the Premier in 1991. 
 
And here’s the best one of all. This is now the current Premier 
in government. In the good old days, though — at least on the 
NDP side — when Mr. Romanow was the premier, and here 
was his quote, from 1992. 
 

. . . perhaps every member of this government ought to 
have a plaque on their desk which reads: the debt stops 
here. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And so the question will be to the Premier, on 
behalf of the people of the province, on behalf of the 
opposition, what happened to his plaque? Where did his plaque 
go? This Premier that inherited a surplus from his predecessor 
and has promptly turned it into deficit budgets and has promptly 
added a billion and a half to the provincial debt, and we ask him 
today, where is his plaque, Mr. Chairman? 
 
He apparently threw it in the garbage can, maybe with all of the 
business plans of SPUDCO and maybe the imaginary ethanol 
plant or that . . . Remember that Colombian Internet scam from 
earlier this year? I think it was the current member for Moose 
Jaw North who bought into that on behalf of the Premier. It was 
$3,000 for us to buy into an Internet scam that would declare us 
the cultural centre of the world or something to that . . . or 
maybe it was of the universe. 
 
Again, Mr. Chair . . . Well that member who’s a little 
embarrassed is waiting for the question. I think we’ll spend a 
little more time actually on some of these issues but we will get 
to the question, I assure that member. 
 
Maybe the plaque that says, the debt stops here, maybe the 
Premier threw it into the wastepaper basket with the business 
plan for Retx.com — Retx.com, a $26 million investment in 
Atlanta, Georgia. 
 
And here’s the problem with all of that, Mr. Chairman. The 
problem with all of that is all of those investments and losses 
have been piled up in the very, very recent history of our 
province. And all along, all along when the Premier has been 
asked to keep his promises . . . and yes, we have asked a lot of 
those questions this session because he made some specific 
promises in the campaign and we were going to hold him to an 
account for those. And all along when we ask him those 
questions — why have you not kept these promises? — the 
Premier says, he pleads poverty. 
 
The equalization problem . . . the member for Saskatoon Nutana 

is now chirping from her seat, she who also of course must have 
been instrumental in this, in their master strategy to offer the 
lowest utility rates in all of Canada right now. That was during 
the election — right now. And then after the election it became 
maybe, sort of, kind of, at some point in the future, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
So she’ll forgive me, she’ll forgive me if I don’t take a lot of 
solace from her comfort as to why the Premier is not keeping 
his promises when she simply can’t keep hers either, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But when the Premier is asked about these 
promises, when he’s asked about . . . and when he’s asked about 
serious issues — and we’ve raised them here in estimates and 
we’ve raised them in question period — whether it happens to 
be the conference centre raised by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood or whether it’s addictions or crystal 
meth, or whether it’s just the Premier’s own promises, he pleads 
poverty, doesn’t have any money. It’s either he doesn’t have 
any money currently or if equalization one day is fixed, he 
might be able to possibly get around to keeping his promises. 
 
But if you add up the list, those lists of recent losses, you’re 
going to find in excess of $300 million, Mr. Chairman. You’re 
going to find $50 million in this budget and $50 million in the 
next one. I think it’s 50 million over the next four years, 200 
million more dollars, and it’s not just . . . I guess what’s 
frustrating about it, it’s not just good money after bad in terms 
of an economic approach that hasn’t worked for any 
government in this province that’s tried it for all these decades. 
It’s not just that. It’s not just that it is based on an approach to 
the economy that simply doesn’t work, that has betrayed the 
great potential of Saskatchewan. 
 
What’s perhaps more frustrating is that all of these millions, 
these hundreds of millions in investment and the 50 million 
more over the next four years, are made on behalf of a 
government, on behalf of a Premier that says, I can’t keep the 
promises that I made because I have no money. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that rings very, very hollow for the people of 
this province, and that’s why they’re disappointed. That’s why 
people that didn’t vote for the Premier are disappointed, to be 
sure. And frankly, what we’re hearing increasingly is that’s why 
the people that did vote for this Premier are disappointed 
because even those that voted for him, even those that voted for 
him who may have believed, Mr. Chairman, that while the 
government didn’t seem to be very competent, i.e., SPUDCO, 
while it didn’t seem to have their best interests at heart in terms 
of turning a surplus from Mr. Romanow into a deficit under the 
current Premier, while it didn’t seem competent, at least I think 
that many that voted for him said, well we trust him. We trust 
him. 
 
And systematically almost on every single promise that this 
Premier made when he went around this province, willing to 
say anything or do anything to win the election, he has 
systematically broke those promises to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I think even the Premier would 
agree, as his quotes reflected from his days in opposition, that 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

there is a precious currency in this business, Mr. Chairman, and 
it’s called trust. And I think, I think the Premier’s bank account 
is empty. 
 
And the member for Regina Qu’Appelle wants to chirp in about 
personal standing or words that a person has to say. This 
minister who in the last election went to a senior citizen’s home 
in his constituency who had a Sask Party sign and told them 
that if they voted for the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Chairman, 
here’s what he said: if you vote for them, they’ll take away your 
health care. That’s what he said, to the point . . . He scared them 
to the point where they took down their sign. They took down 
their sign and they put up one of his until the truth was 
explained to him, and they took down his sign and put back up 
a Saskatchewan Party sign. 
 
And you know the best news about it is the minister says it 
didn’t happen, but guess what? Those . . . that couple were 
brave enough, they had the courage enough to stand up and be 
interviewed and go on television and say that’s what the NDP 
. . . their NDP candidate, now their NDP MLA, did. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Chairman? That is what’s wrong with 
this government, not just with the Minister of Agriculture, but 
it’s also afflicting the Premier himself and the government. 
People simply don’t trust them and after stunts like that, who 
would, Mr. Chairman? Who would? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And so, and so we . . . and so what we have tried 
to do today, Mr. Chairman, is highlight for the government the 
fact that we’re going to continue to hold them accountable for 
the promises that they made during the election campaign. 
 
We’re going to object to occurrences where they seem to be 
arrogant, for example when it comes to health care for 
individual citizens of this province, when they refer to them as 
patients of the day. We’ll hold them to an account for that. 
 
We’ll hold them to an account when the minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs goes out and threatens SARM 
delegates on the steps of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
We’ll hold them to an account for their promises. When they 
come up with a good idea — as we highlighted in the Throne 
Speech, there were some — we will highlight those. We will 
congratulate them and ask them for specifics. 
 
We’ll try to raise constructive issues, such as we did even here 
earlier tonight with crystal meth. And if it looks like the 
government is even moving in the right direction, we’ll give 
them the benefit of the doubt. 
 
But above all, above all, Mr. Chairman, what we are going to 
continue to do on this side of the House is we’ll hold this 
Premier and this government accountable for the need for a 
vision for this province. We on this side of the House and 
people across Saskatchewan — rural and urban, north and south 
— understand that our potential is vast, it is limitless. 
 
But we’ve got to change what we’ve been doing for the last six 
decades. And soon and very soon, Mr. Chairman, I do believe 

we are going to get that chance. In the meantime, in the 
meantime, would the Premier please tell the people of the 
province just one more time, could he explain why it is they 
should trust him now or in the future based on his record, based 
on the promises that he has made and the promises he has 
broken? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have listened to the 
Leader of the Opposition throughout the day. We’ve listened to 
him intently for the last 15 minutes and what have we heard? 
 
Have we heard a substantive, a substantive comment on public 
policy? Have we heard one substantive comment about a 
change that he would make to the provincial budget? I’ve asked 
repeatedly today, what would his number be for health care? 
What would his number be for education? What would his 
number be for highways and agriculture? Of course, silence on 
those fronts. 
 
Have we heard how in fact that Leader of the Opposition and 
his party would pay for the kind of spending, the spending 
promises and commitments they would have this government 
make? How would they pay for it? Not a word. 
 
You know, I say again, Mr. Chair, in public life it’s not what we 
say about ourselves. And it’s not so much even what we say 
about each other because, I mean, they’ll say what they say and 
we’ll say what we say. What matters is, number one, what the 
third party validators say. It matters what the bond rating 
agencies say. It matters, it matters what the people of 
Saskatchewan say. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan tonight have heard nothing; 
nothing that they did not hear over the last two or three years. 
Nothing tonight that they didn’t hear prior to the election. And 
in greater numbers than in 1999, the people of Saskatchewan 
chose New Democrats to govern this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I guess there’s not much that you’re 
responsible for when you’re the Leader of the Opposition. Not 
much. Although I would have expected from a new leader 
something different than we’ve seen today and something 
different than we’ve seen over the course of this session. 
 
Because this leader, when he came to the office, when he was 
made Leader of the Opposition, unelected — no one else 
seemed to want the job over there — when he came to the 
office he made some very bold, bold statements on how he was 
going to lead this opposition in a new direction and how he was 
going to have this opposition stretch their thinking; how they 
were going to be less acrimonious; how they would bring to the 
debate substantive public policy issues. 
 
Have we heard any of that in this session or in this estimate? 
Not a bit, not a bit, Mr. Chair. But I’ll tell you what we have 
seen in this session which deeply, deeply troubles me. The 
Leader of the Opposition moments ago talked about 
accountability. I ask him tonight, will he be accountable, will he 
be accountable for himself, his party, and his members? 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Because in this session we have seen, Mr. Chair, and I think 
some very, very egregious activity in this Chamber. 
 
Let me begin with this. We had the member from Cypress Hills 
say in this House about those citizens who now serve on 
Investment Saskatchewan. He said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that the NDP’s 
investment watchdog is lame, blind, deaf, and toothless? 

 
That’s what a member of the opposition said about the citizens 
of Saskatchewan who are serving on Investment Saskatchewan. 
 
That woke them up, didn’t it, Mr. Chair? 
 
Well let me ask the Leader of the Opposition this question. On 
May 12 of this year, on May 12 of this year I wrote to the 
Leader of the Opposition. I wrote to the Leader of the 
Opposition on May 12 of this year to ask from him an apology, 
an apology to the people of Dominion Construction and an 
apology to the volunteers who the day we celebrated the dig of 
the lake, provided to the citizens samples of the lake bottom 
sand. 
 
I wrote to the Leader of the Opposition after Mr. Brian Barber, 
very publicly, very publicly made it very clear that the 
Saskatchewan Party — I need to be careful with my language 
here, Mr. Chair — that the Saskatchewan Party, that the 
Saskatchewan Party had made a mockery of what was a fine 
gesture; of how information provided in this House was wrong, 
was wrong. 
 
Now will the Leader of the Opposition, since he has not even 
provided to me the courtesy of a reply or an acknowledgement 
to my letter of over a month ago, will the Leader of the 
Opposition today, will he apologize on behalf of his caucus, for 
the stunt, the stunt, that they pulled in this legislature with no 
basis in fact? 
 
(21:15) 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, will he be responsible tonight? Will he be 
responsible tonight to speak to the issue which, if I may say, 
Mr. Chair, in my time in this legislature, I’m not sure I have 
seen, I have seen this legislature fall to the depth that it did that 
day when the Deputy Leader of the Opposition stood in his 
place and, with reference to a letter which apparently they had 
done no checking on, accused Mr. Tom Waller, the new head of 
the Crown Investments Corporation, on the basis of a letter that 
he had received, of painting Mr. Tom Waller as being under 
criminal investigation. 
 
Now I in my time, Mr. Chair, in this House, have never seen 
that kind of an attack on a public service. It’s one thing to attack 
citizens who are working on an investment board. It’s another 
thing to attack Mr. Barber and Dominion Construction and the 
volunteers. But I tell you, when you stand in this House and 
attack a public servant who has no ability to respond, that, Mr. 
Chair, is the kind of opposition that I never thought I would see 
in the province of Saskatchewan, now being led by this new 
leader. 
 
Now I have received and the Leader of the Opposition has 

received a letter from the Peepeekisis Band, from the 
Peepeekisis Band, expressing their outrage over this attack on 
Mr. Tom Waller. I won’t bother, because of the hour, to read it 
into the record. 
 
Now what this new leader should do, and what that opposition 
should do over there, is be true to their word. Be true to their 
word. If this is a new opposition, then I believe the Leader of 
the Opposition needs to demonstrate some new tactic and some 
willingness to apologize on behalf of his party and his caucus. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, we’ve had some debate today, not substantive 
debate because there’s nothing being offered from the other 
side. But this government, Mr. Chair, this government has laid 
before the people of Saskatchewan in Throne Speech, in policy 
and platform, in Throne Speech, and in budget, a solid plan to 
take this province into its next century. That’s what we’re 
about, Mr. Chair — to take this province into its next century, 
to make this province ready for its next generation of young 
people. 
 
We’re doing that by building a green and a prosperous economy 
— a green and a prosperous economy with no new assistance 
from the members opposite, but an economy that’s producing 
more jobs and opportunities for Saskatchewan people, more 
educational opportunities for Saskatchewan people, more 
opportunities to participate in the new green economy, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re doing that. We’re doing that, and we’re 
providing the best quality public health care that we can provide 
in this province. And we are going to stand firm, no matter what 
the opposition. We’re going to stand firm to the principles of 
medicare, publicly funded and publicly administered medicare. 
 
We’re going to open doors and . . . you know, Mr. Chair, they 
can shout from their seats. They can holler all they want, but 
they won’t prevent this government from doing the right things 
for the people of Saskatchewan with all of their shouting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And the negativity, Mr. Chair, the 
negativity that continues to proceed from this opposition is 
rejected by the people of Saskatchewan tonight, the same way it 
was rejected in the fall. And, Mr. Speaker, for all the naysayers 
over there, we’re still working and we’re joining with the 
people of Saskatchewan to build a future for this great province. 
 
And I’m going to end with this because I heard the Leader of 
the Opposition, from his bench tonight say that he wants to 
make this the — what? — the comeback province. Mr. Chair, 
this province began a comeback in 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I’ll tell you, and I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Chair, tonight in the nation of Canada, this province is taking 
leadership — leadership in the economy; leadership in 
developing our resources; leadership in programs for people, be 
it housing or health care or education; leadership in building a 
strong national economy; leadership on behalf of the farming 
people of Canada. This province is taking leadership. We’re not 
some comeback province. We’re a province that’s taking 
leadership, and we intend to keep it that way in spite of Her 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Order. Administration (EX01) for the amount of 
$2,431,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
Subvote (EX01) agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Accommodation and central services (EX02) for 
the amount of $952,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: —That’s carried. 
 
Subvote (EX02) agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Premier’s office (EX07) for the amount of 
$476,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. 
 
Subvote (EX07) agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Cabinet secretariat and cabinet planning unit 
(EX04) for the amount of $1,339,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. 
 
Subvote (EX04) agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Communications coordination and media 
services (EX03) for the amount of $1,063,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: —Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. 
 
Subvote (EX03) agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — House business and research (EX08) for the 
amount of $420,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
Subvote (EX08) agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Members of the Executive Council (EX06) for 
the amount of $690,000; amounts in this subvote are statutory. 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
Subvote (EX06) — Statutory. 
 
The Chair: — Amortization of capital assets — amortization is 
a non-voted, non-cash expense and is presented for information 
purposes only — for the amount of $16,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Not necessary, but . . .  
 

Therefore resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty 
for the 12 months ending March 31, 2005, the following 
sums for Executive Council for the amount of $6,681,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — The next item before the committee . . . I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, with the leave of the 
committee, I want to extend thanks to my officials. 
 
The Chair: — The Premier’s requested leave to express thanks 
to his officials. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, members. I want to take this 
opportunity to thank the officials who have joined me for the 
estimates today. While we didn’t call on their specific expertise 
much during the course of the day, in thanking them tonight, I 
am thanking them not for their work particularly today, but 
work that goes on throughout the year in Executive Council, 
which as you know, Mr. Chair, is the central, central agency of 
government. 
 
And in thanking these particular public servants who have been 
with us tonight, I want to extend through them our thanks to the 
entire public service of the province of Saskatchewan. As that 
office which leads our public service, I want to say to the entire 
public service, we are proud of our public servants. They do 
exceptional work, exceptional work on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would want them to know, through these officials, the 
gratitude of this government and this legislature for all the work 
they do. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

Premier’s officials. First of all I’ll thank the Premier for . . . 
 
The Chair: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 
leave to also thank the officials. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Just before I do that, Mr. Chair, I would like to 
thank the Premier for just a little bit over four hours of his time 
here today. Certainly he’s got a busy schedule and agenda, and 
we appreciate the time for estimates today. 
 
As well I would like to join with him in thanking the officials, 
both from Executive Council, his deputy minister, and join him 
again in thanking through these officials, all of the public 
servants of the province of Saskatchewan. Wherever they are, 
they certainly, they certainly go to work dedicated to serve the 
public, and we want to thank them for all that they do for 
Saskatchewan and thank them specifically for the four hours 
that they spent here tonight and today, notwithstanding the fact 
that maybe they, you know, didn’t have to do a lot of advising 
necessarily, but we want to thank them for their time tonight. 
Thanks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — The next item before the committee is the 
consideration of estimates for the Department of Learning, vote 
5, found on page 107 of the Estimates book. We’ll take a brief 
pause while the minister takes his place. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The business before the committee is 
estimates for Department of Learning, administration (LR01). 
The minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I’m pleased tonight to be joined by a number of officials 
representing both the post-secondary side and the K to 12 side 
of the department. Seated next to me, of course, is our deputy 
minister, Neil Yeates. Next to him is Kevin Hoyt, director of 
finance for corporate services. Behind him is Kevin 
Veitenheimer, the director of the university services. Directly 
behind the deputy minister is Wayne McElree, the assistant 
deputy minister. Seated directly behind me is Brady Salloum, 
the executive director of student financial services. We’re also 
joined tonight behind the bar by a number of officials. Actually 
if it’s all right, I’ll just introduce them as they come up to join 
us. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The question before the committee is 
subvote administration (LR01). Is the committee ready for 
question? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials at this late hour. Mr. Minister, last 
time we were in estimates we had asked for some information 
regarding the salary grids that pertain to the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
instructors, both the existing grid and the new one as a result of 
the agreement. I’m wondering if you’re able to table that at this 
time tonight. We’ve been awaiting that information, and we’d 
certainly like to have a copy of that this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In fact I can table that this evening. 
Unfortunately I left it with my assistant who is outside, but I’ll 
send an official out to get it and I’ll table it tonight. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We appreciate 
getting that information this evening. 
 
Further along the same lines, the same topic, we would like to 
know what the total salary dollars expended by the department 
on SIAST instructors for the following years, including 
benefits. And I realize you may not have that information at 
your fingertips tonight, but we’re hoping that we could get that 
tomorrow from you. From July 1, 2002, to July 1, 2003; July 1, 
2003, to July 1, 2004 — we realize that that will be a bit of an 
estimate, but we should know what those numbers are, and then 
the forecast for July 1, 2004, to 2005; and July 1, 2005, to July 
1, 2006. So for four separate calendar years, we would like to 
know the salary dollars expended by the department on SIAST 
instructors, including benefits, the total salary dollars. Is that 
possible, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think that is indeed possible. We 
don’t have that detail broken out tonight, but I can provide the 
member with that. Also once the pages return, I’ll send across 
the salary grid. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. 
Also how many employees are covered in-scope in each of 
those years? How many employees would that pertain to, and 
can we expect that information tomorrow some time? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In this particular case it would be 
helpful to know whether the member’s wanting a full-time 
equivalent numbers or whether he wants to know occupied 
positions — number of employees. We can certainly provide 
any of that detailed information. As we’re looking at going back 
over a number of years, it may take us a few days to pull that 
together, but we can certainly provide that. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
occupied positions I think would be the information that we 
would require of him, but if he is able to provide both, the 
full-time equivalents and occupied positions, that would be 
preferential. 
 
Also, Mr. Minister, can you provide us with the signed 
agreements with both the SIAST academic bargaining unit and 
the SIAST support staff? I believe those agreements have been 
signed now. Can we have copies, official and complete copies 
of that within the next 24 hours or so? 
 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I can provide the member with a copy 
of the academic unit. The support unit hasn’t ratified yet, and so 
I won’t be able to until that has happened. But once that has, I’ll 
endeavour to do so. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, Mr. 
Minister. That completes my questioning. I wasn’t sure about 
the admin support, if that had been signed or not, but if you 
could undertake to get it to us as soon as it is signed I’d 
appreciate it. And thank you again for the many hours of 
debates and estimates that we’ve had here, and to your officials, 
and thank you for providing the information where possible in a 
prompt and courteous manner. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My questions of 
course are going to be directed more to the K to 12 area and 
some of the issues that surround that. So I imagine the minister 
will want to change some officials, and I don’t know about 
introducing. 
 
But I guess I would first of all like to thank the minister and his 
officials for coming tonight at such a late hour. I think probably 
some of these estimates were planned on being taken care of 
last week, but unfortunately I was not able to be here. And so I 
thank the minister and his staff for adjusting their schedule and 
allowing us to be here at such a fine time as 9:30 at night to 
answer a few questions. 
 
I’m not going to be very long. We did cover a lot of the issues 
around amalgamation. I am going to ask some more questions 
on that. And where . . . because the last time we were together 
was probably three weeks or better ago. And I know there’s 
been certainly a lot of rumbling in the education community 
around amalgamation. I’ve received a lot of correspondence 
from school divisions, and I’m sure the minister has, and we 
will get to that in a little bit. 
 
My first questions however are dealing more with the actual, 
the hard numbers, the monies that are being spent in education, 
and particularly K to 12. I realize each year that there is some 
federal money that comes into the province for education 
through the Department of Learning. 
 
Could the minister give me a ballpark of what money we’re 
receiving through the federal government for Learning. And, I 
mean, I guess particularly I’d like it broken out K to 12, but if 
that’s not available, just a ballpark number of monies that we 
receive through the federal government that will be put into the 
education budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, three things. First of 
all I’d like to welcome some new officials and introduce them 
to the Assembly. 
 
Seated behind me is Gillian McCreary, who is the assistant 
deputy minister. Next to her is Margaret Lipp, who is the 
assistant deputy minister . . . associate deputy minister. Have 
we promoted you? Assistant deputy minister. Okay, good. I 
need to keep that straight. Next to her is Don Sangster. Don is 
the executive director of school . . . responsible for school 

finance. Seated behind him is Michael Littlewood, who is the 
executive director of legislation and school administration. And 
next to him is Nelson Wagner, the executive director of 
facilities. 
 
I also would like to thank the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs for his questions in the last several weeks that we’ve 
had an opportunity to discuss on the floor. I’ve appreciated the 
debate and certainly the passion and sincerity that he brings to 
this file. 
 
With respect to the questions asked by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, he asks in particular about the amount of 
federal support that we receive. I would indicate that we would 
receive only a very little that is dedicated directly to what we 
would call education. Of course education is a provincial 
responsibility. I would characterize most of that money as 
coming in support for the office of minority languages, and 
some money for, obviously, student loans, administration, 
provincial library, promotion of bilingualism, some 
miscellaneous services, and that appears to be the bulk of it. 
 
There is one other area that we do receive a sizeable amount of 
money, about $45 million from the federal government, and that 
is to deal with Labour Market Development Agreements. But in 
terms of education, that is almost entirely provincially funded. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a bit of a 
printout here of what we received, that the federal government 
is putting towards Learning. And as I look through it, there 
doesn’t look to be a lot that are pure dollars going right into 
education. And of course we know it’s a provincial 
responsibility. 
 
My other questions are around the SchoolPLUS program and 
monies that the government has set aside. It certainly was a 
large announcement made a couple of years ago. And we are 
certainly in favour of the concept of SchoolPLUS. I would like to 
know where the government is on it, how much money it’s 
putting towards the SchoolPLUS program, and some of the, I 
guess, latest advancements of the SchoolPLUS program 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The specific question that was asked 
was the province’s support through the Department of Learning 
for SchoolPLUS. That amount is 15.1 million, which is 
recognized of course. Other departments provide some 
expenditures through their services that are offered through the 
school system also. But that is what is . . . goes through this 
particular vote. 
 
There are a number of different initiatives which are under way. 
One of the . . . if I might just identify one of the challenges that 
we have over the next 18 months, 2 years, is to really put a 
provincial focus, to make sure we’ve got a relatively uniform 
program laid out across the province in terms of SchoolPLUS, 
something identifies viable, something tangible, which is 
obvious within the schools throughout the province. 
 
We have largely been working on pilot projects over the last 
couple of years. And there’s some very interesting initiatives 
which have been undertaken. They fall into a number of 
different categories. And maybe what I’ll do is just pick a 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

sampling of them and provide the member in the House with 
some opportunity to ask questions in more detail about this as 
we move on. 
 
Among the areas that we’ve looked at, certainly one of the 
newer ones, has been the Community-Teacher Engagement 
Fund, which has been trying to draw into the SchoolPLUS model 
more of the work and ideas that the individual teachers have 
about what could work at their school, what are some of the 
innovative things that we could do to better link up these 
options. That has been well received. 
 
In the last year and a bit, we have published a number of 
different publications: Working Together Toward SchoolPLUS, 
Parent and Community Partnerships in Education, SchoolPLUS 
Progress Report. There are a number of regional and provincial 
forums which have occurred. And a couple of new initiatives 
under the category of dealing with hidden youth, which I guess 
is one of the areas which is of particular interest — this being 
youth who have dropped out of the system are very hard to 
contain within the system, obviously a target group that we 
want to participate with. 
 
This includes three new initiatives here, including the student 
tracking initiative, youth services model — which is being 
piloted in Regina and Prince Albert — and education in custody 
facilities which Sask Learning has committed some money to. It 
obviously deals with youth who are periodically in custody. 
 
There’s a number of other initiatives we can talk about, not the 
least of which is the fact that 39 school divisions are now 
participating in the improvement initiatives. So there’s a lot of 
different things happening around the province. And one of the 
benefits of the program is that it’s extremely flexible and tries 
to meet community needs. On the other hand, that also means 
that it is sometimes difficult to discernibly identify what is 
tangibly SchoolPLUS, as it will vary somewhat from community 
to community. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One question a little bit further to the 
SchoolPLUS. I was reading through some information that you’d 
sent over regarding the community teacher program. You just 
mentioned it there. I don’t have the wording quite right, but . . . 
and I was reading that there were 10 projects agreed to or 
funded. 
 
How many applications were put forward? I realize that 10 were 
accepted, but how many . . . what size of a demand are we 
looking at from the education system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I know initially some people expressed 
concern that there was not going to be much take-up on this. In 
fact we ended up with . . . it says 101 applications were 
received for this. So I think this really does speak to the 
potential demand that there is within the school system — 
certainly identified by teachers — to be able to draw in more 
community work, and, I think, speaks to potentially the strength 
of the SchoolPLUS project. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, could the minister also explain 
to me and just fill me in . . . I went through the numbers. I 
didn’t see . . . but for example, what type of contribution does 
the Department of Health and the Department of Justice and the 

Department of Community Resources and Employment, I 
believe, how does those relationships work with the Department 
of Education? 
 
I know we’ve heard . . . and over the four years when we’ve had 
groups come in, they say that, you know, it’s not uncommon 
because of different boundaries to have somebody in there from 
Justice and from Social Services and from Department of 
Health, none of them really knowing that they were there 
before. So it’s not only just communication as to who’s been in 
the school on a certain day, but also the funding. What type of 
funding transfers or flows from these departments for students 
with these needs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The process that’s in place is largely 
driven at a community level and will vary from community to 
community as schools identify their need. Certainly one of the 
issues, and the member identifies this tonight, is the question of 
how the funding works. 
 
One of the comments that was in Commissioner Boughen’s 
report was that departments should set aside in a specific line 
item or subvote the amount that they contribute into SchoolPLUS. 
This is one of the issues that I think was quite helpful in the 
identification under Commissioner Boughen’s report. And it’s 
something that we are working on within government to see so 
that we could point to the Department of Community Resources 
and Employment and say X number of person-years and tens of 
millions of dollars is dedicated to support for children at risk or 
children in the school system. 
 
Today that is, unfortunately, difficult to identify. I think that it 
is one of the areas that, as we move forward with SchoolPLUS, 
we’ll need to more clearly articulate, and it is something that 
today we are working on an inter-departmental basis. So I regret 
I am not able to be more specific in terms of the amount of 
funding. Obviously as we move through this, we’ll need to try 
and more clearly articulate what the specific amount is and how 
we account for that. 
 
One of the challenges that we do have is that obviously 
departments offer services to students and youth in different 
ways. And so it’s not always through the school system; it’s 
sometimes in support of the school system. And this is a 
challenge to then identify the specific amount of money which 
is targeted to that, as opposed to categorized under other 
programs. 
 
It is unfortunately one of those accounting-type issues that we’ll 
need to clarify, but I think that certainly the advice provided by 
Commissioner Boughen is helpful in that regard. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I would suggest that would be very useful 
because we hear all the time — back when I was in the 
education system teaching and talking to teachers now — that 
there’s more and more demands, more and more being asked of 
them and of the school system. And there’s always a question 
as to whether the dollars flow. 
 
(21:45) 
 
I guess I was under the impression before I started tonight that 
there would be a bit of a grasp on Health put so much in and 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

Justice and whatever. So there’s really no reflection in the 
numbers in the budget book regarding how much is going to 
spent in education. In other words, there could be quite a bit 
more money spent through other departments that don’t show 
up in the Department of Learning’s budget. Am I correct there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In fact the member is correct. There 
are a number of other initiatives from other departments that 
deal with children and youth that do support the school system. 
Examples would be everything from health expenditures to deal 
with special resources that may be called upon by schools or 
support through young offenders’ services or support through 
the non-government sector that is funded out of the Department 
of Community Resources and Employment. This is 
unfortunately a murky area, and it is one that I think would 
behoove us all to more clearly identify and brand as SchoolPLUS 
so we can more clearly identify what those resource drawdowns 
are. 
 
As I talk to educators around the province, and have over the 
last several months as minister and before that as a member of 
the caucus, I too was certainly made well aware that teachers in 
particular, while supportive of the SchoolPLUS initiative put this 
caution on it, that they want to make sure that resources that are 
added into it come not only through the Department of Learning 
budget but are clearly identified in the appropriate host 
departments. This is something I’m very mindful of and 
something that our government’s mindful of and is indeed a 
large part of the discussion that we’re having as we move 
forward with developing a province-wide rollout of SchoolPLUS. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess when you talk to some of the school 
divisions . . . and I can use a couple of examples, and one I 
guess would come from the Adopt an MLA that Community 
Living did in a small community that I was in and talking to the 
mother of a son who had Down’s syndrome. And knowing in 
that school where I had taught in that school that I really don’t 
think if you would have gone back 25 years ago when I was 
there or 20 years ago, that it would be equipped. 
 
And so there’s certain inherent costs that are going to come on 
school divisions, not only just the structure of the building and 
what they need in the building, but the transportation. I think in 
rural Saskatchewan so many of these students now are being 
transported on buses. 
 
And is there any flow of dollars to cover the cost because 
certainly the cost now has to be borne by the division board to 
make sure that these people are integrated and educated, 
everything that we want to see. But is that cost, is the majority 
of the cost being borne by the school division and then hence 
the property tax payers? Or are there dollars to match the extra 
cost that department or that school divisions are facing across 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In part it depends on the spending. The 
examples that the member uses tonight are largely around 
special education cost. Those do tend to be factored in already 
under foundation operating grant and in the department’s 
expenditures. 
 
If I were to use a different example where we may not see that 
accounted for through the Department of Education but it may 

be provided through a different department, would be, for 
example, where we have after-school programs put into place 
that would flow nicely into SchoolPLUS or we have in place a 
childcare in our schools. In that case, those expenditures are 
often undertaken by the Department of Community Resources 
in support of education and learning but are accounted for under 
different programs, so would not be identified directly as 
SchoolPLUS. 
 
Health is another example. And certainly the discussions we 
were having today around challenges for children with autism, 
some of those support services may be provided by the 
Department of Health and not specifically identified as being a 
support to the school system. 
 
So this is, this is an interesting area. It is one where departments 
have acted to meet what they believe were their responsibilities 
to children and youth. But we have those identified under a 
number, a real array of different programs. I think it would be 
helpful for us, as we move forward over the next 18 months to 
two years, to more clearly identify those as being supports to 
the school system, where there are linkages in. Part of this will 
depend on us being able to devise more of a provincially 
identifiable SchoolPLUS program as opposed to one based on 
largely on pilot projects and new initiatives. 
 
So this is an evolutionary process. I think it is good that we 
have the advice coming in now as we’re still fairly new into it 
because this is obviously something which I think 
Saskatchewan has a real opportunity to take a national lead on 
and is one that I know that ministers in the government who are 
responsible for children and youth issues are quite interested in 
and are working on. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll be interested 
to follow and see how you make out over the next 18 months to 
two years and start tracking that a little bit clearer, I guess, 
because I think it would be of use to understand the, you know, 
the relationship between the Department of Learning and other 
departments — financial relationship and the money that 
transfers back and forth. 
 
I think what I’d like to move to now, because it may take a little 
while, is the whole issue and the biggest announcement in the 
last 60 years regarding amalgamation. And, you know, you 
would think that after that long that the announcement would be 
really well received. You know, people have been waiting for 
60 years for this big announcement, and it maybe hasn’t been 
received quite the way that, probably the way the minister had 
anticipated. I don’t know what his anticipation was before the 
announcement. 
 
But certainly we have heard an awful lot of feedback. I have a 
raft of letters here from many school divisions. I’ve certainly 
talked to the School Boards Association many, many times. 
We’ve talked to the teachers’ association. We’ve talked to a lot 
of the people that are directly involved with the education 
system. 
 
And quite frankly, maybe not withstanding one or two 
divisions, it really hasn’t been met with a whole lot of great 
anticipation of excitement. There have been many, many 
questions around it. And there have been many people talking 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

on the side, and we’re hearing some rumours that perhaps that 
government is, and the minister’s office, is softening a little bit 
on some of the criteria that it set out and some of the direction 
that it had set out. 
 
For one point, for one example, for example, it was said that 
every school division must be 5,000 students or more. That was 
certainly mentioned in the minister’s speech. And we’ve done 
some numbers, and we’ve looked at maps, and we’ve certainly 
seen some of the geographical size of school divisions to get to 
a population of 5,000. 
 
Can the minister tell me what . . . what he can tell me, what has 
been going on in the department? And I realize that they’ve 
named the other two members to the commission of drawing 
the boundaries. Can the minister give me a bit of an update on 
how this — the biggest announcement in 60 years — has gone? 
And are they looking at changing any of their criteria that they 
set out roughly about a month and a half ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I do have some understanding as to 
why people only undertake these types of changes once every 
60 years. They are certainly worthy of a great deal of debate 
and certainly consume a great deal of time and effort to make 
sure they’re done appropriately. 
 
I will offer this editorial comment that I must admit I have been 
pleased with how the responses have been received to date. In 
many ways the reaction was as expected. In many ways I have 
been pleasantly surprised by the response. When you take into 
account the fact that more than half the school divisions in the 
province will be amalgamated, that we will lose a large number, 
and we have to expect a certain amount of institutional 
resistance. Indeed that is a challenge for any well-entrenched 
and well-established set of organizations who have been doing a 
good job to date, to believe that in many ways they could 
continue with the status quo. 
 
However I’ve been pleasantly surprised by the response of 
many divisions and many of the educational leaders around the 
province as they’ve embraced these changes and suggested that 
we needed to push forward. In some cases divisions have . . . 
and pundits have said we have not gone far enough, that we 
need to push even further ahead. 
 
So in terms of that, I have been generally pleased by the 
response that we’re seeing across the province, pleased by the 
institutional response of major stakeholders who are certainly 
putting forward their views in a strong way and in a helpful 
way. As the member’s identified, we have now got in place the 
task force. I’ve been very pleased to secure the involvement of 
two very highly respected trustees, former trustees, whose 
expertise in this area I think will be particularly helpful. 
 
I am also pleased that we are currently pulling together the 
restructuring coordinating committee which will deal with a lot 
of the very meaty and complicated issues to actually 
operationalize the amalgamations. This will be a good 
opportunity for key stakeholder groups to participate and pull 
together their ideas and represent them in terms of making sure 
that this works at an operational level and on the ground. 
 
With respect to the criteria, the member may characterize it as a 

softening of the criteria. I don’t see it as that. I have certainly 
said that if the task force comes back with school divisions that 
are not quite at 5,000, if they’re in the 4,500 range, that I would 
feel compelled to look at that. I think that that’s a reasonable 
approach. 
 
I’m not trying to be inflexible on this. I’m trying to find a set of 
solutions that work, that move us towards a sustainable 
education system so that we hopefully don’t have to do this 
again . . . I think it would be too bold to say for another 60 
years, but certainly for a least another few decades, to be able to 
have an organizational set of changes in place now that’ll guide 
us through that. 
 
So in that regard, we are looking in fact at the criteria remaining 
relatively stable. I have however suggested to individual school 
boards that I’ve met with them . . . I had sent a message to the 
School Boards Association today saying that where boards are 
interested in coming forward with proposals in terms of who 
they think they would best amalgamating with for whatever 
reasons — whether that be corporate, cultural or geographic 
issues — that I know that the task force would welcome that 
advice and would take it into account. 
 
If that’s characterized as a softening of our position, so be it. 
From my perspective, I simply view it as a way to find a 
common sense approach to moving forward in a way that meets 
the needs of local boards and local communities. Beyond that, I 
can’t identify any other specific changes that we’ve made to 
those criteria, but I’m sure if the member’s aware of any, he’ll 
point them out to me. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well that is interesting. Your response is 
quite interesting because I do believe that, as compared to what 
we heard in the speech on May 13, I guess was when the 
minister made his announcement, a little over a month ago, that 
there has been some change in your position. Because quite 
frankly, at that time, and talking to school divisions and the 
School Boards Association, they were quite sure that it was 
5,000 or more and that there was going to be no softening on 
that. 
 
Now to hear the minister say, well maybe 4,500 which could 
then maybe be 4,000, I hear . . . see that the minister’s shaking 
his head. So now 4,500 is the number because 5,000 was the 
number. And now, if there’s a softening, I’m not — don’t get 
me wrong — I’m not saying that that’s incorrect. I think there 
needed to be some softening because, to try and put a one size 
fits all, one size of population fits all across this province, quite 
frankly, was not doable. Well I shouldn’t say it wasn’t doable. 
It was doable, but it wasn’t practical. 
 
And to see the minister looking at softening it a little bit and 
moving it from 5,000 to maybe 4,500, depending on what the 
recommendation is of the task force . . . and even more now 
though, to hear the minister say that the task force would be 
willing to hear proposals put forward by school divisions on 
what makes sense to them . . . because quite frankly, I think that 
was one of the biggest stumbling blocks that school divisions 
felt across this province. And when you look at the School 
Boards Association, “Decisions made without consultation” is 
the head of the latest School Boards Association newsletter. 
 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

The impression that was left after May 13 was that there was 
going to be no flexibility whatsoever. There was going to be no 
consultation so that school divisions, if they made a 
recommendation because of geographic areas and trading areas, 
was not going to be accepted. It was going to be the task force 
making their decision, drawing their map. And it really seemed 
like it was very rigid, the whole process. 
 
Now to hear the minister talk the way he has tonight, I’m glad 
we stayed till the time that we have because that certainly has 
made me feel better. And I think it will make other school 
divisions feel better. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Deputy . . . No, Mr. Chair, there are a number of 
other . . . Deputy Chair, a number of school divisions that have 
sent letters. And I would like to, and I don’t know if I have the 
time . . . But whether it’s Eastland Lakes School Division, 
whether it’s Aspen Grove School Division, whether it’s South 
Central, Weyburn’s School Division, all of these divisions have 
gone through amalgamation in the last two or three years. 
 
And all of these divisions are sending letters. These are all 
addressed to you and you’ve seen them, I’ve no doubt. They’ve 
all been addressed to you, raising deep concerns with the 
process that was put in place as of May 13. 
 
(22:00) 
 
I think all of those divisions, along with the school board, will 
be pleased to hear that it’s maybe not locked in at 5,000. It may 
be able to vary, but more importantly that school divisions will 
have some input as to where the map and the boundary is going 
to be, how it’s going to be drawn up because, you know, I 
listen. 
 
I read the one letter from Eastland Lakes School Division, and 
it talks about the size of the school division. I mean, this 
division has amalgamated twice and it’s gone from, I believe, 
five or six school divisions down to the one that it’s at right 
now, and it talks about the geographic area that it encompasses, 
over 10,000 square kilometres, Mr. Chair. And when it talks 
about some of the staff in that school division and the travel 
time, they’re logging over 8,000 kilometres a month. That 
translates into over 80 hours of travel time per month for some 
of these people at highway speeds. You’ll get to the point with 
such large geographic areas that you find no efficiency, in 
administration especially, because a large portion of their time 
is going to be spent on the road. 
 
And so now I realize, and we both agree and we have agreed in 
this House and I’ll still agree totally that there is definitely a lot 
of amalgamation that has to take place on the school divisions. 
But to set a one-size cookie cutter, one size fits all, and say they 
have to be 5,000 in population and the task force is going to 
draw it up, really I think was going to run into a pile of 
opposition. Now as I said, I’m certainly glad to hear that there 
has been some relaxing of that. 
 
Has the minister thought of relaxing the moratorium on school 
closures? Because there is a line further on this letter, not just 
talking about the geographic issues of making their school 
division much larger, but it says: 
 

In addition to the 1 per cent increase in the PST has had an 
effect on our budget and the moratorium on school 
closures has also tied our hands. On May 11 we made a 
decision to close the school effective June 30, 2006, after 
grave reductions in September of 2005. Should we be 
allowed to close the school as planned, the school will 
have 17 students from K to 5. 

 
You know, and now there is a moratorium. So what the school 
division is saying, they’ve gone through amalgamation twice 
over the last couple of years. They’ve reached a geographic size 
that it’s getting hard to manage. Any larger would be practically 
impossible. They’re being hit with a PST increase and now 
they’re having their hands tied with a school closure. 
 
You have to realize that this school division certainly isn’t 
anti-amalgamation. It’s gone through the process. It’s anti, I 
guess, government on some of the things that you’ve gone 
forward and done. 
 
So I guess I would ask the minister for his response on that, and 
one other question in that. Will the task force being coming 
through with any interim map? I believe the date that you had 
set was November of this year to have a map finalized. Will 
there be an interim map? And if the date is November, and they 
will have an interim map, I would question what is the time 
available for consultation from these divisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I appreciate these numerous 
questions and issues that the member raises. When I made the 
announcement, one of the reasons we had purposely decided to 
announce that we would structure a task force was to undertake 
consultation, was to have the task force at some arm’s-length 
from the minister, to be able to go out and talk to various school 
boards about what they thought would fit together well. 
 
We had said in that that we wanted to make sure we respected 
previous amalgamations where work has been done. I think it’s 
difficult to come in and then undo it or to move it in a different 
direction. But that we wanted to make sure that the task force 
had an opportunity to talk with local divisions about what was 
workable in their regard. 
 
Now as we talked about the threshold number of 5,000 students 
per division, we still believe that that is the benchmark. That is 
the most reasonable number. Now realistically that may mean 
one division is not in one of the new and larger ones; it maybe 
moves into the neighbouring one. That could shift 500 students. 
We want to be flexible as to what that looks like. 
 
Certainly some of these divisions are going to be very large; 
there is no doubt about that. But this is the 21st century. We 
have an opportunity to have more modern communication 
mechanisms. I think people have come to understand that we 
need to reduce overhead to make sure that expenditures that are 
raised for student education in fact are spent on instruction and 
student education. In many cases where we can collapse four or 
five or six boards into one and reduce accordingly the number 
of district offices, there’s bound to be some saving. 
 
Now if the member wants to characterize that as us having 
softened our response, so be it. Then tonight is time well-spent. 
However the general principles that we’ve laid out — that the 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

task force will go and consult, that they will meet with local 
school divisions to talk about what they see, that they will look 
to develop a map that has divisions of a sustainable size of 
around 5,000 students, that they should do so in a way that 
respects previous amalgamations, that with some exception they 
should do so by moving whole districts into new areas. 
 
Now there are some areas that I have certainly become aware of 
and was aware of before this, that there’s always some debate as 
to whether it should be in one division or another. I can think of 
the situation with Lang and Milestone, as an example, who of 
course have lobbied heavily to move over into Thunder Creek. 
Maybe they should go where Thunder Creek goes, rather than 
with the Weyburn division. That’s something the school 
division will have to look at. 
 
I think there’s another set of issues that will need to be 
discussed around Sask Valley and how that reconfigures with 
Saskatoon as to whether the bedroom communities or so-called 
bedroom communities of Martensville, Warman maybe should 
move into the Saskatoon district. That’s something again that I 
think that the task force will need to look at. 
 
But in terms of the perimeters that we’ve outlined and I outlined 
on May 13, they all remain in place today. If there is a better 
understanding of the flexibility that was built into it, so be it, 
and I’m pleased to hear that. I think that this will encourage 
divisions to come forward and find the support there. 
 
All that being said, I think that we need to understand that this 
is going to be a difficult process that is going to require a great 
deal of co-operation, a great deal of support and innovation at a 
local level. 
 
And from the divisions that I’ve talked to, even those who are 
resistant to the idea of needing to amalgamate, I do believe that 
they’ll rise to the challenge and that they’ll accept it. And I’m 
convinced that they will come to the table and participate in a 
way that looks after who they’re most concerned with, and 
that’s obviously the children in the system that they’re 
responsible for. 
 
I don’t want to engage tonight in a reading back and forth of 
letters. I have received, as the member can expect and 
appreciate, a large number of letters on both sides of this. I’ve 
received letters chastising me . . . from the school divisions, 
chastising the school board associations, some chastising me for 
the approach, some criticizing the member opposite, as hard as 
that is to believe. And what we need to do, I think, is just take 
out of that what we can in terms of a better understanding of the 
challenge and move forward. 
 
And that is in fact the direction the department’s going in. I am 
pleased to say that the task force is moving forward. And 
indeed in time, in the next couple of months, we will see the 
restructuring coordinating committee appointed to deal with 
some of the meatier issues. 
 
The final issue that the member asked me about was the 
question of an interim map. As I understand the process . . . 
And the committee is in fact meeting this week to talk about 
their process, the task force is. They are looking at this time, as 
I understand it, to begin consultations on a regional basis, 

meeting with school divisions about what their concerns are, 
and how they think they might be able to come together to get a 
better feel as to what divisions may be better amalgamated. 
 
There is a possibility . . . I don’t think they’ve decided yet 
whether they want to produce an interim map or not. It’s an 
issue that I would leave to the task force based largely on their 
consultation. If they saw fit to provide me with a map in 
October or to make that public . . . or in September, whenever 
. . . at what point they get to that we would certainly be 
amenable to that. In fact there could be some benefit to having 
that out there. 
 
I have no doubt that there will be a certain shock value to the 
map when people see it. But what we’ve set out are a set of 
principles that I believe are firm and strong and I think will help 
guide this process, and in that regard we are now at a point 
where we are managing the process. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think . . . you 
know you started by talking a little bit about the 5,000 threshold 
and some may be less and some may be more. I maybe would 
not argue the fact that in an ideal world 5,000 students per 
school division is the right number to have. But I would argue 
that with the geographic constraints that we have, the lack of 
population in some of our areas of our province, it’s just not 
practical. And I think you’d find any sort of efficiencies that 
you are trying to gain you would soon lose because of the sheer 
expanse of that specific division. 
 
I would suggest that an interim map would be very useful. It 
would be quite interesting to see an interim map for school 
divisions because if you only come out with a final map, as you 
said, the shock value of seeing what this province will look like, 
what the governance will look like of school divisions, and the 
number of school divisions will be quite a shock. And I would 
suggest that if the task force could come forward with an 
interim map prior and then go back out for some more 
consultations, because there will be some things on that interim 
map that just won’t make sense — just as there will be if it was 
a final map. 
 
And to give school boards the ability then to get in touch with 
the task force and explain the rationale why some things that 
this interim map was put together, that don’t make sense, and 
give the school boards and opportunity to explain that. Not 
unlike the boundary map of the constituencies came out with a 
interim map, then organizations and constituency associations 
were given the ability to talk to that task force and make some 
changes. And there were some changes made. Not significant, I 
don’t think, but there were changes made that made sense. 
 
And to not have that opportunity or ability for school divisions 
. . . school boards, I should say, and other interested parties, to 
make representation after they see the initial shock of the 
interim map, before they see the final map . . . So I would 
suggest that would be very useful. 
 
I was also interested to hear the minister say that splitting up 
already amalgamated divisions is not out of the mandate of the 
task force. In other words, there may be some amalgamated 
divisions that have gone through the process that will be split 
up. Would that be true? Is that a fair assumption? 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — To answer the last point first, I think it 
is unlikely that we would see that. 
 
I am aware of one division that came to my attention today 
where I’m told it has recently — of course it has recently 
amalgamated — where they may want to look at some changes, 
depending on which direction the larger amalgamation takes 
affect. They may feel that some of the communities are better 
served by the neighbouring board. In those cases, the task force 
probably should look at it. 
 
What we are reluctant to see the task force start to get into is 
questioning the value of the amalgamations that have already 
taken on. In these cases, some of these divisions are only a few 
years old. I think it is beneficial to largely leave those intact — 
add on to them, fine, but rather than break them back up and 
start over again. 
 
So there may be some exceptions where those divisions would 
see changes, where they made petition for them, and so be it. 
But I would think that would be the exception. 
 
With respect to the number of school divisions . . . and let me 
speak in particular about the geographic size. I was initially 
inclined, as I think we all are, inclined to believe that geography 
of course can be a significant issue in our province, which is 
very large, and can be an issue in terms of the size of divisions 
as we make them. 
 
And I believed this until I became the Minister of Learning and 
had an opportunity to look at the Northern Lights School 
Division, which is responsible for education in almost fully 
one-half of this province — one division. I can tell the member 
— and it won’t surprise him as I’m sure he’s read local papers 
— sharp criticism I’ve received in The Northerner, where the 
editor had written an editorial chastising me for not 
amalgamating in Ile-a-la-Crosse and Creighton in with that 
school division, arguing in fact that this is the 21st century; 
surely we can find ways to do that without needing to maintain 
all this local control. Simply pool the assessment all together 
and move forward. 
 
If that’s a view which is prevalent in the northern half of this 
province that does not have, in many cases, roads that link up 
the individual communities, why is that not the view of the 
southern half of the province, that we can accommodate bigger 
districts? 
 
And I think we need to really seriously think about that, as we 
think about how we govern ourselves. Certainly one of the 
announcements that I made, and we will move forward with, is 
to engage communities and a new local model of 
accountability. You still need to have that sort of accountability 
at the school level. And in fact I would argue that we need to 
make it stronger there, as opposed to worrying about the 
number of division boards that we have. 
 
(22:15) 
 
There are some who say that the 5,000 number is too large. I 
received an e-mail this morning from a parent in Grand Coulee 
who was arguing we should not abolish the board there, that the 
board should not be amalgamated in. And in fact this board 

which is responsible for a school of about — what is it? — 80, 
77, 78 students is just the perfect size. 
 
I can appreciate that sentiment, but the fact is that we have fully 
one-third of the province educated in just four divisions: the 
Catholic and the public division in Saskatoon, and the Catholic 
and the public division in Regina. As far as I can tell, those 
students and those ratepayers are well represented by the 
mechanisms they have in place. So I’m not suggesting a one 
size fits all. What I am saying though is everybody needs to 
take a look at how we can move the system forward in a way 
that certainly maintains local accountability, but maybe doesn’t 
do that by having a school division attached to it, that certainly 
has larger divisions but takes into account that this is the 
modern age and we have new ways to communicate and does 
that. 
 
And I certainly as minister have been mindful of this and have 
learned a great deal over the last several weeks, as people have 
responded and sometimes very glowing ways about what we’re 
doing and sometimes very harsh criticism. And what we’re 
trying to do is to build a system that takes into account local 
need and local accountability on that. 
 
The other issue that the member raised was the question about 
the moratorium on school closures. And I didn’t answer that the 
previous time, and I’d like to address that now. When we 
announced the moratorium, we did so recognizing that it was in 
fact a responsibility of the local boards who make the final 
decision about school closure. The minister does not have 
legislative authority to stop the closure of any school in this 
province today. That is a decision which is either taken by the 
boards and is followed through that way. I have asked 
individual boards who were looking at closures to bear in mind 
there will be changes coming and that they may have additional 
resources available at their disposal. 
 
What the member has alluded to, and I think is quite right, is 
that in some cases it’s not a question of money. It is a question 
of the sustainable size of the school. Where we have schools, 
particularly those that are under 100 students, between the 50 
and 100, and are relatively close by to another school in the 
same situation, where they may feel that by creating one school 
with more than 100 students they’ve got better educational 
programming; they can get rid of double and triple class 
grading, that we can in fact develop a better instructional 
program. This is a . . . These are difficult ones to deal with. And 
I can think of two examples to date where the boards are on 
opposite sides of the moratorium. One is in the York area where 
I know that they’re looking at one school that is small, and 
they’re thinking about whether it’s better dealt with through 
amalgamation with the neighbouring one. 
 
Of course the member for Biggar has raised in this Assembly 
the concern about the school at Radisson where there is a debate 
by the Saskatoon West division as to whether Radisson and 
Borden should be amalgamated into one school. 
 
In the case of York, in the case of Regina, I can tell you that 
those divisions have lobbied to be exempted out of the 
moratorium, believing that they should be allowed to pursue the 
school closures. Conversely, the community of Radisson has 
lobbied heavily to be included in it. 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

What we have done is set out what I think is a reasonable 
approach for the boards to follow, which is that they should be 
mindful of where they are going to see amalgamation, 
particularly with more wealthy divisions whether that gives 
them increased fiscal capacity to keep those schools open. If 
however those are driven by other decisions, I think we’ll need 
to take a look at that in time. 
 
Indeed it is entirely possible that some divisions will not be 
affected by amalgamation, and we may know that by the time 
the interim map comes out, in which case it would make little 
sense to me to hold them for two more years on a no-closure 
moratorium. If they’re not affected, if the reason we’re doing 
this is to provide some breathing space to get a better 
understanding of what the resources are if they’re not affected, 
then I think they could put forward a compelling argument to be 
exempted out. 
 
The member may accuse me again of softening up my approach 
on this. Indeed I think what we’re trying to do is just respond to 
the local need, and we’ll take a look at it on a case-by-case 
basis. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well you know I don’t know if it’s an 
accusation, softening his position, because I would be in 
agreement of the moves that they’re making, and they’re not 
quite as rigid. 
 
My concern though . . . and I don’t want to go on to this 
moratorium much longer. I do have one more point that I 
wanted to make because really it’s not the big picture issue that 
amalgamation is. But the one thing that I will say about a 
moratorium is that, as I said before, school divisions never get 
to the point of closing a school lightly. And they go through a 
whole pile of head scratching and I’m sure some sleepless 
nights dealing with a school closure. As I say I’ve been at 
division meetings where the poor board members are struggling 
with it. And what you’ve done now is given the community just 
another arrow in their quiver to shoot at the school board. As if 
it wasn’t hard enough for the school board, you’ve given them 
another arrow. 
 
And you know, I know what will happen out there. You’ll have 
some parent groups saying, you really, really don’t like us now 
because the government is saying you don’t have to close us. 
And the board is saying, maybe you’re right; we don’t have to 
close you. But all the stars are lined up; it makes sense to close 
it. 
 
And you know, it’s just going to be that much harder for board 
members. As if the decision wasn’t hard enough as it was, now 
they’re going to get shot with another arrow that quite frankly 
isn’t going to do them any good. But regardless of that, we’ll 
leave that moratorium on the side. 
 
I was interested — I only have a couple more questions here, so 
bear with me — I was interested when you were saying about 
the local boards and making sure schools themselves have local 
boards that have more power, that are stronger representative of 
that school. 
 
Could you give me some sort of snapshot of what you see this 
local board . . . what other responsibilities you see these local 

boards having? And if — the second part to that question — if 
it won’t be a bit of a competition . . . not competition, but be 
locking heads sometimes with an elected board, elected division 
board, when it makes decisions. You’ve got a local school 
board now with more authority that may be butting heads with a 
elected greater school board. Do you not see there being some 
conflict there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — With respect to the question on 
moratorium again, I do appreciate the comments of the member 
opposite. And I would certainly encourage to adopt the member 
for Biggar in this session and try and help him explain this 
position as to the approach the boards go through. 
 
What I have said to the boards, and we have communicated 
through the regional director to Saskatoon West in the case of 
Radisson, is that they need to be mindful that change may 
increase their fiscal capacity to keep schools open. That doesn’t 
mean that that is the only factor, and I agree fully with the 
member opposite that in many cases it is better to see that 
amalgamation. 
 
I can point to a situation in my constituency. This is not a 
phenomena which is limited only to rural areas. Indeed we have 
faced a school closure. I have gone through that in my own 
neighbourhood where the school board decided they wanted to 
put two schools together and make one stronger one. There’s 
still a lot of hard feelings over that, and that’s six years after the 
fact. But it has, I think, generally benefited the students and 
benefited the system. 
 
So boards obviously take this into account. What we wanted to 
make sure is that they kept in mind that this may change, in 
some of those cases, the fiscal resources available. And I think 
in particular about schools that are in the remote south, like 
Alida— which is a very small school, I think only probably 
fewer than 30 students in it — that may in fact be in a better 
position to stay open as a result of increased resources being 
moved into instruction. I don’t know that for sure; this is 
something the board will need to take a look at. 
 
But there’s — as we’ve gone through before — obviously 
going to be a number of closures and we understand that. Yes, it 
does give parents another opportunity, but frankly I’m of the 
view that it doesn’t hurt to have that level of scrutiny. Senior 
levels of government have that. I can tell you I have that here. I 
think that we have a very open process to debate these issues on 
the floor, and I think that that doesn’t hurt for other levels of 
government to have that level of scrutiny also and that chance 
to have a second thought about what the program is they’re 
undertaking. If there’s merit to the argument, it’ll proceed and I 
believe that that will win the day. 
 
With respect to the question of local school councils — this is, I 
think, going to be one of the most interesting pieces of the 
reforms that we introduce and may very well be the piece that 
best defines Saskatchewan’s new school system in a way that 
will provide an increased role for parents and teachers, helping 
agencies, for ratepayers, to come together to have more say in 
the functioning of the schools. 
 
Now some people say we should base it on the model of the 
school councils. Some say it should be based on the model of 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

the local boards. Others have suggested they should come 
together as a community planning council. Some have 
suggested it should be directly elected. Others have suggested it 
should be appointed by the parent board. 
 
I have not yet decided which model I favour. I have in my mind 
a general idea as to the form that I want and the . . . I can see the 
merit of bringing together these different interests around in 
order to strengthen the board, particularly bringing in helping 
agencies around a SchoolPLUS-type model. Whether that board is 
directly elected or whether that is appointed by the division 
board is an issue that we need to have more discussion about, 
and it’s one that certainly I would welcome input in from 
stakeholders and certainly from the School Boards Association 
before coming to rest on one final model. 
 
I do however think that whatever model it is that we come to, 
that we should look to enshrine it in legislation, that we should 
clearly articulate what its powers are, what its responsibilities 
are, to help minimize the conflict between varying levels. 
 
At the end of this, I believe that we are still best served by a 
school system that are focused on schools and classrooms, 
parents and teachers, and kids, that are mindful that there’s a 
relationship with the ratepayers but also welcomes in the advice 
of other helping agencies. And that is, in a large part, what has 
shaped our vision around SchoolPLUS and I think provides us 
with that opportunity to move forward in terms of these new 
SchoolPLUS councils or whatever it is we may call them. 
 
So this is something that we’ll have some time to debate. I am 
keen to make sure that this is in place before we move to the 
larger districts so that there’s a clear understanding of how 
communities will relate to those schools. And I must say I am 
looking for a model that works as well in urban areas as it does 
in rural ones because, as an urban representative, I worry that 
even in our cities that the communities are not as well 
connected to schools as they should be. And so I think there’s 
an opportunity here for us to find a model built on community 
schools, built on SchoolPLUS and really strengthens and finds a 
new role for parents and teachers in that system. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One last question, I think, depending on 
how the answer comes, so be careful on how you answer . . . is 
regarding on the governance. And I know from again the school 
divisions that have amalgamated that the governance and how 
they set up . . . whether it’s a ten-member board or an 
eight-member board or however that works. That is extremely 
important to making an amalgamation work and fit together. 
 
And I can think of a division — and you touched on two of the 
schools, Lang and Milestone, well that’s kind of in my area — 
where Prairie View amalgamated with Weyburn and that was 
one of the biggest issues . . . is the makeup of the governance of 
the school board. 
 
And so I guess my question would be, when the map will be 
drawn, will they also draw up how the governance will be 
structured, how many board members there will be on each 
division? Because certainly I can see a benefit of getting to a 
point where there is a board member for four or five schools, so 
he’s seeing the whole division as opposed to . . . so often there 
is a division member per school and that is . . . their whole issue 

is their own school as opposed to looking at the betterment of 
education in the whole division. 
 
So could you explain to me what you foresee as far as the 
governance and the makeup of school boards? And also can we 
be assured, and I think I know the . . . but we can be assured 
that those board members will still be elected, and there won’t 
be people appointed from the department on these different 
school boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Indeed the education equity task force 
will come back with the boundaries for the new subdivisions. 
So they will come forward with that at the same time, and we’ll 
have an opportunity to look at it. I’m told that we are looking at 
a maximum of 10 members per board. 
 
(22:30) 
 
In some of these we may want to take a look, depending on the 
geographic areas and the number of boards that are being 
amalgamated in, as to whether that is the appropriate number or 
whether we want to go larger, slightly larger. I can assure the 
member that these boards will be fully elected. 
 
One of the things that I heard as I travelled the province was 
that they wanted very clearly to maintain the ability for boards 
to raise their own funds and to remain elected. And that is one 
of the reasons we rejected the Alberta model and opted for this 
one. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well that’s reassuring, and I guess that was 
the answer I was looking for so I have no more questions. But I 
would like to thank the minister and his officials for being here. 
My member from Arm River-Watrous has a couple of 
questions, and then we’ll wrap it up. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — They are very quick questions. They are just 
with the information that I received today from you on the pay 
scale or the pay grid change. On the instructors, how many were 
affected by the grid change of instructors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Indeed all the instructors were affected 
by this change and will be placed into an appropriate step and 
category within the grid. Although that hasn’t happened, so I 
am not able to give the member tonight the number by category 
which we would normally be able to provide. But I can assure 
him and advise him that indeed every member of the academic 
unit is affected by this and will be placed into the new grid. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — If you could provide that with us as soon as 
possible I would be interested in that. One of the questions I 
guess I’ll ask you is . . . the government always said this year 
there would be zero increase. But is that how you . . . it looks 
like they got around that zero increase was adjusting . . . each 
instructor got a pay grid . . . can you give me an average of 
what their pay would go up? Would you know? Would it be 2 
per cent, 3 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It is difficult in this case to average. 
The academic unit is different than the academic support unit in 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2004 

that it had not yet received its pay equity money. And the last 
time we were discussing these estimates, I explained that one of 
the difficulties with dealing with the pay equity for SIAST is 
that there is not an obvious male wage line to bring into it. 
 
And so the result was to restructure this more to base it on a 
credentialized basis. As such there are changes. I can’t tell the 
member what an average increase would be. Some will be 
significant as the pay equity is applied. Others will be relatively 
small. But once you separate out the pay equity money, you still 
end up with the 0, 1, and 1 in terms of the overall change. Plus 
then pay equities apply. 
 
So this is a bit of a complicated one because it had not yet had 
to pay equity monies brought in, and there was no obvious male 
wage line to bring into it. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess I would be 
. . . I’d be asking, would be 2,000 a month, along that line. 
 
But one of the other questions I would ask is: why would you 
have brought in each instructor a different pay grid? Basically 
that’s . . . I don’t think . . . I don’t know if it was the union 
asking for that to begin with, or is that something that was 
brought in from the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This was the fundamental change that 
happened with this particular set of negotiations. This was a 
request by the union to move to a credentialized basis. So 
instead of every welding instructor being paid the same as the 
welding instructor, it recognized the number of years that they 
had in terms of post-secondary education. This was a request 
that they made. 
 
It did complicate the negotiations. And obviously when you 
start with a brand new grid system, you’re going to end up with 
a certain amount of debate. But this was what we were advised 
by SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ 
Union), they favoured. And from a perspective of management, 
it was workable, and as such it was agreed to. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Is this going to affect the current budget for the 
education? Can you give me a dollar figure of a gross amount 
of what’s going to be paid out this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — SIAST will draw down its reserves this 
year to meet its demands. There is some impact, I understand, 
about the range of 1 million, a million and a half — I’m told 
more precisely, I guess 1.6 million — in terms of impact that 
they’ll draw down on the reserves. And we will re-base their 
budget next year to deal with that. 
 
But in terms of the approach that is . . . what was agreed on and 
it seemed workable. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Chair. And I want to thank 
again the officials for being here so late into the night. We 
really appreciate that and answering the few questions. 
 
It will certainly be interesting as the map — the map — comes 

forward in November, that we will have a fall session to 
scrutinize that map in. So we look forward to having 
opportunities in November to ask more questions. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I too would like to . . . I’d like to thank 
the officials for their time. They’ve been very helpful. As a new 
minister, this has been a great opportunity to get to see the way 
that this department works. And I can see why so many 
members clamour to be the Minister of Learning. 
 
I’d also like to thank the members opposite for their questions. 
 
And I just want to reiterate; I guess I did promise the map 
would be here November 15, not December 15, but maybe I’m 
flexible on that too so . . . No, okay, it’ll be November 15. With 
that, thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Okay subvote (LR01) for 5,718,000. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Subvote (LR01) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Okay. Subvote accommodation and 
central services (LR02) for 6,230,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Subvote (LR02) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Subvote post-secondary education 
(LR11) for 387,917. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Oh, 387 million, pardon me. 
 
Subvote (LR11) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Subvote early childhood development 
(LR08) for 3,320,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Subvote (LR08) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Subvote K-12 education (LR03) for 
578,771,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Subvote (LR03) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Subvote training programs (LR12), 
37,526,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Subvote (LR12) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Subvote student support programs 
(LR13) for 71,271,000. Is that agreed? 



June 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Subvote (LR13) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Provincial Library (LR15) for 
8,529,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Subvote (LR15) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Teachers’ pensions and benefits (LR04) 
for 119,123,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Subvote (LR04) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Amortization of capital assets. Are there 
any questions? Okay. 
 

Be it resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 
12 months ending March 31, 2005, the following sums, 
$1,119,385,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Learning 
Vote 169 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Next item of business, page 146, 
Learning, vote 169, loans to student aid (SA01), 66,000,000. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Okay. 
 
Subvote (SA01) agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — 
 

Be it resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 
12 months ending March 31, 2005, the following sums, 
$66,000,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Okay, carried. 
 
Vote 169 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation 

Vote 170 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Okay, final business. Statutory question, 
Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation loans (ED01) 
for 3,900,000. Are there any questions? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Subvote (ED01) — Statutory. 
 
Vote 170 — Statutory. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Okay. That concludes the estimates for 
the Department of Learning. I recognize the Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, I would ask that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the fine Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It being now past 10:30, this House 
stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. Have a pleasant 
evening. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:42. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................1611, 1628 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1619 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1620 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1622 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1634 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1634 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1635 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Learning — Vote 169 .......................................................1645 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation — Vote 170 ..............................................................................................1645 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1614 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




