















































Hansard: May 17, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 40A  MONDAY, MAY 17, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1129 
 May 17, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people from my constituency who are 
very worried about the government’s upcoming issue about 
closures of homes. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Foam Lake Jubilee 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley, 
Foam Lake, Wadena, and Margo. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Herbert-Morse union hospital and 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Herbert-Morse 
union hospital is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Chaplin, Swift Current, Herbert, Rush Lake, 
Morse, and Gouldtown. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
again today to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency very concerned about the possible closure or 
further downsizing of Mainprize Manor & Health Centre. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Mainprize Manor & 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Midale, Estevan, 
Macoun, and Halbrite. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the future of their health 
care centres and services. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition is signed by residents of the city of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens that are extremely concerned 
about the possible loss of health care facilities in the Wood 
River constituency. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Lafleche, 
Woodrow, and Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
here with the people opposed to downsizing or closures to the 
Davidson, Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

Signed by the good citizens from the town of Davidson, I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents opposed to possible reduction of health care 
services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home be maintained at the very least at 
the current level of services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in the Assembly to 
present a single petition, this one coming from the good folks 
from west central Saskatchewan concerned with the loss of 
ambulance services. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Dodsland, 
Plenty, Stranraer, and Kelfield. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order a petition concerning the Foam 
Lake Health Centre presented on May 14 has been reviewed 
and pursuant to rule 14(7) is found to be irregular and therefore 
cannot be read and received. 
 
Other petitions presented as addendums to sessional papers no. 
63, 97, 106, 145, 146, 166, 167, and 178 are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the SaskTel minister: there’s a study underway to move 
Max TV from ADSL capability to VDSL. If so, when will 
the study be complete? And further to that, how much 
would the cost involved be for the upgrade? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on 
day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 

To the SaskTel minister: what is the cost to SaskTel for 
each Max TV home installation? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
how much money does the government have invested in 
Heartland Hog Barns? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: what is the total number of kilometres of 
roadways that your department is responsible for? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, I also give notice that I shall on day 
no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

For the fiscal year 2001-2002, how many kilometres of 
highways were rebuilt? 

 
And a similar question for 2002-2003, 2003 and 2004. An 
additional question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: for the fiscal year 2001-2002, how many 
kilometres of highways were repaired and/or resurfaced? 
 

And a similar question for 2002-2003, 2003 and 2004. 
 
And an additional question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: for the fiscal year 2004-2005, what is the 
total number of kilometres of highways expected to be (a) 
repaired and/or resurfaced; and (b) rebuilt? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce constituents from 
Canora-Pelly, specifically from the community of Preeceville. 
I’d like to introduce to you and to all members of the House, 
two people from Preeceville, Stan Szostak and Laverne Babiuk. 
And I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as everybody in 
Saskatchewan knows, today is Norwegian Constitution Day, 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

and I have some very special guests in the west gallery who 
have come from Jar, Norway, just outside of Oslo to visit us 
today. Rob and Anne Danielsen Wood and their two children 
Oda, 17, and Henrik who’s 14, are accompanied by their 
grandmother, Elaine Wood. 
 
They live in Norway. They have a strong connection with 
Saskatchewan. The children are both Saskatchewan people and 
Norwegian people. I think Oda is a rower on our lake out here. 
She plays tennis on our tennis courts when she visits her 
grandmother. Rob in Oslo is the president of the curling club, 
the home of Paal Trulsen’s gold medal Olympic team. So it’s 
. . . They’re doing that. I know they’re teaching them how to 
play hockey over there. 
 
Rob met Anne when she was in Regina working at SaskPower 
on a work study program, and that’s many, many years ago. 
And we’re happy to have them here, and I urge all members to 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a special 
privilege for me today to introduce to you and through you to 
the members of this House, a group of students from Hague 
High School. There are 50 of them. They are grade 11 and 12 
students, and they’re in the east gallery. They’re accompanied 
today by Margi Corbett, Scott Richardson as their educators. 
And chaperons Rhonda Dueck and Larry Fehr and bus driver 
called Keith. 
 
Hague has a very special place in my heart. Numbers of years 
ago, I taught there for a short period of time when Margi was 
there. She’s one of the best teachers this province has ever seen. 
And I hate to say this, but it is the truth, Mr. Speaker. I taught 
my very first year in the community of Hague, and 
unfortunately some of these people’s students’ grandparents 
may actually have been in that class, and that’s a little 
frightening. 
 
So at this time, would you join with me to welcome a great 
group of students from Hague, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House a gentleman sitting up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Jon 
Gillies who’s the president-elect of the Association of 
Professional Engineers and Geoscientists. 
 
Mr. Gillies is here today to take in question period but also to 
be on hand for the second reading of The Limitations Act. I ask 
all the members to offer Mr. Gillies a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to introduce to you and to all members of the House a 
guest sitting in your gallery, Dr. John Conway, a retired 
professor from the University of Saskatchewan who’s very, 
very involved in the city of Saskatoon and the province in a 
number of professional organizations and community groups. 
And he continues to take a significant interest in the University 
of Saskatchewan. Dr. Conway was a candidate for the New 
Democratic Party in the last provincial election, running in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. And he came within a 
hair’s breadth of winning the seat for the NDP (New 
Democratic Party), but will be back, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask all 
members of the legislature to welcome Dr. Conway to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I now recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with all members 
in welcoming Dr. Conway today. It was a very slow hare, but a 
significant and credible hare nonetheless. Dr. Conway ran a 
very gracious campaign, and phoned and conceded defeat in a 
very eloquent and touching manner. And I personally appreciate 
that, Mr. Speaker, and would like to join with all members in 
welcoming Dr. Conway. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Emergency Medical Services Week 2004 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, May 16 to 22 is Emergency 
Medical Services Week here in Saskatchewan. There are 
approximately 3,000 emergency medical services practitioners 
employed across the province, working as dispatchers, 
technicians, advanced technicians, paramedics, and first 
responders. Mr. Speaker, it is entirely appropriate that we take 
this opportunity one week out of the year to recognize and pay 
tribute to the hard work and commitment of these dedicated 
individuals, who are here for us when we need them 24 hours a 
day, 7 days a week, throughout the entire year. 
 
I and my colleague, the Minister of Industry and Resources, had 
the privilege to attend the kickoff of EMS (emergency medical 
services) Week 2004 yesterday at a special awards ceremony in 
Saskatoon where EMS professionals from across Saskatchewan 
were recognized for exemplary service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor presented 24 Governor 
General of Canada Emergency Medical Services Exemplary 
Service Medals, awarded to individuals who have served at 
least 20 years in the profession. And 13 others received Stars of 
Life Awards as selected by the Saskatchewan emergency 
services association for their outstanding contributions to the 
EMS community. Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join 
me in congratulating yesterday’s recipients and in thanking all 
the EMS practitioners across the province for the valuable 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

services they provide to us each and every day. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Opening of New Personal Care Home 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate the community of Isidore-de-Bellevue on the 
opening of their new personal care home, Foyer Jesus Marie — 
an idea that began 35 years ago. The 16-unit complex opened 
March 31 and is fully occupied except for one unit. Residents 
come from Bellevue and area as well as Debden and 
Spiritwood. The first resident was Edgar Topping. 
 
The cost of staying at Foyer Jesus Marie is $1,200 a month 
which includes all food, laundry and housekeeping. The 
personal care home cost approximately 1 million to build, of 
which 500,000 was raised locally — a very impressive 
achievement considering that Bellevue has a population of 
about 200 people. There are 11 trained staff with Aurele Gaudet 
is the interim administrator. The dietary is supervised Marie 
Duval and Alice Gareau. 
 
Besides the 16 unit there’s a spacious dining room, an activity 
room, and a chapel. The Saskatchewan Valley Credit Union 
moved into its branch in the new facility in March. The official 
opening of the Foyer Jesus Marie is schedule for Friday, June 
18. 
 
Congratulations and best wishes again on the opening of your 
wonderful personal care home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Constitution Day in Norway 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — (The hon. member spoke for a time in 
Norwegian.) This is the national anthem of Norway which is 
being sung across Saskatchewan and across Canada, but 
especially in Norway. 
 
And this celebrates the Constitution Day of Norway when they 
remember the events of 1814. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan there are many people who celebrate this 
particular event and we’re happy to wish them the best. The 
King and Queen of Norway, King Harald and Queen Sonja, 
send their best wishes to all Norwegian citizens and people of 
Norwegian descent in Canada on this special day. And I think 
we in Saskatchewan send our best wishes to the royal family as 
they have a new heir, Princess Ingrid Alexandra, who was born 
this spring. 
 
I always like to commemorate this day here in Saskatchewan 
because there are so many people who have Norwegian roots. 
And so with all of those members of the legislature who have 
Norwegian roots, I bring greetings to all Saskatchewan people. 

So the member from Regina Coronation Park, the member from 
Rosetown Biggar, the member from Saltcoats, the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, the member from Lloydminster, and the 
member from The Battlefords, we all wish all Saskatchewan 
people — but especially those of Norwegian descent — happy 
syttende mai. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Estevan Royal Purple Celebrates 60th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Saturday evening, I had the privilege of attending the 60th 
anniversary of the Estevan Royal Purple Lodge #74. 
 
After a delicious roast beef dinner, the very capable master of 
ceremonies, Garry Dinsmore, introduced as guest speaker 
charter member, Rose Nicholson, who give a history of the 
Estevan chapter, including reminiscing on how during the 
1940s tables for banquets were sawhorses with planks on top. 
And they certainly have progressed from that, Mr. Speaker. I 
might add that Rose is 90 years old and travelled from BC 
(British Columbia) to attend the celebrations. 
 
The Royal Purple donates to many worthwhile causes in the 
community including donations of wheelchairs, etc. This is 
made possible by the many functions at which they cater and 
other fundraising efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Christa Bussian for my 
invitation and I ask all members to join me in wishing the 
Estevan Royal Purple Lodge #74 continued success. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Native 
Theatre Company located in my constituency of Saskatoon 
Centre is a unique cultural organization that creates, develops 
and performs the works of Aboriginal artists from across 
Canada. 
 
Currently the SNTC (Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company) 
is staging a play called 400 Kilometres by award-winning 
playwright, Drew Hayden Taylor. This play is the third in the 
trilogy by Mr. Taylor and follows the journey of a 37-year-old 
lawyer and Aboriginal adoptee searching for her identity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this play delves deep into the issue of Aboriginal 
adoption by non-Aboriginal families during the 1960s on Turtle 
Island in Ontario. The difference between the two cultures is 
evident in the performance. And while some of the characters 
appear accepting of the Aboriginal culture on the surface, 
they’re ignorance becomes exposed when they face it head on. 
 
This play is now showing at SNTC Black Box Theatre in 
Saskatoon and runs until May 22. 
 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

Other upcoming events and performances scheduled at the 
Black Box Theatre includes an Aboriginal Performing Arts 
Symposium from May 27th to 29th and a one-person play, 
Tales of an Urban Indian, from June 8th to June 12th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
commending the SNTC, the actors, writers, and all those 
involved for striving to entertain and educate people while 
promoting the positive images of Aboriginal artists. This creates 
cultural understandings and strengthens the spirit of our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of seeing this play on Friday 
and I urge everyone to attend the performance. I would wish the 
SNTC luck with their present and future performances. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

High-Speed Internet Access in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
communications have come a long way over the last few years. 
Few of us send letters by mail in these days. Even a Luddite 
like myself can from time to time retrieve a missive from the 
computer. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I came across a page from SaskTel 
News, May, 2004, and I’d like to read just a little bit from that. 
And they’re talking about the high-speed Internet and Max 
service and those sorts of things. And then it says: 
 

This means that Saskatchewan people in every community 
with at least 800 people, and many even smaller, (may) 
now have access to high speed internet. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, not true, not true. In the communities 
Waldheim, Osler, and Hague, no high-speed Internet, Mr. 
Speaker. Those are communities, Mr. Speaker, that have a 
number of multi-million dollar businesses in each community 
working on not just a provincial basis but an interprovincial and 
a national scope. It’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that those 
communities can’t have that access. 
 
The NDP may have driven most communities in rural 
Saskatchewan to a population of under 800; they won’t do that 
with the communities of Waldheim, Osler, and Hague. We just 
need high-speed Internet. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Award-Winning Beer 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From the 
negative to the positive — in keeping with our province’s 
reputation for excellence, in this case brewing excellence, 
another Saskatchewan beer has been recognized on the national 
level. 

Kelly Deis from the constituency of Regina Dewdney was 
recognized at the Homebrew Open, an event that was hosted by 
the Ale & Lager Enthusiasts of Saskatchewan club, and 
sponsored by Bushwakker’s. Mr. Deis won a gold medal in the 
Best of Show category with his Rauchbier or smoked beer. 
 
I was privileged to attend this event and present the Silver 
award. There were many wonderful foods and sauces prepared 
with beer by the Bushwakker kitchen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s Ale & Lager Enthusiasts Home Brew 
Open was the largest beer competition in Canadian history with 
615 entries and a total of 98 awards up for grabs. The Ale & 
Lager Enthusiasts, or ALES competition, is recognized as a 
senior Canadian competition for amateur brewed beers by the 
American Homebrewers Association in Denver. 
 
Mr. Deis was not the only Regina brewer recognized. Members 
of the ALES Club took home a combined 50 medals, giving the 
hometown club the award for homebrew club of the year. Mr. 
Deis was not only recognized for his excellence with this 
particular beer, but won 16 additional medals, and was named 
Homebrewer of the Year. Mr. Deis will now have the 
opportunity to brew his beer with Bushwakker’s head brewer, 
David Rudge, for release to the public this fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Kelly Deis and the ALES Club for once again 
showing the world that nobody makes beer better than the 
people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Waiting Times for Treatment of Cancer 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In March the Health 
minister unveiled target time frames for surgery. According to 
the news release sent out that day, and I quote, “The first key 
area will be cancer surgeries.” The quote goes on to say, “ . . . 
the goal will be to complete 95 per cent of cancer surgeries 
within three weeks.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Stan Szostak of Preeceville has prostate cancer. 
He had a biopsy about a month ago, and a few days later cancer 
was confirmed. Stan has been told he must wait three to four 
months for surgery. 
 
Obviously upset at the news, Stan contacted his quality care 
coordinator. And, Mr. Speaker, what he was told is that he may 
consider himself fortunate because others are waiting much 
longer than that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: if the optimum 
treatment time for cancer is three weeks, why is Mr. Szostak 
and others — according to that quality care coordinator — 
waiting months for prostate cancer surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always, I’m 
very concerned about individuals who are concerned about their 
health care and the treatment that they’re getting. I know that 
they will work with the professionals to get the advice as to 
how to complete the various procedures or other things that 
they need. 
 
As it relates to the target time frames that we have in 
Saskatchewan, we’ve set those target time frames out, and it is 
our goal — as the member opposite has identified — to have 
cancer surgeries done within a three-week period. That’s not 
something that we’re able to do immediately. 
 
As the member also knows, in the budget speech and in the 
budget information that was provided on March 31, we have set 
aside specific dollars to deal with some of the backlogs and try 
to actually specifically deal with these surgeries that need to be 
done within the three-week period. We’re working with all the 
professionals as we do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that is similar to what the 
minister told this Assembly over a month ago, that the optimum 
treatment time for cancer is less than three weeks. He said, and 
this was a quote: 
 

. . . I am led to understand that we are very close to 
meeting that in a (high) very high percentage of . . . cases. 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to say that the optimum 
treatment time for cancer surgery is three weeks and to set your 
goal by that. There’s a difference between that and making sure 
that it is happening as quickly as possible, Mr. Speaker, as we 
would ask in the case of Mr. Szostak. 
 
There is an out-of-province referral system in terms of 
treatment. Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked this question before. Since 
that process is in place, will the minister commit today to Mr. 
Szostak and others like him who need treatment immediately, 
that that out-of-province referral system will be reviewed so 
that it is working in the interests of patients who need 
treatment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the person of 
concern is working with his medical professionals and with the 
staff within the facilities to get the treatment that’s needed. I 
know that there are processes around assessing the needs that 
are there, and we need to rely on the professionals to work on 
this. If there are problems with the overall system, then I’m 
happy to look at that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I can do is ask some questions. But I’m 
fairly certain that the people who are involved are working 
diligently to sort out the issues here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we would encourage the 
minister to ask some questions, and ask tough questions, so that 
people like Mr. Szostak can get treatment. Three to four months 
isn’t acceptable; we’re talking about prostate cancer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m certain that the Health minister is familiar with the Surgical 
Care Network Web site. He should be aware that the Web site 
states, and I quote, “Cancer surgeries are classified as urgent.” 
It’s very difficult though, Mr. Speaker, to find information 
about wait times for prostate cancer surgery on the site. You 
can find target time frames for cancer surgeries of 95 per cent of 
the cases within three weeks, as we’ve talked about earlier. 
 
Stan Szostak doesn’t even have a date for surgery yet. And even 
if he did he wouldn’t be able to track it on his Web site. So 
there is another specific question to the minister. How is the 
government’s Surgical Care Network and the attendant Web 
site helping people like Stan Szostak? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the whole issue of how we 
deal with wait lists and allocating resources to make sure that 
we get all of the people dealt with in the target time frames is 
very complex. We’re working with the doctors, we’re working 
with the hospital administrators, we’re working with the 
regional health authorities to make sure this whole system 
works. 
 
But what we need also is for information and to work with 
individual patients. So I will raise the question of Mr. Szostak 
and make sure that he is getting the appropriate contacts with 
people involved in the overall system. 
 
But our goal, Mr. Speaker, with our wait list project is to make 
sure that we have public information about how all of this 
works so that we can explain to people and have them 
understand when some of the times that are in the system are 
appropriate or not. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
minister’s indication that he will look into Mr. Szostak’s case 
but I guess there’s an additional question. The minister talks 
about waiting lists and different systems that the government’s 
implementing to monitor the waiting lists and for people to 
track the waiting lists. We need to do something to shorten the 
waiting lists. 
 
One alternative for people is potentially out-of-province 
treatment. If the resources aren’t available here in a timely way, 
then that’s why the out-of-province referral system is there. But 
it honestly doesn’t seem to be working. There’s some confusion 
as to who makes the referrals, whether it is the specialist, 
whether it’s a GP (general practitioner). There’s a solution here 
potentially. You know the cancer society called for a cancer 
ombudsman; the Saskatchewan Party has offered a health care 
ombudsman — some independent arbiter that could get 
involved in situations specific to this, that could get people 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

treatment, that could ensure that where referrals are needed for 
treatment, like for people like Mr. Szostak, that the process 
works in their favour. 
 
What is the minister going to do to review the out-of-province 
referral system in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, our health system in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada for many, many years has had 
strong advocates in the system for patients. They’re called your 
family doctor or your general practitioner, and much of the 
work that they do is explaining to you what the process is, 
working with you if you need a specialist or surgeon, and also 
giving you some information about how all this works. 
 
What we’ve been doing with our wait list project — and other 
jurisdictions are very interested in this as well — is trying to 
provide more information to individuals so that they can work 
with their family doctors as they move forward with various 
procedures that they require. 
 
What we all need in our country, I think, is further resources. 
I’ve been working on that. I know that we’ll all be working 
together as this election comes forward to make sure that the 
issue of resources for health is a top priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
Litigation 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation. The NDP’s 
bankrupt SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) potato business has already lost Saskatchewan 
taxpayers $28 million, and now the NDP is also being sued for 
tens of millions of dollars more by investors and local business 
owners who also got burned for millions of dollars when 
SPUDCO collapsed. Now the government’s lawyer, Fred 
Zinkhan, is countersuing those same investors and local 
business owners for $10 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who authorized the NDP’s lawyers to launch the 
counterclaim in the SPUDCO case? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to thank the hon. member for the question. I 
think this is an important issue. 
 
Let me first say to the hon. member that while initially $28 
million was lost, there have been, Mr. Speaker, some revenues 
that have come from the sale of storage sheds. I think those will 
be in the range of approximately $5 million. So I first want to 
inform the hon. member that while there are still significant 
losses, they have been reduced to now $23 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 

Secondly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, 
they say, oh, oh. Well listen, $5 million is significant. So let’s 
wait and see. 
 
Secondly, secondly, Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out to the 
hon. member that there are significant revenues that will accrue 
to the province from the expansion of the potato industry in the 
Lake Diefenbaker area. And he should take account of this as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question was not about what 
the potential benefits might be, but specifically who authorized 
the counterclaim in the SPUDCO case. Was it recommended by 
Crown Management Board, and was it authorized or approved 
by cabinet, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to assure the hon. member that there was authorization by 
a member of cabinet for the launching of the suit, if that’s what 
his concern is. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to assure the hon. member that 
obviously we . . . there has been a significant process of 
discovery involved here. There have been more than 2,700 
documents now filed. And, Mr. Speaker, not only does the 
government believe that there is a sound basis for a defence of 
this case, but there has been enough information that’s come to 
light that we feel there’s a sound basis for a counterclaim. 
 
If the hon. member is asking, are we certain of winning the 
claim, well of course there’s uncertainty, Mr. Speaker. But we 
feel the appropriate forum for settling this dispute is in the 
courts. And that’s all I’ll have to say with respect to the court 
process. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my questions still have not been 
answered. Which members of cabinet specifically approved this 
transaction and, Mr. Speaker, what is the potential financial 
exposure to taxpayers in the event that the NDP’s counterclaim 
in the SPUDCO case fails? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for Sask 
Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I would say to the hon. member, obviously there will be 
additional legal costs that will be associated with the filing of 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

this counterclaim. But the actors for the most part in this 
dispute, Mr. Speaker, remain the same so I don’t expect those 
additional legal costs to be substantial, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the other hand I think it’s important that the courts hear the 
basis of the information for the counterclaim, Mr. Speaker. We 
believe there is substantive information for the courts to hear, 
and the courts will be the appropriate forum for the resolution 
of this dispute. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated that 
the province has sold some equipment for $5 million. How 
much of that has actually been received? And, Mr. Speaker, 
how much has the NDP set aside in the contingency fund to pay 
the multi-million dollar costs that would be associated with 
losing either the NDP’s counterclaim or the main SPUDCO 
lawsuit itself, or both? And is there any insurance available that 
will pay for any of this, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for Sask 
Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the precise amount that’s 
been received, I’ll take notice and get back to the member on 
that. 
 
But implicit in the member’s question, Mr. Speaker, is 
somehow the notion that the Government of Saskatchewan 
ought not to have filed this counterclaim. And I’d be interested 
in hearing the basis of the member’s assessment of that, Mr. 
Speaker, because we feel there is important information for the 
courts to hear on this matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if the member is somehow implying that the counterclaim 
is inappropriate, let him say that, Mr. Speaker, because our 
view of this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
information in the counterclaim is in the interest of the people 
of Saskatchewan and is a matter that the courts deserve to hear. 
And the courts are the appropriate mechanism for examining 
this matter, Mr. Speaker, not here on the floor of the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the issue is not what is the 
counterclaim. The issue is whether we should’ve been involved 
in SPUDCO in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, how much money has the NDP 
government paid so far to the NDP’s law firm of Olive Waller 
Zinkhan & Waller to cover legal costs related to this SPUDCO 
lawsuit? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that it’s very clear — and it’s a 
matter of real clarity that the Privacy Commissioner has ruled 
on — that the exact amount of money that is spent on a 
particular lawsuit is a matter of client confidentiality. And the 
rulings on this are clear, and the member opposite knows that. 
 
On the other hand, the member asks how much has the Olive 
Waller law firm received. And I think if he looks at last year’s 
report that’s been filed by Sask Water in terms of amounts in 
excess of $10,000 that have been received by law firms, Olive 
Waller has received 349,000. 
 
I want to emphasize that’s not all for this case. But obviously, 
Mr. Speaker, this case is a very significant element in that 
figure. And that’s the information that I’m pleased to provide to 
the member. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Role of Crown Management Board President 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s lawyer in the 
SPUDCO trial is Fred Zinkhan of Olive Waller Zinkhan & 
Waller. One of the founding partners of that firm, Tom Waller, 
is now the NDP’s hand-picked president of the Crown 
Management Board. What involvement did Tom Waller have in 
authorizing this counterclaim in the SPUDCO case, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I can say absolutely none. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this lawyer is still on the Crown 
Management Board. And, Mr. Speaker, my question to the 
minister is: does Mr. Waller still have financial ties or a legal 
role or partnership responsibilities in the law firm of Olive 
Waller Zinkhan & Waller? Or is he now paid full-time by the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We have put a significant amount of effort into ensuring that 
Mr. Waller is safeguarded from these kinds of suggestions by 
members of the opposition. What I can tell the public is that Mr. 
Waller is a full-time president and CEO (chief executive 
officer) of Crown Management Board, and has been since 
March of this year. 
 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, does the minister think it’s 
appropriate for Mr. Waller to be . . . continue to be involved in 
government decisions and continue to be involved in that law 
firm when hundreds of thousands of dollars of legal fees are 
being paid to that law firm? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that Tom 
Waller is not involved in the law firm, that we have put a 
significant amount of time and effort into ensuring that Mr. 
Waller is not the subject of these kinds of suggestions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What I can say to the member opposite is that Mr. Waller has 
no financial interest in the firm in that he is not able, as a result 
of the work that was done, to basically put a fireguard between 
himself and his law firm in any of the revenues that might go to 
the firm resulting from this kind of work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

St. Brieux Policing Costs 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Justice. Last week I got a letter from the mayor of 
St. Brieux. The letter had some good news, Mr. Speaker, but the 
letter also had some bad news. 
 
The good news is that, in spite of the NDP’s attack on rural 
Saskatchewan, the village of St. Brieux grew by seven people 
last year. The bad news is the NDP government is celebrating 
St. Brieux’s growing population by doubling the village’s 
policing bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s tough enough in rural Saskatchewan already. 
Does the minister think it is fair for his NDP government to 
double St. Brieux’s policing bill just because the village grew 
by seven people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, in the year 2003-2004, 
the province spent more than $91 million for support policing in 
Saskatchewan, of which it recovered $13 million from 
municipalities. 
 
There has been concern over the years that urban municipalities 
were paying too much of this amount that’s recovered and we 
have been working to close the gap between what is paid on a 
per capita basis between rural municipalities and urban 
municipalities. But it is still on a per capita basis. 
 
So the good news in St. Brieux is that their population is 
growing, but so is the cost of services to people in that 

community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, thanks to the NDP government, 
the future is not so wide open for the village of St. Brieux. 
While most communities would be celebrating the arrival of 
new residents, the village of St. Brieux is wondering whether to 
ask some of its new residents to leave. 
 
According to the mayor of St. Brieux the village paid $9,920 for 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) service last year. 
Then the village grew by seven people. So this year the NDP 
sent St. Brieux a policing bill of a whopping $22,750, an 
increase in policing cost of 129 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unless one of those new residents is Jack the 
Ripper, I don’t think the policing requirement is going to double 
this year in St. Brieux. So why does the NDP think it’s fair or 
necessary to more than double St. Brieux’s policing bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m quite willing to look 
at the individual situation in the community of St. Brieux. This 
has just been raised with me for the first time today. I can 
advise the member and the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan that the assessment, in trying to make the 
payment for policing costs fair across the province, has to be 
adjusted among communities. There are rural communities that 
are . . . small urban communities, communities that have 
detachments, that all these factors make a difference whether 
they’re over 500 people or below 500 people. 
 
And I admit that some of these cut-offs can seem arbitrary but 
they have to be cut off somewhere, Mr. Speaker. But I’m 
willing to look at the situation of course in St. Brieux, because 
that is a dramatic increase the member has drawn to my 
attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Funding for Wide Open Future Campaign 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
recently the NDP introduced legislation, specifically Bill No. 
35, to clarify — and that’s in their words — the Crown 
corporations’ legal authority to spend money on the Future is 
Wide Open campaign. 
 
The NDP has already used the Crowns to pay for $2.2 million 
worth of the Future’s Wide Open campaign. Now we find out 
this spending may not have been legal, and the NDP is now 
moving to try to make it legal after the fact, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister claims to have a legal opinion saying this spending was 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

legal, but she refuses to release it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please tell the House who 
prepared this legal opinion and what exactly does it say about 
whether the Crowns had the legal authority to spend the 
money? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, if I understand the 
comments that come from the Provincial Auditor on an annual 
basis, when the Provincial Auditor believes that a certain 
department or agency did not have the authority to spend 
money, they indicate so in their report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am advised that in the report that the Provincial 
Auditor will table with the legislature that the Provincial 
Auditor indicates that the mandate has to be clarified. My 
understanding is that the Provincial Auditor does not say and 
use the words, did not have the authority. What the Provincial 
Auditor recommends to the government is that we clarify the 
legislation and, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, for a government that says often 
that they have nothing to hide, they sure seem to spend a lot of 
time hiding stuff. Mr. Speaker, prior to the election the NDP 
secretly used the Crowns to pay for $2.2 million worth of the 
wide open campaign. We just want to find out if this spending 
was legal or not. 
 
The minister claims to have a legal opinion that says it was 
legal and she doesn’t want to release it. Why not? What is the 
minister hiding? She stated on Friday that she would not release 
that legal opinion. I ask her to table the correspondence from 
the legal firm that says that they have a legal opinion, and 
secondly, any correspondence that her department may have 
received from the Provincial Auditor regarding this situation. 
Will she please table those documents in the Assembly today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re so secretive that 
they, the opposition, was able to get this information in the 
explanatory notes attached to the Bill. I hardly call that 
secretive, Mr. Speaker. That’s a big secret, Mr. Speaker. It’s so 
secret, Mr. Speaker, that we tabled the explanatory notes in the 
legislature. Now come on. 
 
What I can tell the members, Mr. Speaker, is that governments 
do not table legal opinions that they receive from the 
Department of Justice and elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. That is how 
government functions. But I can tell the member is that we 
believe, we believe, Mr. Speaker, that we had authority . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. The 

member may continue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I know 
the opposition can brouhaha all they want, but that’s how 
governments tend to function across the country — something 
they know nothing about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I have indicated is that we will amend 
the legislation in order to clarify the recommendations given by 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Public Health 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I recognize the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 56, The 
Public Health Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 56, The Public Health Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I would 
like to table the annual report from the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Library for the period ending March 31, 2003. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Comments Made During Debate 
 
The Speaker: — I would also at this time like to refer members 
to a debate in Hansard on page 1109 — order, please — middle 
of the left-hand column, the debate between the Minister of 
Learning and the member for Indian Head-Milestone. The 
subject of the debate was the proposed number of school 
divisions. 
 
During that debate, the member for Indian Head-Milestone 
implied wrongdoing on the part of the government. I want to 
say that it is . . . Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

want to say that it’s unparliamentary to allege that a 
government is dishonest and it is unparliamentary to allege the 
opposition is dishonest. Such remarks damage the process of 
debate. 
 
The statement made by the member for Indian Head-Milestone 
is out of order. I urge him and all members to be very careful 
when phrasing their statements in debate. 
 
Order, order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 313 and 314. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 313 and 314 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Limitations Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Limitations Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, limitations law is the area of law applicable to 
civil proceedings. Limitation statute provides rules respecting 
the time available for a person to bring a legal claim against 
another person. If a civil proceeding is not commenced within 
the applicable limitation period and if the limitation period is 
successfully raised as a defence by the defendant, the action 
cannot proceed. 
 
Limitations of actions statutes recognize the legal system 
cannot allow a person who’s aware of a legal claim to do 
nothing for many years and then bring an action after the 
defendant may no longer be in a position to make a defence. For 
this reason, limitation periods have been a feature of our legal 
system since the first English limitation enacted in 1623. 
 
Our courts have recognized that statutes of limitations are 
created with four objectives in mind: to create a defined time as 
to when potential defendants may be free of ancient obligations; 
to prompt claimants to proceed before evidence is lost due to 
the passage of time; to encourage the plaintiff to act in a timely 
fashion; and to account for the claimant’s own circumstances 
when assessing whether a claim should be barred by the 
passage of time. 
 
Limitation of actions legislation attempts to balance the 
interests of the plaintiff with those of the defendant. Society is 
interested in providing a fair and orderly process to obtain a 
remedy for injuries suffered by the claimant. The defendant, 

however, is interested in being able to mount a reasonable 
defence to any claim made. Limitation periods are intended to 
ensure that defendants have a fair opportunity to contest claims. 
They are not intended to enable defendants to simply avoid 
liability. 
 
Our current statute, The Limitation of Actions Act, dates from 
1931 and evolved in a time when the problems encountered by 
the judicial system were often considerably different from those 
of today. It is largely a collection of individual provisions from 
English statutes enacted between 1623 and the late 1800s, 
combined with some new initiatives. Its complicated structure, 
often archaic wording and, in many cases, irrelevant provisions, 
are in need of reform. 
 
One of the main problems to the current limitation of actions 
laws in Saskatchewan is that they are very complex. Ideally, a 
limitations statute should include as few limitation periods as 
possible. This contributes to clarity and predictability for the 
parties. 
 
Our current limitations statute includes several limitation 
periods. For some actions different limitation periods can be 
available for the same injury depending upon whether it’s 
framed in contract, which means a six-year limitation period 
applies, or tort so that a two-year period applies. 
 
In addition, there are more than 100 limitation periods in other 
provincial statutes. As a result the applicable limitation period 
is frequently not clear at the commencement of an action. It is 
difficult to understand or rationalize why different limitation 
periods should apply to different actions and especially to the 
same action. It is unclear in some cases as to when the period 
starts to run. 
 
The discoverability principle applies to some cases but not to 
others. This principle is a court-made rule respecting 
application of limitation periods. This discoverability principle 
provides that discovery of the damage by the claimant should 
start time running for statutory limitation periods. Whether the 
period starts to run from the event that gave rise to the action, or 
from when the plaintiff knew or should have known that he or 
she has a claim against the defendant, can dramatically affect 
the rights of the plaintiff to bring an action and exposure to 
liability of the defendant. 
 
The combination of an archaic statute, numerous limitation 
periods in other statutes, and uncertainty about when 
discoverability applies results in confusion and lack of 
predictability in many cases. The need to be fundamentally . . . 
reform limitations law is generally acknowledged. Within the 
last 30 years a number of Canadian law reform commissions 
have recommended reform of limitations law and some 
provinces have passed legislation to introduce reforms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed Limitations Act replaces the existing 
Limitation of Actions Act, the new Act that clarifies and 
rationalizes limitation periods for legal actions. This legislation 
replaces the current categorization of legal claims and 
accompanying myriad of limitation periods with a totally 
different model. 
 
For most actions a two-year limitation period will apply to all 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

actions. That two-year period will start to run when the claimant 
first knew or ought to have known that injury had occurred, that 
the injury was attributable to the defendant’s conduct, and that 
the injury warranted bringing a proceeding. Thus the 
discoverability principle was built into the basic limitation 
period. 
 
The Act also provides for an ultimate limitation period barring 
all actions after 15 years from the act or omission that gave rise 
to the legal claim. This ultimate period prevents an action being 
brought many years after the conduct due to the discoverability 
principle. 
 
The ultimate limitation period responds to the concern that the 
discoverability principle allows a situation where a defendant 
can be sued for an act or omission that occurred many years or 
decades earlier. In some cases it results in no real limitation 
period with the result that some of the objectives of the 
limitation statutes are not met. The potential defence may never 
be free of ancient obligations, evidence is lost to the passage of 
time, and plaintiffs do not have to act in a timely fashion. The 
discoverability principle recognizes the plaintiff’s interest in 
gathering the information necessary to start a claim, and the 
ultimate limitation period recognizes the defendant’s need to 
mount a defence. 
 
In addition to these basic limitation periods the Act continues to 
recognize that there are special circumstances that modify the 
operation of the basic limitation period. In many cases these 
provisions apply to the circumstances of vulnerable persons. 
For example, Saskatchewan’s current provision postponing the 
running of limitation period for minors, or for mentally disabled 
persons who are not represented by a personal or property 
guardian, is retained. 
 
The discovery period is designed to give a claimant sufficient 
opportunity after discovery to conduct further investigations to 
attempt to negotiate a settlement, and to bring a proceeding if 
necessary. It is based on the assumption that a person who 
obtains the requisite knowledge has the ability to make 
reasonable judgments and decisions relating to a claim. 
 
This assumption does not fit a minor or an adult under 
disability, who is considered, for the purposes of limitation 
period rules, as unable to make reasonable judgments in 
respective manners relating to a claim. 
 
The Act also recognizes that where a defendant fraudulently 
conceals the fact that injury occurred, this should suspend the 
running of limitation periods. A defendant who fraudulently 
conceals the fact that an injury has occurred should not be 
rewarded by being able to rely on the limitation period. The Act 
will continue to provide that acknowledgement or part payment 
of a debt means the period runs from that acknowledgement or 
part payment. A provision in the Act replaces, clarifies, updates, 
and simplifies the doctrines of acknowledgment in part 
payments. The basic rules of law governing these doctrines of 
judicial origin are included in our current limitation statute. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Currently at least six different sections include rules for part 
payment and acknowledgement respecting different types of 

claims. These are replaced and updated in the Act. 
 
A provision in this Act will allow parties to contractually 
extend the limitation period. Potential parties to an action may 
make an agreement extending an applicable limitation period 
for the benefit of the potential claimant and defendant. An 
agreement extending limitation period may be made before or 
after an alleged breach of duty has occurred. This can relieve 
the claimant with the necessity of bringing an action that may 
prove to be unnecessary. This gives the parties more time for 
settlement negotiations. If the defendant is granted additional 
time to perform his or her obligations, litigation expenses can 
be postponed or avoided. 
 
Proceedings to enforce court orders and arbitration awards are 
excluded because the considerations that underlie the need for 
limitation periods no longer apply — the evidentiary matters 
and the defence liability have been determined. 
 
The Act maintains the current rule that there is no limitation 
period applicable for proceedings arising from sexual assault or 
for other assaults where the plaintiff and defendant were living 
in an intimate relationship or the parties were in a dependent 
relationship. Again this recognizes that vulnerable persons 
should be not be placed at disadvantage in pursuing their 
claims; indeed instead their special circumstances should be 
recognized. 
 
This Act does not affect a provision in another Act that provides 
for extension, suspension, or variation of the limitation period. 
Such provisions in other Acts have been established to provide 
flexibility where this is fair or necessary, and these should be 
retained. 
 
The Act preserves provisions in other Acts that have certain 
requirements to be met before a plaintiff can start an action. For 
instance, they may have to provide information, or attempts to 
mediate or settle may be required. These provisions will not be 
affected by this Act. 
 
Many Acts require plaintiffs to give notice to the defendant 
respecting damages. For example, municipal Acts and the 
highways legislation require notice where a person is making 
claim when based upon default of duty to repair a street or 
highway. Insurance legislation requires notice that . . . notice of 
damages. 
 
These notice periods can be fairly short ranging from three days 
for hail insurance to sixty days for flooding in rural 
municipalities. In the case of notice periods and municipal 
legislation, where the claim results from default in duty to 
repair a street, the court is given discretion to extend the notice 
period where there is a reasonable explanation for the delay and 
there is no prejudice to the defendant if the period is extended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us today increases the consistency 
to these notice provisions. Limitation periods in municipal 
legislation are retained pending a review of the overall liability 
position of municipalities. However notice periods relating to 
claims resulting from default in the duty to repair a street in 
municipal and highway statutes are harmonized, so that they are 
30 days in every case. In addition, a new provision extends the 
judicial discretion in all notice periods in all statutes. This 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

ensures that legitimate claims are not barred just because a 
notice period was missed. This may occur even in cases where 
the plaintiff had good reasons for missing the periods. In these 
cases, the plaintiff may apply to the court for an extension. 
 
Many Saskatchewan statutes have special limitation periods. To 
the extent these can be repealed, the consequential amendments 
provide for repeal. In other cases, provisions are amended to 
make them more consistent with the Act. This approach to 
harmonizing this area of law will result in limitation periods in 
65 other statutes being repealed or amended. Limitation periods 
in professional statutes are being repealed. Currently, these vary 
from as short as six months to as long as discovery plus six 
years. There are no good reasons for these variations between 
different professions. Standardizing these periods means that 
clear and fair rules will apply to all professionals. 
 
The limitation periods in insurance legislation are repealed. 
This standardizes limitation periods in this area where currently 
a one-year period applied in some cases and a two-year period 
applies in other cases. Also repealed are limitation periods in 
corporate legislation, which are already two years. The 
limitation periods in The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 and The 
Small Claims Act providing for extending the limitation periods 
for motor vehicle accidents are repealed. The discoverability 
principle addresses the issues that those provisions addressed. 
The Public Officers’ Protection Act is repealed. The sole 
purpose of this Act is to establish a limitation period for actions 
against public officials. The limitation periods in the new Act 
will apply to public officials. These repeals, together with some 
others, will clarify and harmonize limitation periods. 
 
Some limitation periods will not change. Limitation periods in 
some statutes that provide complete codes respecting certain 
areas are retained. For example, the limitation periods in The 
Securities Act, 1988 and The Builders’ Lien Act are not being 
changed. Limitation periods relating to collection of royalties 
and taxes by government and municipalities are retained. If 
these periods are changed, it would impede the collection of 
revenues and paid amounts would end up being paid by other 
taxpayers. There are good public policy reasons for not 
changing these periods. 
 
The limitation period of discovery plus six years in The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act is retained. 
This is an appropriate period given the serious long-term 
consequences of this activity, and the fact that the activity and 
consequences might only be discovered years or decades later. 
Several statutes are amended to remove the limitation period 
but retain the provision to the extent that it sets out the event 
that starts the running of the limitation period, or creates a cause 
of action. 
 
This legislation results from a signification amount of 
consultation over the course of several years. In 2000, a 
discussion paper was broadly circulated to interested 
organizations and individuals. The many responses to that paper 
provided assistance and guidance in the preparation of a draft 
Bill, which was circulated in January of this year. Government 
officials have met with numerous organizations and individuals 
over the course of the last four years. The proposed legislation 
is the result of time, advice, and expertise shared by many of 
the consultees. 

The consultees confirmed our view that more clear, fair, and 
predictable roles are required in this area of the law, which is 
currently very confusing. This is achieved by the proposed 
legislation which provides fewer limitation periods and fewer 
exceptions. It rationalizes the law and creates a situation where 
consistent and clear principles apply to all actions, all plaintiffs, 
and all defendants. This legislation makes the legal picture 
more fair, more accessible, and more understandable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move second reading of an 
Act respecting the limitations of actions Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 51, The Limitations Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 
this afternoon to rise and respond briefly to the minister’s 
statement in regards to the Act respecting limitation periods. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I listened to the minister’s detailed and 
very complete explanation, as a layperson I was moved to think 
that the one limitation that has been overlooked is the length of 
minister’s statement when the Bills are introduced. 
 
However I understand that this is a very complex and complete 
Bill that updates legislation that basically was on the books for 
a good number of years, and that there is a need, as indicated by 
the minister, that there have been recommendations from the 
courts and other jurisdictions that reform to the limitations 
legislation is very much needed. 
 
I understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is really to try to 
establish reasonable time frames whereby plaintiffs may 
commence an action, and in no way tries to preclude the 
opportunity from defendants to have a fair opportunity to 
contest claims. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that we as a society 
must ensure that there is a fair and orderly process in place to 
allow remedies for injuries and harm suffered by claimants. We 
also as a society I think have an obligation to ensure that there’s 
a similar process in place whereby a defendant can mount a 
reasonable defence to any claim that is made within a 
reasonable length of time. By allowing a balance of these 
provisions, I think that we indicate to our judicial sector that we 
are going to have a democratic society that is fair, open, 
accessible, and balanced. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of individuals who 
have indicated they would like to comment to us on the 
appropriateness of this detailed legislation, and in order for that 
to happen I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Melfort that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Limitations Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives 

découlant de la loi intitulée The Limitations Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Limitations Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2004. 
 
This Act consequentially amends the seven bilingual Acts so 
that they are in harmony with the principles in The Limitations 
Act. In some cases limitation periods are repealed. Some are 
preserved, and some are amended. These changes are made to 
ensure consistency with the new limitations statute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
make consequential amendments to certain Acts arising from 
the enactment of The Limitations Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 52, The Limitations Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
because this Bill is very much linked to The Limitations Act, 
we believe they should be kept together in the consideration 
process. And in order to do that, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on Bill No. 52 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Contributory Negligence 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Contributory Negligence Amendment 
Act, 2004. The Contributory Negligence Act provides for the 
manner in which joint and several liability operates in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The principle of joint and several liability provides the 
defendant who is found liable in an action and tort or 
negligence may be required to pay the entire amount awarded 
against all defendants, regardless of the degree of responsibility 
of the particular defendant. Where there are two or more 

defendants and one of them is unable to pay its share of the 
judgment, the other defendants are required to pay their own 
share plus that of the defendant who is unable to pay. The 
rationale for joint and several liability is to ensure that plaintiffs 
are able to recover their full damages, notwithstanding the fact 
that one of the defendants cannot satisfy his or her share of the 
judgment. 
 
However the law has come under increasing criticism for the 
unfairness that results when a defendant is required to pay 
significantly more than its share of a judgment. An unintended 
result at the principle of joint and several liability is that it 
encourages claims against defendants with deep pockets such as 
municipal governments, professional, and other individuals or 
groups who are known to be well funded or well insured. 
 
These groups have complained that the availability of adequate 
insurance and the cost of such insurance, where it is available, 
are becoming increasingly serious problems. Municipalities tell 
us that there’s very little competition for their insurance 
business and that the deductibles have become so high that they 
have, to a large extent, been forced to become self-insured. 
Professionals such as accountants, engineers, and architects tell 
us that their rising premiums result in higher cost to their 
clients. And businesses tell us they must pass this increased cost 
onto their customers. Health regions and representatives of the 
medical community indicate that higher insurance premiums 
place an additional burden on our medical system. 
 
In addition we are told that there is pressure on defendants to 
pay claims even where they believe they bear no responsibility 
for the plaintiff’s loss because a finding of even a small 
percentage of liability against them may result in responsibility 
for paying the entire loss. 
 
The amendments do not do away with joint and several liability. 
Plaintiffs deserve to be compensated for their losses. However 
to accommodate the concerns of those defendants I have just 
described, the amendments do contain two significant changes 
to the manner in which the principle of joint and several 
liability will operate in certain circumstances. 
 
Under the current wording of the Act where one defendant is 
unable to pay its share of damages as awarded by the court, the 
plaintiff can collect the entire amount of the judgment from any 
one of the remaining defendants found to have contributed to 
the loss. Although the defendant called upon to pay is entitled 
to request contribution from the remaining defendants, the Act 
currently limits the ability to that amount accessed against those 
defendants by the court. Accordingly the effect of one 
defendant’s inability to pay could be borne entirely by the 
defendant first called upon by the plaintiff to pay. 
 
Under these amendments, the inability of a defendant to pay its 
share of a judgment will be borne on a pro rata basis by all 
remaining defendants according to the degree of fault attributed 
to them by the court. 
 
The second change to the existing law contained in these 
amendments will affect plaintiffs who have been found by the 
court to have contributed to their own damage or loss. Plaintiffs 
who have contributed to their own loss will be required to share 
also on a pro rata basis in the effect of any shortfall caused by a 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

defendant who cannot pay its share of the damages. 
Accordingly where one or more defendants are unable to pay a 
judgment against them, the plaintiff will receive less in 
proportion to the liability assessed against them by the court. 
The law in Saskatchewan is currently the same as all other 
Canadian jurisdictions, with the exception of British Columbia 
where plaintiffs found to have contributed to their own loss are 
not entitled to the benefits of joint and several liability. 
 
(14:45) 
 
However over the past 25 years, the law reform commissions of 
Alberta, British Columbia, Saskatchewan, and Canada have all 
recommended changes to the legislation to provide for 
reallocation of the responsibility for unfunded liability. To date 
none of these recommendations have resulted in legislative 
amendments. 
 
However in the United States, after several decades of tort 
reform, almost all American states have enacted some form of 
modified proportionate liability regime. Australia and New 
South Wales have also introduced aspects of proportionate 
liability into their laws. We have drawn upon the experience of 
all these jurisdictions in arriving at the amendments proposed 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments in this Bill strike a fair and 
reasonable balance between the legitimate interests of plaintiffs 
who have suffered injury or loss as a result of someone else’s 
wrongful behaviour and the interests of the defendants who are 
responsible for injuries or losses. The amendments allow joint 
and several liability to remain available to those who have 
suffered a loss but in a manner that will reduce the negative 
effects on Saskatchewan’s municipalities, businesses, and 
professional communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 41, The Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly about Bill 41, The Contributory 
Negligence Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the minister has quite accurately defined 
some of the positive and the potential negative issues 
surrounding joint and several responsibility that exists in the 
current legislation. And the minister I think correctly identified 
that victims that have a responsibility to be compensated need 
to have the right to be fully compensated. And there is that 
dilemma between . . . Are all members that are held joint and 
severally responsible equally able to live up to their 
responsibilities and commitments? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it also is true is that the whole issue 

surrounding litigation and those sorts of issues have placed a 
great deal of pressure and burden on many of our professionals 
and professional organizations like professional engineers, 
medical professionals, doctors, specialists, and things of that 
nature. And so there has to be an issue of fairness and balance. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s outlined a couple of 
significant changes to the current legislation that may go some 
considerable distance in order to make this whole process a lot 
more balanced and fair to all those concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that many professional organizations, as 
well as representatives potentially of municipal jurisdiction and 
governments, will be interested in commenting on this 
legislation. And in order for that to happen, I would now move 
to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 41 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 1 — The 
Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill No. 1 I 
think is going to be a real positive piece of legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been calling on the government for some 
time to start putting together summary financial statements. 
This is one of the areas that the government appears to have 
been listening and is moving toward more accountability and 
transparency, and certainly that’s going in the right direction. 
 
We’re generally in support of this particular amendment, and 
really not for reasons of trying to have any advantage or 
political expediency. It’s really, Mr. Speaker, just the right thing 
to do, and it’s about time that it was done. 
 
When you look at these kinds of reporting in a typical 
corporation, the financial statements are very, very important. 
And the financial statements have to be complete and accurate, 
and the members of the board of directors of any corporation 
have to stand behind them. And so the transparency and 
accuracy are very, very important. So whether you’re in a 
corporation or if you’re in partnerships in businesses or if 
you’re just talking about your family finances, it is so important 
that you have complete accuracy of the financial situation and 
full reporting. And also the full reporting in a very timely way 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

is so critical. 
 
The timeliness, the accuracy of the reporting becomes very 
essential because the decisions that you’re going to have to 
make — both in your own businesses or in your own personal 
finances or in a corporate sense — depend very much on the 
accuracy and timeliness of those reports. And here’s a situation 
in government circles where completeness is really very 
important. 
 
When we’re looking at the budgetary process . . . and the 
reporting in the government finances up to this point, the fiscal 
. . . the General Revenue Fund rather, Mr. Speaker, has 
certainly been open for scrutiny and for debate. But that only at 
that time represented 60 per cent of the financial picture of the 
province. That’s not complete. The other 40 per cent was 
available to us only after the fact when the annual reports were 
presented and then the two brought together when the 
Provincial Auditor was putting the summary statements after 
the fact. 
 
The timeliness then was not available to the scrutiny of the 
legislature, and therefore it doesn’t have the scrutiny of the 
people of the province. And so this change is both important 
and timely, and that part of it is certainly supported from my 
point of view. If you don’t have that kind of reporting, the 
assumptions then start to tend toward what is the right thing to 
do. And certainly we have to make sure that there isn’t any 
suggestion of wrongdoing or any suggestion that things could 
be manipulated behind the scenes. 
 
We are going to try to explore some of the other items that are 
talked about in these amendments, and we’re going to do that at 
a later function, later time. And so I therefore move 
adjournment on the debate of Bill No. 1. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Lloydminster that debate on Bill No. 1 be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 13 — The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to be able to enter into the debate on Bill 13. 
 
Venture capital is a very important item in this province. We 
have a growing . . . a province that we need to grow the 
economy, and venture capital is an integral part of start-up of 

new businesses and their future successes. 
 
I have a group of individuals in the community in my area in 
Kelliher, Mr. Speaker, who are endeavouring to start a business 
and that’s their major obstacle, is gathering up enough venture 
capital to get that business up and running. And so anything that 
we can do in this province and that this government can do to 
create more venture capital is certainly a step in the right 
direction. And particularly, we need the working men and 
women of this province, Mr. Speaker, to have a vehicle 
whereby they can invest their savings to help create the quality 
jobs that they themselves, or their children, or their family 
members can then obtain and build careers on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By and large, there’s been one or two members from this side of 
the House that have spoken to this Bill. We’ve identified a 
couple of problems with this Bill. We’ve sent it out to interest 
groups and stakeholders. We’ve received some feedback but we 
certainly haven’t received all the feedback that we need . . . that 
we feel we require, Mr. Speaker, so therefore, I would move 
that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that debate on Bill No. 13 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 15 — The 
Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 15 is a Bill that 
enables the Workers’ Compensation Board to move the 
superannuation plan and benefits into the new pension plan and 
we have asked for input on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t 
received any negative comments. 
 
The only comment I would like to make and that’s with regards 
to pension is I was very recently made aware of a group of 
individuals who contributed some 38 years to a pension fund 
only to find upon their retirement that the pension plan was 
bankrupt. And that is certainly not an acceptable situation in 
this province today, Mr. Speaker, and so therefore, we must 
ensure that that type of incident doesn’t repeat itself. 
 
I’m not saying that that’s the situation here at all, but I just 
thought I would like to put . . . make those comments in the 
context of pension plans and superannuation plans. And as I 
said, Mr. Speaker, we have reviewed the Bill. We have some 
questions but we feel that those questions can be adequately 
addressed in the committee stage, so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

suggest we move this Bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour, that Bill No. 15, The 
Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation Act be 
now read a second time? Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that Bill No. 15, The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Pension Implementation Act be referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 15, The Workers’ Compensation Board Pension 
Implementation Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 16 — The 
Geographic Names Board Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m glad 
to rise and discuss this Bill. It’s very important that we do 
recognize the men that paid the sacrifice they did in the Second 
World War. 
 
The term we use is, lest we forget, and too often and too many 
times people are forgetting the price that these young men paid. 
And they were teenagers basically and some just barely out of 
their teens and they paid the ultimate price, I mean the ultimate 
price not only in death. They paid the ultimate price physically 
and mentally. What they have gone through has left them 
marked for the rest of their lives. They are not the same people 
they were when they left and they never will be, so our 
recognition is important. 
 
D-Day, they say . . . The philosophers, the experts say that 
D-Day is the day that Canada became a nation. So these are the 

young men that made us the nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am a son of a veteran and I have talked to 
veterans. The Bill would be a small, small — very small tribute, 
but yet it is good. My concern with the Bill is the selection of 
the committee. Why do we need ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) to administer? Ask the Legion. 
They were good enough during the war. They’re good enough 
now. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are prepared to let this Bill move 
to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Industry and Resources that 
Bill No. 16, The Geographic Names Board Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 16, The 
Geographic Names Board Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 16, The Geographic Names Board 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now referred to the Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
(15:00) 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Bill is referred to the 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 2 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to stand, Mr. Speaker, and speak on the Bill No. 
2, the Act to amend the SaskPower . . . or, pardon me, The 
Power Corporation Act. 
 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, upon first glance this Bill appears to clarify 
SaskPower’s current exclusive franchise to transmit and sell 
electricity in Saskatchewan. The amendment, it seems, will 
clarify and make it easier for SaskPower to respond when there 
is a breach of exclusive franchise. We do have some questions 
on this side of the House as to exactly what that does mean. 
 
In his second reading speech for this piece of legislation, the 
minister responsible stated: 
 

. . . but also ensure that they are in the position to foster 
economic opportunities . . . 

 
There will be questions from our side of the House and from 
other interested groups in Saskatchewan arising out of this 
statement, Mr. Speaker. We all know that the NDP uses the 
Crowns to invest taxpayers’ money and loses tens of millions of 
dollars when it could be better spent within Saskatchewan. We 
see money from Saskatchewan taxpayers that the NDP uses to 
invest in places like Nashville and Atlanta and Australia when 
the money could probably be better invested in places like 
Nipawin or Alida or Aberdeen. 
 
We have seen . . . sent this Bill to a number of third-party 
groups to determine exactly how this piece of legislation will 
impact power cogeneration in Saskatchewan. 
 
We are also hearing from others that are concerned about what 
this Bill may do to their business, Mr. Speaker. Because we all 
know that this NDP government and this Premier, the member 
from Riversdale, if they are not busy breaking election 
promises, they seem to be busy scheming or thinking up plans 
to spend the taxpayers’ dollars all around the planet. 
 
Now in terms of where things are with SaskPower, we all know 
on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, the great job that the 
hard-working employees do within this Crown corporation; 
whether they work here in Regina or if they are at work back in 
my home constituency of Estevan, the workers are proud and 
we on this side of the House applaud them. 
 
And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to take a minute to 
thank them on behalf of all the constituents, thank the 
SaskPower employees who worked round the clock restoring 
the power that was out in my constituency after a major storm 
left them all without electricity. So hats off to those employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must add that I was reading through the paper 
and a headline regarding SaskPower caught my attention. It was 
from the April 3 edition of the Leader-Post and the headline 
says, “Pay more for electricity?”. The article states that 
SaskPower may be looking for a rate hike in the next few 
months and I just can’t help but wonder where that direction is 
coming from. 
 
I wonder if it is coming perhaps from the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana, the Minister of the Crown Management 
Board who stated that she wasn’t even aware of the Premier’s 
promise to have to lowest utility rates in all of Canada. But it 
would seem that if you are trying to have the lowest utility rates 
in all of Canada the first thing you wouldn’t do is jack up the 
SaskPower bills. 
 

As I mentioned SaskPower employees work hard and do their 
best, Mr. Speaker, but when you have the Premier and this NDP 
government constantly breathing down your back I can only 
imagine how hard it is some days for these fine people to do 
their job. 
 
Now with this promise of the lowest utility rates, we all know 
that it is another promise broken. We know of the many 
promises this Premier made before the election, the things he 
told the people of Saskatchewan. And now they learn that their 
Premier, the member from Riversdale, had no intention of even 
coming close . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. It’s unparliamentary for a member to refer to 
improper intentions on the part of any members in the 
Assembly. I ask the member to withdraw the statement before 
she proceeds. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I do withdraw that. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, in regards to Bill 2 and how it 
may impact the people of Saskatchewan, when we talk about 
SaskPower I just think of another embarrassment that this 
government has had and that is the Channel Lake. And you 
know, I’m reminded of the $15 million that was lost through the 
Channel Lake ordeal and how far that money would have went 
towards health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have other questions on this Bill but we 
will send it to committee and then we can address those 
concerns there. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the minister for SaskPower that Bill No. 2, 
The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 2, The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower that Bill No. 2, The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 be now referred to the 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 7 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’m honoured 
to stand today to speak on Bill 7, the amendments to the auto 
insurance Act. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a large piece of 
legislation, and there are numerous amendments to the auto 
insurance Act that are being proposed. 
 
We have sent this Bill with explanatory notes to some lobby 
groups for their opinion, and we are starting to hear back their 
concerns, so we do have several issues that we are waiting to 
deal with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister stated in his second reading speech 
that this Bill proposes changes to the tort injury insurance 
product, and it also deals with no-fault and some proposed 
changes to that specific package. 
 
The minister also mentioned in his second reading speech that a 
change is being — pardon me — being proposed for no-fault is 
ensuring someone who has no-fault, who is entitled to sue for 
non-economic losses, is subject to a $5,000 deductible. And we 
will have some questions for this NDP government as to why 
that is being introduced. 
 
We have several issues, Mr. Speaker, that we feel have to be 
resolved before we can move this to committee. So with that I 
will adjourn debate on Bill 7. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Estevan 
that debate on Bill No. 7 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 8 — The Gas 
Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
address some concerns over this particular Bill. 
 
It more or less seems like a little bit of a housekeeping Bill. 
Sometimes I think some of the Bills that come here are just kind 
of make-work projects, make little adjustments to them. I don’t 
even know why some of them are made. The original Act that 
was done in ’92 I think — I believe it was ’92 or ’93 reading 
through the Bill — I think covers pretty well everything. And it 
is, you know, it was a fairly good Bill. 
 
There’s a couple of comments I would like to address that the 
member had made from Saskatoon when he did second reading 
on it. He had talked about a quote here: 
 

. . . today also fulfill(s) a commitment by our government 
in the Throne Speech to improve the safety and security of 
our neighbourhoods. 

 
Well I think that, I don’t know if I would call this fulfilling a 
commitment. I would think most people when they thought the 
Premier talking in the Throne Speech about fulfilling a 
commitment to safety was probably talking about the 200 police 
officers that they should be hiring or improving safety on the 
streets. 
 
But getting back to this particular Bill here, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s one question I have, but I guess I’ll have to ask that in 
committee is . . . I noticed they’ve raised the fines from 1,000 to 
$10,000, and I can’t understand why that? My office hasn’t had 
a lot of particular calls on offences dealing with gas inspection. 
I don’t think it was a particular problem out there, Mr. Speaker, 
throughout the constituency. 
 
I can’t understand why they’d be taking such a huge jump from 
1,000 to 10,000 which could affect some of the people that are 
out there that are also doing gas inspections at that end of it 
there on handing out fines, and that’s . . . But some questions 
have to be asked in committee. But I can’t . . . He didn’t even 
touch why they would raise the fine at that much. Was it a 
problem? Was there people, a lot of people, breaking . . . not 
fulfilling their role or not following the rules, regulations? I 
don’t know. I never in my years, four or five years of MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) office, I haven’t had one 
complaint about that or even read an issue anywhere on the 
particular thing. So I found that was a little strange. 
 
So that’s what I talk about when they were just tinkering with 
that particular piece of legislation, that they couldn’t really find 
anything else to do to it, so they decided well, we’ll just raise 
the fine from 1,000 to $10,000 because the Premier said, well 
we’ve got to have so many Bills at this particular Legislative 
Assembly. So you just go through your particular agenda, and 
you do some adjusting to a particular Bill that possibly doesn’t 
affect anything. 
 
And I know that there is a few comments coming from the other 
side, so I won’t be adjourning debate on this, so if some of the 
other members want to get up and address this particular Bill, I 
will certainly let them. They will certainly be able to get into 
the particular debate on this particular Bill. 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

But I tell you what, on this particular Bill I really can’t see 
where there was much to put through the House here on that 
other than adjusting the 1,000 to 10,000, which I don’t think 
there was a reason for that. If you want to adjust some things in 
the Bill, you should adjust the one, that’s safety out there. You 
want to talk safety . . . is marking lines. I know that out in our 
area there, that it’s been commented there should be more 
markings in natural gas lines in the area. And that’s something 
that they could possibly address in this particular Bill on that. 
 
The only thing that I can know that addresses with this Bill . . . I 
can remember a few years ago there was a particular gas 
inspector who was raised in this House that I think referred to 
himself as doctor death when he was calling on people to 
inspect their furnaces, which kind of upset some of the 
businesses. And I know that if I was getting a house inspected 
and some guy phoned and said that he called himself . . . this is 
doctor death, and I’m coming to inspect your house. And I think 
I know where I would tell him where to go. And I think, I’m 
hoping that they’ve addressed that problem at that . . . when it 
comes to that. I think that shows a lot of insensitivity, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But at that, I would . . . Other than that, it’s kind of a short Bill, 
and I know it’s . . . about the only two things I can see where 
it’s really did anything . . . and I know in committee will I 
certainly be asking why the particular fine . . . And I hope the 
minister is watching this . . . will be bringing that particular 
information to the committee meeting because I know that’s 
one of the questions that I’ll be asking at that end of it. 
 
And also I’d just like to make a couple of comments on, if they 
want to work about safety, is marking more lines out — to 
providing that out there at that end. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s all I have to say on this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the minister of SaskPower that Bill No. 8, 
The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 8, The Gas 
Inspection Amendment Act, 2004, be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower that Bill No. 8 be referred to the 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 9 — The 
Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A pleasure to speak 
to Bill No. 9, An Act to amend The Electrical Inspection Act. 
 
In all these matters, Mr. Speaker, safety has to be the prime 
concern, and we certainly agree that any steps that we can take 
as legislators to protect the children and the general public 
concerning electricity, we should certainly make the effort. So 
that’s certainly a high priority with the opposition. I’m sure it is 
with the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with looking at this Bill, we have sent this Bill out 
to various people, groups around the province, and we’ve got 
some replies, and we’re waiting for more of their thoughts and 
input on this legislation. But it seems to be making it tougher 
for independent electrical inspectors to set up and operate in the 
province, and I don’t think that should be the purpose. And so 
we need to see if that is actually what’s taking place with this 
Bill, or possibly it’s just minor housekeeping Bills. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that the Bill will be 
changing the fines that inspector . . . heftier fines for inspectors 
who do not comply with the proposed legislation. This is an 
example. This one gentleman phoned that he is being penalized 
$150 per occurrence for, in some cases, a $5 permit fee. And 
that seems to be rather a hefty fine for a very inexpensive 
permit fee. And also he goes on to say that they can assess the 
same $150 fine for being late as for having not reported, so 
there is certainly some inequities in the fines and in the system 
that this Bill may be bringing in. 
 
And also one of the sections of concern is a new section, section 
29, the vicarious liability section, and we’ll be asking questions 
about this section. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I certainly, our . . . (inaudible) . . . in the 
Sask Party certainly have a lot of questions. And when it comes 
up in Committee of the Whole, we’ll be asking those questions 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the minister for SaskPower, that Bill No. 9, The 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Which committee shall this Bill be referred? I 
recognize the minister for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 9, The Electrical 
Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister for 
SaskPower that Bill No. 9 be referred to the Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 11 — The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A number of days 
ago I spoke on this Bill and raised most of my concerns 
regarding the Bill and just more concerns about post-secondary 
education and the problems that students are facing all over. 
 
Certainly we hear again today that some of the students in 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) are not out of the dark yet because some of the 
employees of SIAST are talking about striking again. So there’s 
more issues there. It seems to be a continual struggle for 
post-secondary students in our province — not only straight . . . 
right from funding, all the way through to being able to 
complete their classes. 
 
I had raised most of my concerns the last time I spoke to this 
Bill, so at this time I would move it to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 11, The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
11, the department of post-secondary and skills training 
amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 11 be referred to the Committee on Human 
Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 13 — The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the Minister of Industry and Resources that Bill No. 
13, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
13, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 13 be referred to the Standing Committee 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 19 — The Land 
Titles Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise regarding this Bill and 
would like to make a few comments and then ask the debate be 
adjourned on this matter. We are not ready to have this Bill sent 
to committee at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We noted in the minister’s speech on this that there was a 
number of comments from the minister as to how well ISC was 
functioning, and we’re pleased that ISC is making progress in 
that regard. We still have very substantial concerns about the 
budget that was initially greatly overspent and the methodology 
that was used in developing this. But we’re pleased that this 
project is getting there. And these amendments, Mr. Speaker, 
are in the regard of fine tuning or minor clarifications. 
 
Some of the things that we’re very glad to see, Mr. Speaker, are 
confirmation of the Torrens principle that people are entitled to 
rely on the titles and don’t need to look behind the titles for 
fraud or other issues that are there. Effectively the province 
guarantees title as they always have and as they should. This is 
one of the best systems in the world, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 
pleased that that is being entrenched in this legislation. 
 
We note as well that there is priority given to converted 
instruments and interest based in transactions dealing with 
revolving lines of credit and how that’s secured on title. And 
the priority of those instruments are clarified in this Bill, so 
we’re pleased that that happens as well. We also note as well, 
Mr. Speaker, that the powers of the court are confirmed and 
enhanced. Any time that there is a system as complex as the 
land titles system, it’s imperative that there be remedy and relief 
to the courts. So we very much support that aspect of this Bill. 
 
This Bill also addresses minor housekeeping issues and 
provides clarification on details regarding issues of law and the 
technical process and to try and facilitate the business efficiency 
of ISC. We are pleased that that’s happening. It deals as well 
with mineral issues and sort of the orphan titles that sometimes 
happen with transfers of surface and where the minerals aren’t 
otherwise dealt with. So that we’re pleased is being clarified in 
this Bill. 
 
There’s conflict of interest provisions that dealt with officials of 
ISC and that type of issue to promote honesty and integrity 
within the system. I don’t think it was a specific issue that was 

being addressed, Mr. Speaker, but we are pleased that those 
type of legislative inclusions are there to ensure the integrity of 
the system is retained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill permits other provinces and territories to 
own and acquire land in the province. It validates certain 
practices regarding registration of interests. It does other steps 
where affidavits would be required, and it tries to simplify and 
smooth this process as is required to give proper commercial 
effect to the piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be my pleasure to move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on second reading of Bill No. 
19 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 20 — The Land 
Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak to 
Bill No. 20, The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors 
Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, we have contacted the land 
surveyors’ and professional surveyors’ association, and the 
members of that association confirm the support for the Bill No. 
20, and we certainly respect that support they have given to the 
amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just one question of course, the one thing that we have to ask, 
what this Bill does is of course allow non-residents to be a 
member of the council and . . . but still Saskatchewan residents 
would hold the majority, I believe, members on the council. But 
Mr. Speaker, it just begs the question is why do we need to go 
out of province to have surveyors from the professional 
association on Saskatchewan’s council? I think the answer lies 
in the lack of economic development in this province that the 
present government has undertaken for many years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we had a buoyant economy and a plan in 
place that showed that this province is moving ahead, we 
probably wouldn’t need a Bill like this. But we’re going to 
respect the wishes of the surveyors’ association and move this 
to Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Industry and Resources, that 
Bill No. 20, The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, The 
Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 
2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 20 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 
(15:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. Committee of Finance. The first item 
before the committee are the consideration of estimates for the 
Department of Learning found on page 107 of the Estimates 
book. And I recognize the Minister of Learning to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker . . . 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
I want to begin by introducing my officials. Seated next to me is 
assistant deputy minister, Dr. Margaret Lipp. Seated directly 
behind me is Gillian McCreary, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of Learning also. Next to her is Don Sangster, the 
executive director of school finance. Seated next to Mr. 
Sangster is Dr. Littlewood, the executive director of school 
legislation and school administration. Seated behind Don is 
Nelson Wagner, the executive director of facilities; and directly 
behind Gillian is Kevin Hoyt, the director of corporate services. 
 
With apologies to you, Mr. Chairman, for the slight delay. I was 

on a conference call with one of my colleagues talking about a 
number of issues pertaining, actually, to post-secondary 
education. 
 
But if I might just begin by making a brief, a very brief 
statement. Certainly this Assembly and this session has had a 
great deal of time to talk about education and some of the issues 
and challenges which are facing us today. I want to take the 
opportunity to welcome the officials and to invite further 
discussion on this. I have no doubt that in the coming weeks 
and months, there’ll be a great deal of discussion both in this 
Chamber and across Saskatchewan about the future of 
Saskatchewan education. 
 
I want to say very briefly that in addition to the focus that is 
being placed today on the education system around finance and 
governance reform, there are a number of other areas that we 
would certainly welcome greater discussion in and really I 
think, show a lot of excitement and innovation and leadership 
on the part of Saskatchewan Learning within the national 
context. 
 
Among those, I would identify the work that has been done to 
date on the SchoolPLUS initiative, which is a bold new initiative 
that will try and refocus our school system, that will try and 
work in a broader way with communities to reconnect our 
schools and our school system back to communities to reflect 
the values of Saskatchewan people. This has been a very 
positive initiative that has been largely at a pilot stage up to 
now and now we are beginning to move it into a full phase of 
provincial implementation. 
 
There has been a great deal of work done in the department over 
the last many years to deal with innovative new ways of helping 
with distance learning, on-line learning initiatives. Again this is 
a, very much a made-in-Saskatchewan approach that has been 
taken here and one that I think speaks to the strength of our 
educational system. 
 
Certainly we understand in many smaller communities and 
schools with shrinking class sizes that there’s a lot of pressure 
on rural teachers to be able to offer a broad range of course 
offerings. Distance education provides some of that opportunity 
to do that. 
 
Certainly we’ve been aided by the build out of the 
CommunityNet program across the province, and as recently as 
two weeks ago with the decision to move to a two-way satellite 
system to deal with some of the problems we’ve had in, 
particularly, remote northern regions. These are two areas that I 
think Saskatchewan has excelled in and in areas we don’t talk 
enough about in terms of the innovative work that is being done 
by the department. 
 
From a perspective of how Saskatchewan children are doing 
within the school system, the educational indicators are 
showing that we are improving in terms of our educational 
outcomes and certainly both of the assistant deputy ministers 
who are here with us today have done a great deal of work in 
terms of focusing on educational attainment and educational 
outcomes. 
 
I could probably spend the rest of our time this afternoon 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

talking about the good initiatives that are underway in the 
department, but what I’ll do at this point, Mr. Chairman, is 
invite questions from the opposition so we can embark on a 
dialogue. 
 
The Chair: — Administration (LR01). I recognize the member 
for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for those opening remarks. I’m sure you could 
probably use the hour and twenty minutes that we have talking 
about education. If you’re a good Minister of Learning — and 
I’m sure you are — then there’s lots to talk about in your 
department and you could use that time. I appreciate though that 
we can enter into a dialogue on education and K to 12 
(kindergarten to grade 12) specifically. 
 
Before I go any further, I’d like to also welcome the officials 
and hopefully, within the hour and a half that we have, we’ll 
certainly get some of the questions I have answered. I don’t 
think this would be the last time that we see Learning and 
especially K to 12 in front of the Committee of Finance. At 
least I hope it isn’t. I hope we have a couple more opportunities. 
But today’s will be a good start, I guess. 
 
I think what I would like to start out with is the recent 
announcement by the Department of Learning and the minister 
regarding the response to the Boughen Commission. There has 
been lots and lots of anticipation, lots and lots of talk in the 
field of education over, really, the last four or five years about 
restructuring and issues around restructuring. And I mean, I can 
just tell you from my perspective and dealing in the school 
systems that I have dealt with before I was elected and now 
since I’ve been elected, education doesn’t always come up 
when you do polling as a top priority, until you talk to people 
that have kids in school and it is their number one priority. We 
have two boys in the school system right now and it really tends 
to focus your attention when you have a vested interest in how 
the school system is working. 
 
But I would say, over the last number of years, people have 
been more focused on the school system and on the funding of 
education than ever before. And it doesn’t necessarily mean that 
you have kids going through the school system and that tends to 
be a person’s main focus. But it’s often people now that are just 
paying their property taxes, that have been really starting to 
analyze what is going on in the school system; what can we do 
better and how can we — I guess the bottom line is — get some 
of the burden of funding education off of property tax, because 
that definitely has been the conversation. 
 
It was the conversation not just in the last six months or eight 
months. It’s been the conversation in this province for the last 
five, six, seven years at least. I can remember back five years 
ago, in the 1999 campaign — that was the first campaign I was 
involved with — and during that campaign in the constituency 
that I represent, there had been a couple of RMs (rural 
municipality) have tax revolt meetings. 
 
And actually the tax revolt meetings that happened back in 
1999 were centred right around where I live, one of the RMs 
where I farm and one of the RMs that I used to live in. The RM 
of Scott and the RM of Lajord both had tax revolt meetings, and 

the concern was starting to raise then. 
 
Now the government addressed it for two years by putting some 
more money towards education . . . towards not necessarily 
education, but through the RMs to offset the burden, and that 
kind of quieted or quashed the tax revolt movement in the 
province. 
 
That was since backed away from three years ago or two and a 
half years ago, and as a result we’re hearing more and more 
concern about the whole issue around property tax — so much 
concern around property tax, as a matter of fact, that the 
Premier would strike a commission, better known as the 
Boughen Commission, to look at the whole issue around 
funding education. 
 
And when I look at the terms of reference here of the Boughen 
Commission, and I go through the first five points of reference, 
the terms of reference, each one of them deals with the funding 
of education: the appropriate balance between provincial and 
board of educations’ contribution to the financing of K to 12; 
the appropriate balance between the use of property tax and 
other sources of taxation to finance K to 12; fairness and equity 
among the existing classes of property to finance K to 12; local 
financial capacity among school divisions and the variations of 
an assessment, again to finance education. 
 
So really the Boughen Commission was struck to deal with the 
issue that we even know that has been a major issue in the 
province for many, many years, is funding of K to 12 education. 
 
Last week the minister came out with his announcement and 
there was certainly enough fanfare leading up. I mean I heard 
the minister a couple times and I heard lots of people talking, 
this would be the most significant announcement in education 
that we have seen in the last 40 to 60 years. 
 
And so I guess we kind of had our expectations heightened, 
especially knowing that they knew that a major factor in 
education was the funding of it. And then after the 
announcement I think there was a number of people perhaps 
even a little deflated in the fact that it didn’t really address too 
much the issue of funding, but it sure dealt with the structure of 
school divisions and the whole issue around amalgamation. 
 
That’s what I want to start on, is the whole issue around 
amalgamations and the structure the department sees going 
forward with its task force and a number of other initiatives. 
But first of all I guess I would like to hear from the minister 
himself as to what he thinks are the benefits of amalgamation. I 
mean we’ve gone from 100 — well 120 school divisions at one 
point — but if you look about over the last four years 100 down 
to 80 school divisions, 82 currently, with more amalgamation 
on the way. 
 
And that was again directed, I really feel from the former 
minister of Education, Mr. Jim Melenchuk, that they wanted to 
see 25 per cent fewer school divisions, and they’re on that . . . 
school divisions are on that way. But I just get the sense after 
last week that it wasn’t fast enough and it wasn’t large enough. 
There was not nearly as many amalgamations as what the 
department wants to see now. 
 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

So my question, without going any further — because I guess I 
could probably go for an hour and a half too and only get one or 
two questions in. My question is: from the minister’s 
perspective, why amalgamation to the extent that they’re 
looking at? Is it a financial savings, is it an educational issue? 
What are the reasons to push the amalgamation agenda like he 
is after last week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to thank the member for his 
comments and for the question. I do want to take some 
opportunity today to have the discussion about some of the 
broader philosophical context of the education system. And I 
think the member alludes to that in his comments. 
 
It’s interesting that as we have gone through this debate over 
the last several years in Saskatchewan that there are a number 
of components to it. And I accept what the member says 
because I believe it to be true — that there is a growing 
disconnect between those who are using the system, i.e., have 
children in the system, and those who are asked to pay for it. I 
think that this in many ways is at the root of the so-called tax 
revolt movement, of the concern about the weight of property 
taxes. 
 
What I find interesting is, as we talked to people around the 
province, including people who have either put their children 
already through the system or do not have children — and I 
would add into this as well representatives of the business 
community — that I hear no disagreement among any of those 
groups about the need for us to have taxpayer-supported 
education system. And I know that all the mainstream political 
parties in this province support that and are advocates of it. 
 
The question that we come down to is, which form of taxation 
should we use to raise those funds? Should it be income tax? 
Should it be property tax? Should it be sales tax? Should it be 
some other mechanism — a surcharge or a premium or 
something else? Those mechanisms are all available to us in 
this Assembly to decide in terms of how we want to raise the 
600-and-some million dollars that we need in addition to the 
500 million that the province puts in annually to afford the 
education system that, frankly, we believe Saskatchewan 
children deserve. 
 
The difficulty with this is that there is no easy answer to 
discerning what taxpayers want in terms of an appropriate 
balance. And we certainly saw this as we took a look at the 
response to Mr. Boughen’s report, Commissioner Boughen’s 
report, where he identified that what would be the best way to 
move forward was to identify a $200 million shift off of 
property tax over onto sales tax. 
 
On January 8 when I received the report, I had indicated that I 
thought we would have a very hard time achieving consensus 
around that. Indeed as members of this Assembly know full 
well, there was a large amount of opposition to moving to, not 
only a shift off of property tax over to sales tax, but really 
around the idea of expanding the sales tax base. As a result the 
government made a decision based on public opposition and a 
number of other factors not to expand the sales tax onto 
restaurant meals and snack foods. 
 
(15:45) 

The result of that is there was $56 million less available. That is 
still available if we ever did decide to expand that sales tax to 
deal with expanded education. We could then also move off of 
property tax over to funding it that way. 
 
The commissioner identified in his report a couple of other 
issues, though, that I found were quite thought-provoking — 
some might say provocative — I would certainly believe were 
important and in many ways persuasive. 
 
The commissioner’s arguments around the inequity that’s 
currently based in the system I found to be very persuasive in 
terms of an area where we needed to start from. That in fact the 
system that has served Saskatchewan people fairly well for the 
last 60 years as we look at educational outcomes has not 
worked well in terms of making sure that there is a — clichéd 
as it is — but a level playing field in terms of paying for 
education. 
 
So as a result today we have districts with a wealth differential 
of 25:1 between the poorest districts and the wealthiest districts, 
and we have significant variance within the agricultural farm 
land property class alone in terms of the mill rates which are 
applied. 
 
There is no correlation between the — across the province — 
between what a person living in a $100,000 house in the 
province today would pay varying on which community they 
are in. This I found to be persuasive as we looked at the 
commissioner’s report as to a starting point for us to deal with 
education reform. 
 
Financing governance reform will not get us a better education 
system in itself. But it will provide us with a level playing field, 
so that as new money comes into the system it will be more 
fairly distributed across the province, and that we will be in a 
better position to deal with these changes. 
 
So it was my view that the first step we needed to undertake 
was in fact to deal with the fairness and equity issues outlined 
by the commissioner. The second phase is to deal with what has 
become an extremely complex formula for funding education 
through government revenues, namely the foundation operating 
grant — that we need to move to a simpler, more transparent 
way of doing that. And that third, we need to find a new way to 
shift off of the property tax base over onto provincial revenues. 
Those three items are all essential to us moving forward. 
 
I am not sure that there will be a consensus in terms of moving 
off property tax. As I notice in the commissioner’s report, the 
public opinion polling that was done showed that the province 
was basically split between those who believed that they were 
paying about the right amount on property tax and those that 
believed they were paying too much. 
 
This is a problematic point to work from in terms of discerning 
how to deal with that, recognizing the same taxpayers are going 
to be paying for this education system one way or the other; 
whether it comes through property tax or income tax or sales 
tax, that it is still going to be paid for by Saskatchewan people 
as it’s a provincial responsibility and it’s not an area that we 
would directly invite Ottawa’s participation into. 
 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

So we have work to try and bring forward a three-phase 
approach to dealing with this issue, starting with the fairness 
and equity pieces around financing governance. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess my question was really though just 
basic amalgamation. You know, I spent time talking to directors 
of education that have amalgamated. I’ve got a letter here that I 
would like to read in a little bit from a school division and a 
director from a school division that’s looked at amalgamation 
with three other divisions and felt that that solution wasn’t 
going to fix the problem, that it was going to fix a problem that 
they didn’t have, a problem . . . they didn’t have any of those 
problems in their area. They’re looking at amalgamation as an 
exercise that really wasn’t going to create any solutions to any 
of the problems they saw. 
 
But I’ve talked to other divisions that are very much in favour 
of amalgamation. And I don’t have any problem at all with 
amalgamation. In fact most of the divisions in my area have 
amalgamated or have talked about amalgamating or in the 
process of amalgamating; I have no problem with that. 
 
But when you talk to people about amalgamation, they come at 
it from usually a couple of different areas, different directions. 
Often, if you talk to the directors, they say it’s all about 
education — it’s just about education because, frankly, we 
don’t know if there’s any monetary savings; it’s a better 
education for the student. Well that’s a very tough one to argue, 
and who’s going to argue that? I mean yes, maybe that’s the 
case. But you talk to other ones that will say, it doesn’t do 
anything to enhance education in our division. 
 
So it’s a debatable point. Is it about education, just pure 
education? Or is it about money savings? Because we’ll hear 
some people will say that, well if we amalgamate, we reduce 
the amount of administration; if we change the governance 
structure of a larger board from three boards . . . For example, 
I’ll use Qu’Appelle Valley that had six, at least, trustees. So 
that’s 18 down to a board that has 10; we’ve dropped eight 
trustees. There’s some monetary savings there — not great, but 
some savings there — and some savings with the 
administration. 
 
I want to know from the department’s perspective, which one is 
it? Is it a bit of both? Is it a cross mix? What is it? Is it for the 
betterment of education or is it for some fiscal savings because 
the third issue that — and the minister mentioned it — about 
equity. 
 
Just by going to larger boards does not, will not eliminate the 
inequities completely. I mean, you can go to a larger board for 
example in the Southwest that has an awful lot of oil and gas 
. . . Southeast, I should say, thinking of around the Weyburn 
and Estevan area and then you go straight north and, I mean, 
you could have a larger board in that Southeast and a larger 
board in the Northeast, but does that really address the 
inequities in the assessment and money raised through property 
tax? 
 
So I guess it’s a three-point question. What is amalgamation to 
the Department of Learning? Is it about better education? Is it 
about saving money? Or is it just about equity? Because if it’s 
just about equity, I’m not sure you’re solving the problem that 

you’re trying to address. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well indeed it is item D — all of the 
above. As we look at this, it does have to do with improving . . . 
there are certainly organizational efficiencies. There may be 
some savings attached to that. The magnitude of that though, I 
would say is, would not be the driving factor behind this. 
 
Once all the amalgamations are done, we may be looking at 
overall savings of 5 to $7 million throughout the system. It 
could maybe be as high as 10 depending on how . . . to what 
extent the amalgamation goes ahead. But we’re not talking 
about a huge financial saving. This is one of the reasons that in 
making the announcement we have directed that whatever 
savings are achieved through amalgamation should be 
redirected back into organizational services and educational 
instruction. 
 
This is one of the things we saw where Qu’Appelle Valley, 
Sask Valley, and Sask Rivers have gone through amalgamation 
that in fact they did reinvest their savings and as a result we had 
better educational product. So there is some option there. 
 
As we move to larger districts there will be some challenges 
around how we deal with accountability models. Certainly, and 
the member identifies, I think correctly so, that we need to think 
about the impact of having larger divisions and smaller boards 
and what that does to accountability. To that extent, this is one 
of the reasons we have identified that we need to bring in a new 
accountability mechanism around SchoolPLUS councils. 
 
It is the third point that the member raises that I find to be in 
many ways the most persuasive, and that is dealing with the 
equity issue. To have a variance of 25:1 between the poorest 
and richest divisions in terms of their ability to raise money, 
really is problematic. It’s what has led to us having zero grant 
boards. It is what has led to us having very wealthy divisions 
and some very poor ones. And it’s my view that through 
amalgamation we will be able to reduce that variance — 
hopefully, down to 5:1, something in the 5:1 range. That in 
itself will not fix everything; I mean, ideally you would want a 
1:1 system. 
 
As we’ve looked at options for that, you could go to something 
like Alberta does where everything is centrally pooled. The 
drawback of that, although I have some preference for that 
model, the drawback is that you lose the local autonomy. And 
as I talk to groups around the province, certainly out of Mr. 
Boughen’s recommendation that commercial and industry 
property taxes be pooled, there was a huge resistance to that 
because it was seen as being confiscatory out of the regions — 
particularly the oil-rich regions — and being seen as drawing 
into the cities. 
 
Interestingly, when I was on a . . . chatting with the Kindersley 
Clarion the other day, they had suggested that this was a good 
idea because it would help draw the money out of the larger 
cities that have a bigger commercial pool to draw from, and be 
able to spend it on poorer divisions like Kindersley. As we 
looked at it we felt that it was a better, given Saskatchewan’s 
context, to go to a model where there was a regional sharing of 
wealth that reduced the variance down to something hopefully 
around the 5:1 mark, so that as new provincial money comes in 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

all the regions can benefit. 
 
There will certainly be some very strong resistance from some 
divisions; there will be some divisions that will welcome it with 
open arms. I think this is one of the reasons it has been difficult 
for the school board association, as it has looked at this issue, to 
advance one particular response. Obviously their membership is 
split on this. 
 
What we are trying to do is to devise a province-wise response, 
recognizing that in this case we are going to need to force 
together some rich and poor divisions that otherwise would not 
voluntarily come together. And that is why we have opted to do 
this. 
 
So yes, it will mean some degree of fiscal savings, but I hope 
those will be reinvested into instruction. It should mean some 
organizational efficiency, as we have some very small districts 
that will able to be moved in with larger ones. And yes it should 
mean significantly greater equity within the system in terms of 
the ability to raise money. And as a result, when the province 
brings in its funding it should mean a more equitable 
distribution of that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I was interested that you have worked out 
maybe some calculation of the savings. You mentioned five to 
10 million that there may be saved after we achieve the 
amalgamation that the department is looking for. 
 
I guess my questions will go back a few years, to boards that 
have amalgamated, and then most recently to some of the 
boards that have just recently amalgamated. There has been 
some financial assistance by the department for boards that 
wanted to amalgamate. Could you tell me . . . This is more 
specific than what we have been talking about before, but could 
you tell me what assistance was available for school divisions 
that wanted to amalgamate, let’s say eight or nine years ago, 
and then what assistance has been offered just recently. 
 
I was in a meeting when Qu’Appelle Valley was going to 
amalgamate and I remember the former deputy minister, Mr. 
Dotson, was there and he made an announcement that there’d 
be more support through the Department of Learning. And I 
guess I would like to know those numbers to begin with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I understand in the first round there 
was relatively small support, a small amount of support 
provided — about $15,000 per board. 
 
In the second round that ended up with the larger 
amalgamations that we think about around Sask Valley, Sask 
Rivers, and Qu’Appelle Valley, there was up to 450,000 per 
board with up to $100 per student. It was up to $100 per student 
in the new amalgamated board. That program cost about $4 
million to support that — 4 million overall. 
 
In terms of this round, because we will be facilitating the 
amalgamation, we are expecting that we would be called upon 
and would be providing somewhere around 100, maybe 
200,000 per new board to facilitate those amalgamations. And 
that is the parameter we’re looking at. 
 
Part of this will depend on how complex those amalgamations 

will be. Some may be very easy; some may be much more 
difficult as we end up drawing in a larger number of boards. So 
there’ll be some flexibility there but yes, we will be providing 
additional support. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well that’s interesting. I knew that there 
had certainly been an increase in the funding for boards and the 
larger boards that wanted to because there is quite an expense 
. . . It was quite an expense incurred by those boards that 
pursued that amalgamation route because it did take a number 
of meetings and it was not an easy task. It’s a little bit easier for 
us to stand here and say, okay these two boards should 
amalgamate or these four boards should amalgamate, but we 
don’t quite understand . . . I could say I don’t maybe understand 
all that goes into an amalgamation of that level, and dealing 
with some of the people from Qu’Appelle Valley that were 
formerly on the board that went through the amalgamation there 
was definitely an awful lot of work that went forward. 
 
(16:00) 
 
But I think that’s the very point because you know . . . The first 
round of amalgamations, I know boards that came together, two 
boards that came together, and then the second round of 
amalgamation that was asked for by the department, then one 
board that was formerly two joined with another board that was 
formerly two. And so we got originally four boards down to 
one. They’ve gone through two rounds of amalgamation. And 
then they hear the announcement — it’s not good enough. 
 
You know, I can see the frustration of a number of board 
members or school divisions, school boards, that have gone 
through two rounds of amalgamation and it’s just not good 
enough yet. I can think of the school division that, again, that I 
represent — I’ll mention Qu’Appelle Valley — that have gone 
through their work. 
 
And Qu’Appelle Valley is certainly not unique, I mean it’s . . . I 
think it’s very in favour of amalgamation and further 
amalgamation. But they’ve gone through a pile of work just to 
have them told, or dictated to, that that’s not enough, we’re 
going to have to get you quite a bit bigger. Although that’s not 
too bad, I guess. Qu’Appelle Valley is around the 5,000 mark. 
But there are divisions that have amalgamated and have got to 
2,000, and their neighbour has got, you know, they’ve 
amalgamated and they’ve got to 2,000. Do they have to go 
through another amalgamation? 
 
And they’re feeling that there has been a lot of money spent on 
amalgamation already. We’ve just gone through it and we’ve 
kind of got to this point with more amalgamation on the horizon 
by voluntary . . . through the voluntary process. And so I guess 
the question is: why now all of a sudden dictating to school 
boards that what you have done is not enough, even though 
you’ve done exactly what we said? It hasn’t been enough, and 
now why are we going to push it? 
 
I realize that a lot of people in the province were anticipating 
this announcement and they were anticipating, quite frankly, 
some sort of an announcement on property tax. And what has 
happened is they’ve got an announcement on amalgamation. 
And school boards around the province are saying, it’s not 
necessarily the size of us that makes the issue that is the 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

problem with property tax. It’s the fact that we’re not getting 
enough money from senior government, from the provincial 
government, to offset the need for property tax, both in urban 
and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I guess I find it interesting why you’re asking boards now 
that have already amalgamated to go on further at this time, 
when really the issue seems to be more around property tax. 
And I realize amalgamation, it deals with equity a little bit, it 
deals with education a little bit, it deals with a few things a little 
bit. 
 
But what really the question was is: how you deal with the 
property tax on our ag land and in urban Saskatchewan? So 
why, I guess, why is this the time that you’re pushing more 
divisions to amalgamate who have already amalgamated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, we are prepared to put 
more money into the education system, as we have in this 
budget. It’s interesting to note that in the last five years the 
province has added $100 million to the K to 12 system — $100 
million more into the education system, and some people would 
say, and I’ve been asked that, how is it you can add $100 
million in but not see a decrease in property taxes, not see 
identifiable change in terms of the school system, still see 
school closures? How can we add in $100 million and still not 
see that change? I think it’s important that, before we put in the 
next $100 million in this term, that we actually understand 
where that money’s going to go. 
 
It is interesting that through voluntary amalgamations we still 
have school boards that have no schools. We have school 
boards that have basically no children in them. Voluntary 
amalgamation has worked in some areas and what it showed us 
is that there were benefits to the taxpayers, that there were 
benefits to the students in terms of the system, and that we 
should be able to build on that. And I think that that is an 
important piece for us to identify, is that as we move forward 
with putting more money into the system and as we begin to 
deal with the restructuring, we need to make sure that we’ve 
learned from the success of the voluntary system. And that is 
what in fact we have done. 
 
So that is why I think it is now time to move forward. I know 
that later today, or at least I anticipate we will get into some 
discussion about where districts have looked at amalgamations 
and not decided to proceed. And this does come down to this 
differentiation of have and have-not districts. 
 
And I want to say that we will get into that discussion, but I 
have been convinced as we have looked at this that we need to 
deal with the equity issue first. And that is why we’re going to 
push ahead now. It’s not to say to districts that have gone 
through amalgamation, it’s not good enough. It’s just saying, 
we can do more. 
 
And I think anywhere that I look within government, the 
broader government sector, education is one of the most 
innovative and accepting of change at a local level. What we 
need to do is to provide the leadership to help move it in that 
direction. 
 
So I appreciate what the member is suggesting that yes, there 

has been some amalgamation. Yes, it has been effective. I just 
believe that we can do more and that now is the time we need to 
do it, before we put significant new resources into the system. 
 
Mr. Chairman, while I am on my feet, I would ask leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Chair: — The minister has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. The minister may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much. I notice that 
we’re joined today in the Speaker’s gallery by two officials 
with the school board association. I would like to welcome Mr. 
Bill Wells with the school board association and Ardith 
Stephanson who is largely responsible for their communications 
arm and for dealing with policy issues. 
 
So if members would join with me in welcoming them, I would 
appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I also would ask 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Chair: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. The member may proceed. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to join with 
the minister in welcoming Bill Wells and Ardith Stephanson to 
the proceedings today. I guess they have a real vested interest, 
both working through the school board association. And 
hopefully they find the dialogue back and forth interesting and 
to the points that are so important to the school board 
association. So welcome to the estimates. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Further on to the questioning, it was 
interesting — the minister talked about the money that was put 
into the education budget. And this year it was roughly $18 
million, which I think we all realize goes to covering the 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

teachers’ contract that will be up at the end of this school year. 
 
So it really was not new money that went into operations for 
boards so that they could deal with property tax relief; it’s 
covering the commitment that was made and negotiated through 
the provincial government as the main bargainer in those 
contracts, with the majority on the bargaining group. So let’s be 
aware that the money that was put in, certainly I hope that the 
department didn’t feel that it was going to at all address the 
issue of property tax relief, but simply cover the issue of 
contracts that were negotiated prior. 
 
It was also interesting, and I’m fully aware, again within the 
constituency that I represent, I’m fully aware of boards of 
education that have no schools and maybe only a couple of 
students and they buy services here in Regina. I’m also very 
aware — because I grew up in that area and played a lot of 
sports with some of the members on the board — of a school 
division just outside of Regina that has a small school, K to 6, I 
believe, and then purchases services, and I’m . . . in Regina 
here. 
 
And I’m certainly questioned on a regular basis if I’m at an 
event with one of my former ball mates that we played baseball 
with, and he’s questioned me quite intensely on what we feel 
should happen as far as amalgamation. And certainly one of 
their biggest fears is: that close to the city, would they lose their 
school? And I mean that’s definitely one of the issues around 
keeping that division. 
 
And I realize now that, and I think they were realizing, listening 
to Chris Boesch on the news service the other night, talking 
about his fear of losing their school. And that’s a real fear for 
many, many communities. 
 
I wouldn’t necessarily agree with some of the arguments — 
well that’s going to really hurt our community — because 
frankly the education is more important than trying to keep a 
school to keep their community alive. But the education that 
they offer there they feel is a good quality, and so then they 
really question, why would they lose their school? 
 
But I just want to read a letter that I got from a director of 
education from Tisdale School Division that talks about 
amalgamation, and I think he puts it fairly well. As a director, 
and I quote here: 
 

As a director of education, I am neither for nor against 
amalgamation. Amalgamation is simply a solution to a 
problem. What is missing from current discussions of 
using amalgamation as a solution . . . (when it hasn’t 
identified a) problem. In the northeast of the province, 
Tisdale . . . Nipawin . . . and Hudson Bay . . . have 
analyzed the potential benefits of amalgamation and the 
resulting potential consequences. It is clear to us that the 
“solution” of amalgamation does not fit any (of the) 
problems that . . . (they have identified in their) area. 
 

So you do make . . . you’re going to really . . . there is real 
mixed emotions around forcing amalgamation. And I think, so 
often is the case that if you allow the divisions to enter into 
agreements under their own will, sure with some assistance 
from the department and maybe with a good strong nudge from 

a department, you’re going to find stronger units when this is all 
over with. I’m not so sure you’re going to find much cohesion 
or much morale or any sort of family bonding in a division that 
is dictated from the Department of Learning. 
 
And I think that is very, very important in school divisions, 
when they sit around the board table and they’ve come to an 
agreement as boards to form this division; they’ve all bought 
into it and they realize it’s the best for that area. As opposed to 
sitting around a board table, looking at the people around the 
board table and knowing that, I mean, the only reason we’re 
around this table together is because the Department of 
Learning has told us to be around this table. And the voters in 
our division have voted us in. 
 
I think you’re going to find quite a difference if you were to sit 
around boardroom tables now of divisions that have 
amalgamated or are looking at amalgamation and the 
camaraderie I guess you could say around that boardroom table, 
compared to what you’re going to see after 2006 with directed, 
forced amalgamation through the department. 
 
I’d like to hear the minister’s comments on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well there are a number of issues there 
that I’m very happy to comment on. 
 
First of all I want to reiterate, and I think it’s important that we 
all understand this — education happens in classrooms, not 
boardrooms. And that’s why finance and governance reform is 
taking a look at how we deal with the equity in financing issues. 
The education will continue to happen at the classroom level, 
and that sense of community needs to be at the local school 
level. That’s where we build that sense of community. 
 
I can think of boards that are in their existing districts that are 
badly divided on the direction they take. An example of course 
is the Kindersley board, which has a significant division in 
terms of the direction they take over their budget. This does not 
necessarily isolate, and would not prevent, these kind of 
divisions from happening by simply leaving the divisions as 
they are today. 
 
What we need to do is to find workable divisions to try and deal 
with the equity issue that takes into account region, takes into 
account geography, takes into account the changing 
demographic, takes into account the student population, and 
looks for some community of common interest to build around. 
I think that that can happen on a larger basis. 
 
I am a believer that we should do that through a model of 
pooling the wealth regionally and then supplementing it with 
additional money from the province. And that is the model that 
we have traditionally worked on. 
 
The problem is, is that the districts no longer reflect natural 
regions. Our regions are larger in the province today. And so 
this is part of what we need to take into account. 
 
With regard to the question of school closures, we have made it 
clear in this announcement, and I have said specifically, that 
there will be a moratorium on school closures from September 
1 of this year until December 31 of ’06 in order to allow the 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

transition to move forward. 
 
Now what we need to understand is that of course there are 
some schools that are in the final motion stage and will close 
down this June. Those closures will proceed; those have been 
several months and years in the works, and I didn’t want to 
undo the work that the boards had done in that regard. 
 
But during this transition phase from September 1 of this year 
to December 31 of ’06, we need to put in the moratorium to 
make sure that elected boards are in place, that we have the new 
accountability mechanism in place before additional decisions 
are made. 
 
I also appreciate the comment that the member opposite makes 
about the concern of smaller boards, in terms of whether it’s 
geographic size or population or school population, being 
swallowed up into Saskatoon and Regina. And this is one of the 
reasons that I have suggested publicly that the task force, the 
education and equity task force that Mr. Herron will be leading, 
will need to take into account how we deal with this to make 
sure that those interests are not swamped by the very large 
populations in Saskatoon and Regina. We have said that it is my 
preference, that we bring together whole districts into the 
amalgamation. 
 
But again, as I understand, around the Saskatoon area there may 
be some desire to move the bedroom communities around that 
community into the Saskatoon board. If that were a map that 
were to come forward, if that were a suggestion that were to 
come forward, it would be one I would be prepared to look at. 
 
(16:15) 
 
But I am very conscious that we do not want to see moved in, at 
least into those two biggest boards where the population is 
significant on the urban side, smaller rural divisions that would 
simply get swamped. And I think that we have the ability to 
deal with that. And the task force that Mr. Herron is heading I 
think will move in that direction. 
 
The other issue that the member raises, and I think is one that 
all of us should heed, is that none of us at least in this room 
with the exception of my esteemed officials have the kind of 
detailed knowledge about the work that will need to be done to 
move these divisions together. It is not as simple as getting the 
Jiffy marker out and drawing a boundary on a map. Map 
making is the easiest part of this. 
 
What is difficult will be facilitating the merger of various 
contracts in, of being able to deal with the environmental issues, 
with the number of agreements we have — everything from the 
local contracts for the teachers to the CUPE (Canadian Union of 
Public Employees) contracts. There’ll be staffing issues, busing 
issues, facility issues. All those will need to be facilitated. 
 
It’s our view that the best way to do that is to bring together the 
key educational stakeholders and have them put their efforts 
into moving that forward. So in addition to the education equity 
task force chaired by Mr. Herron, we will be reconvening what 
was known as the restructuring coordinating committee — the 
restructuring coordinating committee. 
 

It’s our view that this group should bring together the key 
players from the School Boards Association, from the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation), from SASBO 
(Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials), from 
LEADS (League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents), from other stakeholders that would need to 
come together to actually facilitate this on the local level. 
 
This transition must be seamless. And that’s why we need to 
take some time to work our way through. This isn’t something 
that’ll happen effective November 15 when the map comes 
back and when we decide on what the new boundaries are. This 
will take us some time to move through transition. 
 
So today what that means is I don’t necessarily have the final 
answer on what the map looks like or how we’ll do that . . . 
what the result will be. But what I can tell you is that we have 
in place a process that builds on the success we have seen and 
frankly learns from the lessons that we had with some of the 
amalgamations, so that we’ll have a smoother and more 
seamless transition as we move forward by ’06. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Just a little bit further to the divisions that I 
had talked about earlier — Tisdale, Nipawin, and Hudson Bay. 
 
It’s interesting I think that you could probably draw the analogy 
to sports in a way that if a coach gets the Coach of the Year 
award, that usually means he’s gone the next year. Well when 
you look at these school divisions in the Northwest, in 2001 
Nipawin School Division received the Premier’s Award for 
Innovation and Excellence. And in 2002, Tisdale received the 
same award for innovation and excellence. They were 
recognized and singled out for their SchoolPLUS and what they 
were doing in their school divisions. In other words, exactly 
what the department was wanting, the direction they were 
wanting them to go, but that doesn’t mean that they can 
function any more into the future as the school divisions per se 
we see them today. 
 
We’ll leave that I guess for a second. I was interested to hear 
. . . And I was certainly interested in your comments last week 
when you talked about school closures. Now I’m not in favour 
of a school closure unless it makes sense for that local board . . . 
for that local school board, I should say. And it’s interesting 
that you would put a moratorium on school closures for boards 
that don’t make these decisions lightly. 
 
And I’ve certainly been to a couple of school board meetings 
and been to a lot more community meetings where they’re 
scared of losing their school. And the amount of energy and 
time that’s put into saving a school . . . but guaranteed, the 
people that are on those school boards don’t come to those 
decisions lightly. They’ve done their homework and they’ve 
wrestled with it, not only at the school board table but I’m sure 
driving home from that school board meeting. I’m sure they’ve 
wrestled with it in their communities after, and they make these 
decisions because they feel it’s the best for education in their 
area. 
 
Now don’t get me wrong, I’m not saying that we should go 
around and close a bunch of schools, but you’re taking the 
power out of the very people that were elected to make those 
decisions for the betterment of education in their area. 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

You know I really question why you would do it. It almost to 
me seems like an olive branch offered to rural Saskatchewan — 
don’t worry, we’re going to protect you for two years here; 
there’ll be no more school closures. As if the boards were 
making those decisions lightly. 
 
The boards only made those decisions because it was for the 
best of education in that area, region, regardless of what size 
that school board was. So I question again, you know, the 
timing of this. Why would you be saying that . . . tying the 
hands of school boards for making decisions that may be the 
best in short term/long term for that division? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Those communities where the boards 
have made the decision to close their schools as of June of this 
year will be permitted to proceed. What we have said though, as 
we go through transitioning, as we go to the larger districts, I 
think it’s important that we not force those school closures. 
 
If new resources become available because of changes to the 
operating grant, because of changes in terms of having more 
equity, of being able to share the resources more effectively 
because of having fewer district offices, maybe some of those 
schools won’t need to close. 
 
Some communities will always have a school because of 
isolation. I mean there are some that as long as there are 
children in those communities, they’re going to have schools. 
That’s not always the case with other ones. What they’re 
influenced by is an availability of money. 
 
And so what I’m saying is, as we’re going through this 
transition, let’s wait to get the transition complete to see what 
resources are available to those boards before we force them 
through this discussion about closure. And to me that seems to 
be the most rational approach. There’s no sense in closing 
schools today if the resources became available to keep them 
open and the local elected boards — that there will still be local 
elected boards afterwards — would decide that they wanted to 
keep that open. 
 
That being said, we identify that there, and we understand 
undoubtedly, there will be school closures in the future. This is 
not a panacea; it does not fix everything. But we’re saying 
during a time of transition, I think it is fairer to the communities 
that are involved to allow the new boards to get in place, to 
have those discussions and move them forward after they know 
what the resources are. No sense doing it in a transition phase, 
and that’s why we’ve brought in the moratorium. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I’d be very interested to know where that 
idea came from. Because the reason I ask that is, I don’t believe 
that would have been driven through the school boards, that 
very idea. Because I can tell you from dealing with school 
boards that went through amalgamation, in their planning stages 
one of the things that they all agreed on is that we can’t protect 
a weak school, for example, so that the whole board would have 
to deal with it after amalgamation. You have to make the 
decisions that have to be made leading up to amalgamation. 
 
Because what you’ve done now, or what will happen I think in 
the future is that . . . Again I have no problem with 
amalgamation, but you know what’s going to happen is that a 

board will amalgamate, and for two years some of these 
decisions weren’t made, so now these decisions will have to be 
made. And I think the idea of the general public after your 
amalgamation will be — see, we knew amalgamation wouldn’t 
work; look at all these schools that are having to close — not 
realizing that there has been a moratorium for two years. 
 
And I’m afraid that what you’re going to do is taint the whole 
issue of amalgamation in the future, after 2006, with the fact 
that people are saying, man, this didn’t work; look at all these 
schools that are closing. Because they’ve been protected for two 
years. 
 
I understand your point that you’re thinking by restructuring 
there’s going to be greater savings — although you’ve already 
admitted that you don’t think there will be much for savings 
with amalgamation — that some of these schools can stay open. 
And I’d be very interested to see that because, I mean, maybe 
time will prove that out. 
 
I would say it’s the alternative. I would say that in a couple of 
years, as the population declines further and further in rural 
Saskatchewan, that you’re going to see schools that should have 
closed two years previous, that the new amalgamated board is 
going to have to make that as their first decision, and that 
amalgamated board is going to be tainted because people are 
going to say that’s what it was all about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I appreciate the political advice, 
and that probably is the easier way, which would be to have 
allowed the amalgamations to proceed with all the background 
noise of school closures. 
 
But what I’m saying is that I think it is important for us to allow 
new boards to make those decisions based on what resources 
they have available. I mean we have a number of schools that 
. . . There were 16 schools closed last year, 10 schools that are 
appearing that they’ll be closed this year. It’s been averaging 
somewhere it looks like around eight schools per year — eight 
to ten schools a year. 
 
So I mean we understand that, and we know where we’re 
looking at in ’05. We’ve got potential closures at Gainsborough 
and Alida, Denzil. I mean these are all very small schools. 
Denzil’s about the largest with 68 students, and it’s a K to 12 
school. None of these have particularly large staff 
complements. 
 
We’re talking about in some cases . . . Well Alida School, 
which is where the member for Cannington comes from, 2.75 
FTEs (full-time equivalent), maybe through the amalgamation, 
maybe through having the common mill rate set, that there will 
be the funds available. Maybe through the change in the 
foundation operating grant that there will be the 2.75 FTEs 
available. And maybe that new board will decide, no, that the 
rationale they were looking at initially — the old board was 
looking at — still held true, in which case then they should 
proceed. 
 
What I’m saying is, during this time of transition, let’s allow the 
amalgamations to go forward. Let’s allow them to know what 
their budgets look like because a second piece of this is not only 
the amalgamation; it’s the change in the foundation operating 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

grant which will change the way the province funds. Let’s make 
sure all of that is out there including the ’05 reassessment which 
will have a significant impact on the property tax base. Let’s 
make sure all that information is clearly understood before we 
end up moving forward with more school closures. 
 
Will this end school closures? No. Will it put some better 
understanding around what the parameters are in terms of the 
financial ability of boards to fund them? Yes. It won’t change 
the demographics, but it may change the affordability model. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess one more statement on the whole 
moratorium of school closures. You just mentioned 16 last year 
— school closures — 10 the year before. That’s 26. You’re 
saying an average of eight or ten, so it obviously was quite a bit 
less years prior. But let’s use those last two years of 26 school 
closures within two years, and let’s project out two or three 
years down the road to 2007 when these fully amalgamated 
boards come into effect. There could very well be 36 schools 
that would close in the province within a year. And you know 
what’s going to . . . That is going to taint the whole issue of 
amalgamation and frame the discussion where it’s not supposed 
to be framed, but that’s, I think, what that decision will lead 
towards. 
 
But enough on school closures and the moratorium. I’m 
interested in so many other areas, but interested in finding out 
this restructuring committee. You’ve named the one fellow on 
the committee. You’re yet to name two others. And could you 
just kind of give me a vision of what you see this restructuring 
committee . . . I guess we know its mandate. Its mandate is to 
get to 40 or less. In fact I mean, I think the documentation that 
we had last week showed probably 28 is less than 40, and I 
have a fairly good grasp of greater than and less than. But we’re 
looking at probably anywhere from 25 to — I would predict — 
probably not over 30. But you want to keep to a 5,000 
minimum per school division. And I mean, we can crunch the 
numbers. It’s not really tough to do. 
 
We don’t have enough students outside the major centres and 
the three major boards that have amalgamated to have any more 
than 15 or 16 boards. And when you crunch the numbers . . . 
And we’re not sure on the separate school division issue and 
how much amalgamation will go on there. But I’d be very 
interested, I guess — before I get going on too long here — 
about the restructuring committee and what you have 
envisioned for that, when you will be naming the other two 
members, and what the parameters will be for them going out 
. . . are they going to be consulting publicly, or how is this 
process going to work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to start with the discussion that 
we were just leaving around school closures. It may interest 
members of the Assembly to know where we’ve been at with 
school closures over the last 30 years. From 1970 to 1980, there 
were 121 school closures. From a low of 3 in 1975 to a high of 
20 in 1973. So there is a huge variance within that, from ’70-80. 
From ’81 to ’91, there were 162 schools closed. The lowest year 
was 9 school closures. The highest year again was 20. From ’92 
to 2002, there were 115 schools closed from a low of 5 to a high 
of 18. 
 
This has been the trend over the last 30 years, and undoubtedly 

it has responded in part to the pressure of a system which is not 
able to keep pace, both in terms of the amount of money that it 
can raise and in terms of a growing number of very wealthy 
districts and a growing number of poor districts. We need to try 
and figure out a way to fix that. 
 
(16:30) 
 
So I understand that there will be school closures. And I am not 
saying that the moratorium is there to in any way chastise 
boards who make these very tough decisions with very good 
intent. But it is there to allow us to have a very clear 
understanding of what money is able to be raised during that 
time frame. 
 
With respect to the role of the two different groups we have in 
place, one is the task force, the education equity task force, and 
the other is the restructuring coordinating committee. 
 
The education task force will be headed by Fred Herron. There 
will be two additional members appointed to it. And it will have 
as its primary role to work with school boards to identify what 
is a reasonable number of districts in the parameters that we’ve 
set out, what the configuration of those are, and to come back 
no later than November 15 with a map that we will then use to 
move forward. 
 
It is the second group that will play in many ways a much more 
pivotal role in moving this amalgamation forward, and that’s 
the restructuring coordinating committee. This is where we will 
bring in the experts within the existing stakeholder community 
to facilitate the amalgamations to make sure that there is in fact 
a seamless approach. And again we would look to invite 
members of the School Boards Association — the CUPE, STF, 
LEADS, SASBO, all of these groups — to participate in this to 
move this forward. 
 
And these two groups will deal with two separate issues. And 
while the work will overlap somewhat in the next couple of 
months, it is the work of the task force that needs to happen 
first. I am not looking at asking the task force, or providing 
them with a mandate, to do public meetings. We will be asking 
them to meet with school board associations to try and 
formulate what those divisions should look like and to then 
report back to me so that we can move forward with the 
amalgamations. 
 
This is something that we have certainly thought about as I have 
looked at the report. Boughen recommended that we move 
forward with the task force to restructure and redraw boundaries 
in amalgamated fashion. I think that the time has come to do 
that and we now need to act on that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess a quick question. Could I ask the 
minister then when will he be naming the other two members to 
the board and striking these task force . . . the first one on the 
map, which has to be back in November, but the second task 
force which seems to be . . . probably will be charged with an 
onerous job of then implementing the map. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I expect to make an announcement in 
the next couple of days about the other two members to the task 
force. The list of candidates that we’ve looked at have all got 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

significant experience at the trustee level at the division level in 
terms of moving those issues, and I want to make sure that we 
have people from the trustee community who will participate in 
that. 
 
With regard to the restructuring coordinating committee, this 
will be a stakeholder-nominated group that we would look at. I 
haven’t determined what that size would be, but indeed what we 
will be looking to do is to call upon people based on their 
expertise to move this forward. I think that that is a very critical 
component of it. 
 
The education equity task force will have as its primary 
responsibility drawing the map, will need to report I think no 
later than November 15 of this year. That’s what we’ve asked 
them to do so that we can move forward with the restructuring 
coordinating committee’s work that will take some time. 
 
It is possible — although I think highly unlikely — it is 
possible that all this work might be accomplished before the 
October ’06 elections; that we might be in a position that, if this 
legislature wanted that, it could enact legislation to go to early 
re-elections. I am not convinced that that is going to happen, 
and as such I have picked a relatively conservative date of 
doing this in concert with the next municipal elections and 
school board elections for October ’06, with then the 
moratorium coming off in ’07. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well I’ll certainly be interested to hear the 
announcement of the other members of the initial task force to 
be announced in the next day or two because I remember about 
a month and a half to two months ago when the members said 
we’ll be making a major announcement in the next week or 
two, two months ago. And so we were all waiting with bated 
breath, and we finally got to it. Well hopefully it won’t take 
quite as long to name the members of the new task force. 
 
I’m going to let my colleague from Saskatoon Silver Springs 
ask a few questions on a specific issue, and then as long as there 
is a bit of time left, we’ll get back into more of the issue around 
what he perceives as equity in a region. 
 
Maybe I better not get too far down that road. I was going to 
explain everything that I was going to ask, so I’ll do that once I 
get back in. So I’ll turn it over to the member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
just wanted to switch gears a bit I guess and talk a little bit 
about capital construction and specifically the high schools in 
Saskatoon. 
 
As most members of this House are aware — I’ve spoken about 
it at some extent so far — I’ve been quite an advocate for the 
construction of a high school in northeast Saskatoon and indeed 
two high schools for Saskatoon. Saskatoon has been playing 
catch-up. They have more students than Regina, but two less 
high schools, and it’s a concern. And I’ve been part of the 
Citizens for a Northeast Collegiate, a lobby group that has been 
working diligently, working along with the Saskatoon Public 

School Division as well as working with your department to 
ensure that a school does come into being in the near future. 
 
I just wanted to, I guess, ask the minister at this point about the 
new northeast collegiate. We have heard that some $9 million 
will be directed towards the funding of the project — $350,000 
in ’04-05 and $3 million in each of ’05-06, ’06-07, ’07-08. My 
question to the minister is: has the funding schedule changed at 
all? And is this a firm commitment, or it is dependent on any 
extenuating circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, in fact I want to start by 
correcting the member that in fact both Saskatoon and Regina 
have about the same number of students in them. So in fact 
there are not more students in Saskatoon. Certainly Saskatoon 
has undergone a significant growth as a community, 
undoubtedly because of the strengthening economy that we 
have seen. Saskatoon has certainly benefited from this, and this 
is one of the accomplishments that this government is always 
happy to celebrate. 
 
With that growth, with the changes in terms of those local 
communities, there are certainly pressures on them to see new 
school capital. I have written the school boards, both the 
Saskatoon public and the Saskatoon separate divisions, to 
advise them of the government’s timeline for funding. The only 
issues that the funding is contingent upon is progress of the 
timeline that is coming forward, so land accumulation, the 
designs, those issues that are not directly in the hands of the 
government. 
 
But I have written them. I don’t think I have the letters with me 
today, but I’ll endeavour to provide you with copies within the 
next day or two. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The minister may 
have more up-to-date numbers on the Saskatoon and Regina 
enrolments than I do, but the last numbers I saw, Saskatoon was 
ahead. But the bottom line is that there’s two less high schools, 
high schools that probably should have been built about three or 
four years ago. 
 
Can the minister assure the citizens of northeast Saskatoon that 
the northeast collegiate will indeed open in the fall of 2006 as 
indicated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I understand that we’re on track 
for that date and, assuming there’s no unforeseen impediments, 
I would see no reason why we won’t see the school opening at 
that point. 
 
I want to say that I appreciate . . . While that member certainly 
is making a case for the northeast Saskatoon schools, I can tell 
you that members on this side do the same with me in terms of 
the west side schools. And we are committed to the projects that 
we announced before the election and we will move them 
forward. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Chair, I can assure the minister that 
I’m concerned about the west side of Saskatoon as well. 
 
And as one of my following questions, just to keep on this high 
school in the northeast for a period of time here, how far along 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

is the design process? And has the capital budget specifically 
been designed for the school? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m told they’re in the still very early 
design phase, but they are moving forward with the joint use 
facility. And it appears the officials, who have much more 
experience in these projects, seem to feel that things are on 
track for what we have announced and that should be able to 
proceed according to plan. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. A somewhat 
technical question I guess — and I’m glad to see the officials 
present — I understand the department has changed the SA-1 
guidelines designed to assess the construction of schools. This 
will see a reduction in the size of this particular collegiate. 
 
How much smaller will it be and is this just cutting a corner to 
reduce the budget, or is there in fact a reason behind reducing 
the SA-1s. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We aren’t aware of any changes at this 
point. But we’ll look into that and we’ll report back to you on 
that. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As you may 
be . . . as you will be aware, I’m not able to keep up to the 
day-to-day proceedings of the negotiations and the lobbying 
that’s taking place with the citizens for a northeast collegiate, 
but that’s what I have been informed, so I’d appreciate if you 
could look into that and get back to me. 
 
Now I wanted to move on to the west side collegiate as well. 
The funding seems to be the same over a three-year period. I 
understand there’s $100,000 in this year’s budget, 2004-2005, 
and then one-third of the remaining, and there it says 7 million 
to $9 million. Is that indeed still the department’s 
understanding, and is that funding in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — These projects are again in very early 
planning phases and there are a number of issues that still need 
to be resolved before we have a very clear time frame for them 
moving forward. But at this point, in terms of the planning 
process, everything appears to be on schedule. 
 
I can’t speak to the situation that the local boards are going 
through in terms of the number of processes and approvals that 
they need to get that may impact on the build out. But from the 
provincial government standpoint, it’s our understanding things 
are proceeding and there would be nothing threatening those 
projects in terms of impediments at this end. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate 
your forthright answers. I also, for the record, wanted to 
indicate the work that the Chair, the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland, has done in this committee as well. 
 
Further questioning, and I wanted to turn to elementary schools, 
I guess, at this point. The area that I represent is the fastest 
growing area in the city, I believe — or in the province — and 
it’s home to Arbour Creek and Willowgrove, Erindale. Dr. John 
G. Egnatoff school in Erindale is probably the largest enrolment 
of any elementary school in the province — close to 700 
students occupy that school. 

Parents are getting concerned about overcrowding. They’re 
contacting my office. I understand that the number of portables 
at John Egnatoff right now is the most that can be legally 
allowed, so there’s some concern. And Arbour Creek has been 
growing at a rapid pace, and now Willowgrove is a brand new 
area in Saskatoon. The city had anticipated selling about 200 
lots in this entire year. The latest information I received, it’s 
258 lots have been sold in Willowgrove. 
 
(16:45) 
 
So what we have here is a situation where the growth is 
outpacing the ability of the school boards or the department to 
move in building new schools. If we look at the northeast 
school for example, I’ve been working on the committee for 
three years; we’ll probably see an opening in the fall of 2006. 
Therefore it takes seven or eight years to see a school come to 
fruition. 
 
And I’m just somewhat concerned I guess about where we’re 
going to be in a few years from now as far as having schools for 
elementary children in the Silver Springs area. And I just 
wanted to see if there’s any plans in place from the department 
to address a very rapid growth in certain areas of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is a very good question — a very 
interesting question that has caused a great deal of interesting 
discussion among officials. 
 
When divisions tend to look at their capital plans, what they’d 
look at are the sustainable population for school-aged children 
in the neighbourhoods. What that tends to mean is that they will 
build a school for the average number of students over a 
30-year period in the neighbourhood. Then what they’ll do is 
add on, as the member has identified, add on portable 
classrooms to deal with the growth. 
 
There are some neighbourhoods, and particularly as we see 
urban growth, where the number of school-age children will 
challenge the model that was in place maybe 20 years ago when 
the school was first built. What we rely on is the local division 
to identify their capital needs and then we priorize them within 
the provincial context. 
 
It’s our understanding at this point that there has not been a 
change in terms of the capital plan coming forward from the 
Saskatoon division; that they have decided that their priorities 
are in fact the collegiates where they’ve identified the pressing 
need. And that is, as a result, where the funding is. 
 
If they were to change their capital plan, if they were to change 
their approach, we would weigh that out with all the other 
capital projects across the province. But I would think it’s fair 
to say from the discussion we’ve had here, with any of us who 
have some anecdotal understanding of the area, that what you 
note is likely true, that we are going to see a larger sustained 
school-age population in those areas. And so this may cause the 
Saskatoon boards to come back with a different plan. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that 
the five-year capital plan . . . that the major capital project 
request list, I guess, that the Saskatoon Public School Board has 
put forward, the Arbour Creek elementary school is on that list 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

for 2006-2007. And I guess what I’m indicating is that the 
growth may necessitate that that move up, and I anticipate 
that’ll happen with next year’s five-year capital plan. And I just 
wanted for the record to make sure that you and your officials 
are aware of it, and I can see that you are. 
 
And I just wanted to say that this issue of capital school 
construction, high schools and elementary schools, is something 
that transcends political boundaries. I think all members in 
Saskatoon, certainly the member from Saskatoon Eastview has 
had input into it and the member from Saskatoon Sutherland 
and myself. And it’s something that we’re working together on 
and we’ve received very good response from your department 
whenever asked. So I wanted to thank the minister for that. 
 
And I know a meeting will be taking place on Thursday, May 
20 and a lobby group being established; a lobby group to learn 
and to educate themselves, and also to interact with the public 
school board and to move things forward. 
 
Thank you for your answers at this time, and I’ll ask my 
colleague from Indian Head-Milestone to continue. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to thank the member for his 
questions. Indeed the department, I think, has worked out over 
many, many years a very good formula for dealing with the 
many competing capital needs across the province. And I 
certainly appreciate the kind words that the member has for the 
officials, and they’re certainly a sentiment that I share as well. 
This is a very difficult issue; there’s always big demands. 
 
I can tell you that representing a neighbourhood that I do that 
has gone through school closures that you are fortunate to be 
dealing with the other side to have the pressure of more families 
moving into the neighbourhood and seeing that revitalization. 
But these are challenges that get met on both sides. 
 
So I certainly welcome your, the member’s continued 
involvement and his polite prodding and pressure, and that we 
will continue to deal with this issue appropriately. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a couple more 
questions. Going back to your announcement last week, you 
had talked about a three phase or . . . yeah, a three phase 
approach, and I’ve been trying to add them up. I don’t know if 
I’ve ever got to three yet. 
 
You know, you’ve talked about, and I think it must be the . . . 
first of all, the commission or the task force to draw a map; the 
second group to implement the map. But I believe you 
mentioned something last week about a commission on funding 
of K to 12, to look at the funding of K to 12, which is more than 
a little ironic that we just came through the Boughen report. But 
you also . . . I believe you mentioned that last week. Could you 
expand on that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — What we have looked at is a . . . I 
announced a seven point plan to deal with a number of issues, 

but it will take effect over three phases: the three phases being 
dealing with the restructuring to deal with equity issues; 
secondly, to deal with foundation operating grant restructuring; 
and third, to deal with the question of property taxes. There are 
a number of different components that fit into it. 
 
The issue around foundation operating grant renewal is one that 
will be largely undertaken internally within the department. 
Today we operate the foundation operating grant largely as an 
equalization program to try and balance out inequities in terms 
of ability to raise money within local districts. 
 
It is my view and the view of the government that we need a 
simpler program that deals with . . . I think today it deals with 
some 17 different criteria — maybe it’s 18 or 19 today, I don’t 
know. It . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 17 different criteria to 
try and balance this out. 
 
The problem with it is it has become . . . it has lost some of its 
simplicity and transparency as it becomes a more refined 
instrument. It is certainly quite precise, but it is not always 
easily understood. And so the belief of the department and 
myself is that what we should look for is a somewhat simpler 
model that puts more emphasis on per pupil grants, per student 
grants, still taking into account that we’re always going to need 
to have some transportation factor, some sparsity factor built in 
to deal with unique circumstances, but to narrow down those 17 
to some smaller number. 
 
And really the thinking behind it is that it should be the 
province’s objective, once we have the equity issue largely 
rebalanced, to start putting money into the system in a way that 
reflects money per student. So that whether that student is in 
east end Saskatchewan or in south end Saskatchewan that there 
is a relatively uniform amount of money that’s attached. 
 
Today the province grants about $3,000 on average to a student. 
In some districts that means nothing; in one division that means 
$12,000 per student. That’s too big a spread and what it means 
is it’s very hard for ratepayers to understand how much money 
is going out of the provincial treasury to fund these. It seems to 
me that if we attach a certain amount of money per student it’s 
easier to understand that as that student moves from one school 
to another, the money travels with him. 
 
So it will hopefully deal with a simpler approach. It’s going to 
take us some time to work through the details of it because 
we’ll want to make sure that the model doesn’t cause more 
problems than it attempts to fix. And that’s why this will 
happen as a second phase following on the restructuring. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So the commission will be dealing more 
with the operating grant. But you did mention at the very end of 
your seven points or whatever it was, property tax. What are 
you doing about property tax? Are you setting up another 
commission like the Boughen? What are you doing about 
property tax because this is how the whole discussion started 
seven years ago? 
 
You’ve done a very good job of explaining everything else that 
you’re doing but you haven’t said a word about property tax. 
What are you doing about property tax? 
 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Once the restructuring has occurred, it 
will be much easier to then deal with targeted reduction of 
property tax. As I indicated earlier, over the last five years $100 
million has gone into the system — 100 million additional 
taxpayers’ dollars out of the provincial treasury — and has not 
had a discernible impact on the property taxation level. 
 
So there are a number of things that need to happen. One is that 
we need to try to bring down the inflation rate within the 
districts. We need to deal with the better affordability model for 
education, for taxpayers. 
 
We do need to have, I think, more debate about where it is that 
that balance gets struck between what should be funded by 
income or sales tax or resource royalties, versus what should be 
paid for by property taxes. And this is a debate that has divided 
the province and frankly that I do not see an emerging 
consensus on. 
 
There are a number of ways we could deal with this issue. 
We’ve identified those in the past — whether that’s expanding 
the PST (provincial sales tax) to immediately get $56 million 
which would mean a 10 per cent reduction in property tax. We 
could do it through expanded income tax, although that’s the 
opposite direction that we’ve taken in just having reduced it 
again in January. 
 
There are a number of options available. It’s going to have to 
ultimately come down to where the population wants us to 
move. 
 
One of the issues that I did announce though is that as new 
money comes on, and if we can get a resolve and when we get a 
resolve to this ongoing equalization problem, when we get the 
same deal for Saskatchewan that Atlantic Canada has on their 
oil revenue, that we will share 30 per cent of that back to deal 
with property tax relief. 
 
But let me also offer this caution. And that is that when Mr. 
Boughen, Commissioner Boughen, presented his report he 
suggested that in order for us to do that, that we should freeze 
the access of school divisions and municipalities to the property 
tax base for a number of years. In his case he recommended 
three years that we freeze their access. 
 
This would significantly change the relationship that we have 
with municipalities, to actually drive in tax reform in that 
regard, and would require us as a legislature to step in and 
provide some mechanism for the minister to sign off on 
property tax increases. We do not have that authority, that legal 
framework, today and indeed, I’m not sure and I have not heard 
from the School Board Association or municipal leaders any 
real appetite for the provincial government and the minister to 
have that authority to set mill rates. So this would be a 
significant change if we were to move to that. 
 
The problem is as we add more money in, the system simply 
expands; we need to figure out a way to deal with that so that 
money actually goes to relief. Whether that is a different format 
— we’d be going back to a rebate — whether that has us using, 
as Mr. Boughen suggests, and putting a cap on or a sign-off, a 
ministerial sign-off, we’re still a long ways off from having that 
resolved. 

What we are prepared to say is that as new money comes in 
from the ongoing equalization relief that we expect Ottawa will 
agree to, that we’re prepared to make 30 per cent of that 
available directly for property tax relief. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move that the 
committee report progress on the estimates for the Department 
of Learning. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee report progress on the estimates for the 
Department of Learning. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. It now being . . . Oh, and the 
member would like to thank the officials. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes, I would like to 
thank the officials for the time spent here today. I think we will 
have many more questions after today and look forward to the 
next couple of one and a half hour sessions that we have 
coming up. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I too would like to thank the officials. 
Obviously when we deal with major policy areas there is 
always some good debate back and forth, but it really does 
come down to the quality of the advice that we get from the 
officials in terms of the technical answers that we can give. So I 
do too want to thank them for their time today. 
 
The Chair: — It now being exactly 5 p.m., this House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1131 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1131 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1131 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1131 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Emergency Medical Services Week 2004 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1131 
 Opening of New Personal Care Home 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1132 
 Constitution Day in Norway 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1132 
 Estevan Royal Purple Celebrates 60th Anniversary 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1132 
 Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1132 
 High-Speed Internet Access in Rural Saskatchewan 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1133 
 Award-Winning Beer 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1133 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Times for Treatment of Cancer 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1133 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1134 
 Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company Litigation 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1135 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1135 
 Role of Crown Management Board President 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1136 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1136 
 St. Brieux Policing Costs 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1137 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1137 
 Funding for Wide Open Future Campaign 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1137 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1138 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 56 — The Public Health Amendment Act, 2004 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1138 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1138 
 
 



 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Comments Made During Debate 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1138 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1139 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1139 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 51 — The Limitations Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1139 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
 Bill No. 52 — The Limitations Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Limitations Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
 Bill No. 41 — The Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
 Bill No. 13 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Hart ................................................................................................................................................................................1144, 1149 
 Bill No. 15 — The Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation Act 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1144 
 Bill No. 16 — The Geographic Names Board Amendment Act, 2004 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1145 
 Bill No. 2 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1145 
 Bill No. 7 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1147 
 Bill No. 8 — The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1147 
 Bill No. 9 — The Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1148 
 Bill No. 11 — The Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training Amendment Act, 2004 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1149 
 Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1150 
 Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1150 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1151 
  McMorris.......................................................................................................................................................................1152, 1163 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1161 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




