















































Hansard: June 11, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 55A  FRIDAY, JUNE 11, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1545 
 June 11, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a continuation of 
the petitions I have presented to the House over the last several 
weeks concerning health care opportunities in the community of 
Climax, I present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the 
communities of Frontier, Climax, Bracken, and Val Marie. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
another petition to save the Luseland and Dodsland ambulance 
services. And, Mr. Speaker, the constituents are concerned 
because these ambulances provide life-saving services for 
residents in those areas. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Dodsland, Plenty, and Stranraer. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about 
the beer discount structure, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to reinstate bulk beer discount 
structure cancelled in the recent provincial budget. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan, Midale, 
Arcola, Oxbow, Redvers, Lampman, Regina, Rosetown, 

Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
calling for local representation of the Davidson Health Care 
Centre to the Heartland Health Region Board, signed by many 
citizens at the meeting that was held on Tuesday. I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the residents of 
Davidson and area have local representation on the 
Heartland Health Region Board and further, that the 
Minister of Health halt the decision to close 10 long-term 
care beds and cut staff until all interested parties are fully 
consulted and their input received by the government 
committee. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by citizens from Davidson and Bladworth and Girvin 
and Craik, and many of the surrounding communities around 
there. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition from constituents opposed to the closure of 
the Radisson School. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Radisson School fall 
under the two-year moratorium on school closures, and 
allow the community and school division the opportunity 
to consult on alternatives to the closing of the Radisson 
School. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Radisson and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise in the 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of residents of west 
central Saskatchewan concerned with the loss of ambulance 
service in their area. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Eatonia ambulance 
services are not discontinued. 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I see from the names on the petition that this 
petition is signed by the best farmers in the province from the 
good town of Eatonia. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received, new 
petitions: 

 
First petition for a rebate program for education tax and 
rural property, sessional paper 202; 
 
A petition concerning Eatonia ambulance services, 
sessional paper 203; 
 
A petition concerning equitable treatment for 
Saskatchewan within the equalization program, sessional 
paper 204; 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 107 and 182. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 60 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many acute care hospital 
beds were in operation on March 31, 2004 in the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region? 
 
And also to the minister on Health: how many radiation 
machines for treating cancer patients are in operation in 
the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region; how old are they; 
how many hours do they operate per week; and how often 
is maintenance required and scheduled? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 60 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: in 2004 were there any increase 
or decrease in administration personnel at the Heartland 
Health Region; if so, what was the change? 

 
And also a similar question for 2003. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are a number of 
visitors here today and they’re going to be formally introduced 
by those MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 

I, though, would like to take the opportunity to introduce a 
familiar face to this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, joining us behind 
the bar is the former member for Kindersley, Bill Boyd. And I 
know members will want to welcome Bill back. We certainly 
do. 
 
He’s agreed to Chair a campaign for a certain political party 
whose fortunes are looking better and better each day, I think, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we just want to encourage all members to join with me in 
welcoming Bill back to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too, 
on behalf of the government, want to welcome Mr. Boyd to the 
Assembly. We know that during the time that he spent here, he 
was a very colourful member in many of the speeches that he 
provided and a very able and capable Agriculture minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Critic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Or critic, sorry. I should have said, Mr. 
Speaker, a wannabe minister. 
 
But he was a very capable and able critic; did a wonderful job, 
Mr. Speaker, I think, in making sure that the work of the 
Saskatchewan Party moved forward at a time when the 
Conservative government in this province was on the brink of 
expiring. And Mr. Boyd did a wonderful job, I think, in 
rebuilding that, probably to the extent that, to some degree, we 
worry about it from day to day, Mr. Boyd. 
 
So welcome to the Assembly. And hopefully, you got your crop 
in, in your part of the world. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, 
two gentlemen from the Southwest — Mr. Al Kildaw, mayor of 
Herbert and Mr. Bruno Miller, reeve of the RM (rural 
municipality) of Excelsior. 
 
These two gentlemen are here this morning representing the 
delegation from the Cypress Health Region concerned with 
closure of the Herbert hospital and the downsizing of the 
long-term care facility in that community that serves so much of 
the Southwest. 
 
I hope that all members will welcome these two gentlemen here 
this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 47 grade 6, 7, and 8 students from North Park 
Wilson School in Saskatoon Meewasin — the little school with 
a big heart. 
 
With the students are Mr. Steel, a grade 7 and 8 teacher; Mr. 
Wihak, a grade 6 and 7 teacher and vice-principal; parents, Mr. 
Snook, Mr. and Mrs. Olbort, Mrs. Harder; and Mrs. Yelland, a 
teacher associate. 
 
As I will be listening attentively to the members opposite in the 
Assembly today, I unfortunately will not be able to meet with 
the students and they will be spared my remarks on 
parliamentary democracy. Nonetheless I hope they enjoy their 
visit to the Legislative Building and I hope all members 
welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce to 
you and through you to the legislature, a group of people that 
travelled up from Davidson-Kenaston area today to watch the 
proceedings. They can give a little wave as I call their name. 
Mayor Jim Cross from the town of Davidson; deputy reeve 
from the RM of Willner, Alf Richardson. And then 
accompanying them is Amber Greene, Val Krpan, Gloria Cool, 
Janna Low, and Dave Nykiforuk. And also from the town of 
Kenaston, Dennis and Marge Karpan. 
 
I want to welcome them here today to their legislature, and I 
hope they enjoy the proceedings that are taking place. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for me 
today to be able to stand and introduce to you and through you 
to all the members of this Assembly, a rather large contingent 
of constituents from Cypress Hills and maybe even a few from 
Wood River. It depends on exactly what side of the line they 
live on. But these roughly 50 people got on a bus this morning 
at about 5 or 5:30 and drove to Regina in the rain to be here to 
witness the debate today on the opposition’s motion about 
public hearings on the closure or the downsizing of service in 
health communities . . . or health facilities in their community. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the fact that they would get on a bus 
that early and come here to participate as observers in this 
debate shows how serious they are about their concerns for their 
community. 
 
I would like all members in this House to welcome them 
enthusiastically. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like 
to introduce a young lady that is seated in your gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Amber Klatt is working as a constituency assistant 
in my Estevan office for the summer. Amber has taken two 
years of political studies at the University of Saskatchewan, and 
this fall she will be attending Renaissance College at the 
University of New Brunswick at Fredericton studying for her 
bachelor of philosophy in leadership and joint majoring in 
political science. 
 
Amber, if I could just ask you to stand so people can see where 
you are. And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me 
in welcoming Amber to her Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and, through you, to all members a friend of 
mine seated in the west gallery: Gunnar Passmore, who’s a 
sheet metal workers’ representative and an advocate for all 
people of Saskatchewan in his job of course for working people, 
who’s a social activist, sometimes golfer, and a good friend of 
mine. 
 
I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming Gunnar 
Passmore to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Young Entrepreneurs Silver Spade Awards in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 
pleasure of attending the Young Entrepreneurs Silver Spade 
Awards gala in Saskatoon. Also in attendance were the 
members from Saskatoon Silver Springs, Saskatoon Eastview, 
Saskatoon Massey Place, and Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Silver Spade Awards gala is an event from the 
Saskatchewan Young Professionals and Entrepreneurs, an 
organization of ambitious, dedicated, and committed young 
leaders who are excited about Saskatchewan as a place to live, 
work, and have fun. 
 
The evening was filled with youthful exuberance and 
excitement which blended well with the entrepreneurial 
ambition and enthusiasm. I had the privilege of sitting with a 
family that included one of the nominees, Michael Swedja, 
from Intec Controls. His spouse, parents, and siblings were also 
part of our group, and the pride at that table on Michael’s behalf 
was overwhelming. 
 
Three awards were handed out last night, Mr. Speaker. The 
Young Professional of the Year Award went to Trina Heal of 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

Deloitte. The Young Entrepreneur of the Year Award went to 
Brian Hnatiw of Ecol Laser, and Mentor of the Year Award 
went to Kent Smith Windsor of the Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce, who is likely no stranger to most of the people in 
this House and is certainly not someone that’s regarded as a 
young entrepreneur because he’s older than most of us. But he 
has given an incredible amount of hard work and dedication to 
young businesses that have started up, and I was pleased to see 
that he was recognized. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it was possible the future of Saskatchewan 
could be condensed in a group of people that would illustrate 
just how promising our future can be, it was in that room last 
night in Saskatoon. 
 
I ask all members of the House to recognize the hard work and 
commitment that those nominees and participants went through. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Saskatchewan Air Show 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Air Show will once again take flight Sunday at 
15 Wing in Moose Jaw. And as they are every year, the 
Snowbirds will be the stars of the show. 
 
The air show began in 1971 as a place for the Snowbirds to 
show off their aerobatic skills. Unfortunately the show took a 
two-year hiatus due to security and insurance issues following 
the events of September 11, 2001, but they’re back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the regular acts will return this year 
including the CF-18 Hornet and F-15 Strike Eagle. There will 
also be performances by water bombers and the SkyHawks, 
Canada’s parachute team. Throughout the day over 40 aircraft 
will be on display, including two American F-16s. And this 
year the Snowbirds will close out the show with a new act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Snowbirds have been thrilling audiences since 
1970, and in that time it’s estimated they have performed for 
over 100 million people. Based at 15 Wing, the team performs 
approximately 70 shows a year at over 50 locations around 
North America and the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge all the good folks involved with 
the Saskatchewan Air Show. I’m confident that the Snowbirds 
will once again be the star act in our Saskatchewan Air Show, a 
true Saskatchewan institution. And, Mr. Speaker, the sun will 
be shining. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Tim Hortons Children’s Foundation Camp Day 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Tim 

Hortons Children’s Foundation Camp Day was held on 
Wednesday, June 9, and I had the pleasure of working a shift at 
Tim Hortons in Estevan. Sharing my shift were SUN 102.3 
radio personalities, Carrie Senchuk and Craig Picton, as well CJ 
1280’s morning man, Cal Gratton. And we were kept quite busy 
making and serving coffee and cleaning tables. And I might 
add, Mr. Speaker, that these folks were just awesome to work 
alongside. 
 
All money from coffee sales on this day is designated to send 
less fortunate kids to camp. These camps are located throughout 
Canada and the United States. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 
to join me in congratulating Tim Hortons; the franchise owners, 
Dennis and Joanne Willows; and the staff for their generosity 
which raised over $1,400 to send kids to camp. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Regina Artists Receive National Recognition 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, before I begin with my member 
statement today I’d like to send special wishes to my 
father-in-law, Cliff Morin, who is ill and has the first 
opportunity to see me at work in the legislature. 
 
It gives me great pleasure today to recognize two Saskatchewan 
artists who have recently made a name for themselves on the 
national stage. Bill Pelletier and Willi Daechert are two Regina 
painters whose work was featured in the month-long exhibition 
at the National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa. The exhibition, 
called Mindscapes, features works of art by people affected by 
mental illness. 
 
The exhibition was organized in part by the Canadian Mental 
Health Association. I want to take this opportunity to 
acknowledge one of the Regina branch’s board members, Chris 
Kelly, who encouraged these two artists to enter their work. Mr. 
Speaker, mental illness, art, and creativity have shared a close 
relationship since brush first met canvas. 
 
The work of Mr. Daechert and Mr. Pelletier reminds us of how 
art can cross boundaries and create understanding between 
people. The works they have created — Mr. Pelletier’s is 
entitled Electric Skeleton, and Mr. Daechert’s is called Trapped 
— are powerful examples of the strength of the human spirit. 
They also serve as valuable reminders of the danger of 
assumptions and the importance of recognizing the contribution 
every person makes to society. 
 
These two works are on display this week at the Regina branch 
of the Canadian Mental Health Association on Albert Street. 
 
I ask everyone to join me in congratulating Willi Daechert and 
Bill Pelletier on their achievement and in wishing them every 
success in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

University of Regina Spring Convocation 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the 
honour of joining people from across the province and across 
the world at the 30th spring convocation of the University of 
Regina earlier this week. Some 1,601 students convocated from 
the university this spring, and I might add 65 per cent of the 
graduates were women. 
 
The university honoured a princess, a scholar, a poet and a 
francophone champion each with an honorary Doctor of Laws 
degree. Her Royal Highness, the Princess Royal was awarded 
the degree to recognize her charity work with children from 
around the world. 
 
Four exceptional professionals were also honoured at the 
convocation ceremony. Jeanne Shami, an English professor, 
and Peter Leavitt, an aquatic ecology researcher, both received 
an Excellence in Research Award from the university’s alumni 
association. Jeffrey Pfiefer, a psychology professor, received 
the Excellence in Undergraduate Teaching Award. And Mary 
Cronin received an Excellence in Public Service Award for her 
work with child literacy programs. 
 
I’d also like to recognize one special student, Raegan 
Bernhardt, an engineering student who won the university 
medal for the third consecutive year with a grade average of a 
whopping 96 per cent. 
 
I would like to congratulate all University of Regina graduates 
on their convocation and commend them for their hard work, 
study, and dedication to pursuing higher education. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Students Awarded Certificate of Merit 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
group of very determined grade 7 and 8 students at Prince 
Arthur Elementary School in Moose Jaw have helped make 
Saskatchewan a healthier place to live. Recently the grade 7 and 
8 students of Ms. Lucie Delgarno and Mr. Dave Osberg were 
awarded their certificate of merit from the Canadian Medical 
Association and the Saskatchewan Medical Association for 
their role in the smoke-free campaign that resulted municipal 
non-smoking bylaws in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people had a role in passing this bylaw, but 
the teachers and students of Prince Arthur Elementary School 
were at the heart of this achievement. Last fall, the grade 7 and 
8 students of Ms. Delgarno and Mr. Osberg visited the mayor of 
Moose Jaw to ask if he could make all indoor places smoke 
free. They gathered 3,600 signatures, and with the help of the 
People for a Smoke-Free Moose Jaw, they presented a petition 
to city hall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the effort and commitment of these students 
resulted in a referendum during the fall election that proposed a 
ban on all smoking in public places. On October 22, 2003, the 

referendum passed with a 2:1 margin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the actions of these students show that a small 
group of very committed people can make a positive difference. 
I’m sure my colleagues will join me in congratulating these 
grade 7 and 8 students at Prince Arthur for their ongoing 
accomplishment and acknowledging their commitment to 
making Moose Jaw a healthier community for everyone. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Postmaster Celebrates 25th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to talk about a remarkable life service by Mrs. Lee Cole 
to the Canada Post office at Loreburn. In June the community 
of Loreburn is coming out to congratulate Mrs. Cole on 25 
years of service as postmaster in Loreburn. In fact, Mrs. Cole 
states her actual 25th anniversary with Canada Post was back in 
December 19, 2003, when 25 years before, in 1978, she began 
to fill a position at the post office. Later on, in July 4, ’79, the 
post office position was given to her full-time and was named 
postmaster. 
 
Mrs. Cole states that she took the job as a way to bring in 
off-farm income to help the family farm, much the same way as 
it is often in the case today. Indeed the Cole family has deep 
roots in the Loreburn area, with her husband’s grandparents 
homesteading in the area a century ago — an event that was 
celebrated last August in Loreburn. And I’ll add that Mrs. Cole 
also has deep roots in Bladworth, where she was born and 
raised. 
 
Mrs. Cole indicated that she is retiring from the post office 
within the next five years and expressed some worry that the 
town post office may close at that time. The post office is a 
central place of gathering information and staying connected 
with others in the community. “I hope that the post office 
doesn’t close when I retire,” states Mrs. Cole. 
 
I would ask that all members join me in congratulating Mrs. 
Lee Cole on a quarter century of service to Canada Post and the 
people of Loreburn. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Public Consultation on Health Facilities 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today this 
legislature will vote on a Saskatchewan Party motion. It’s a 
pretty reasonable motion, Mr. Speaker. It calls for an all-party 
committee to hold public hearings in every community that is to 
be affected by health care closures as a result of the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government’s budget. 
 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

People from many of these communities have travelled here 
today from places like Davidson and Climax and Herbert; and 
there are obviously other communities affected, including Foam 
Lake and many others across our province. They’re asking 
MLAs to come to their communities and meet with the people 
in those communities to discuss closures, perhaps to propose 
options, before these closures take place. 
 
I wonder if the Premier will commit today to support that 
motion, to support the Saskatchewan Party motion and travel to 
these communities, consult with them directly before the 
closures occur. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan have 
been working and looking at health issues across the province 
for quite a number of years. We’ve had some very focused 
discussions on those with Mr. Fyke coming to our province and 
then working and building on the Action Plan for Saskatchewan 
Health Care. 
 
What happened in all of that process is we had to look at how 
do you provide a balance between access to communities right 
across the province with the highest, most expensive technical 
kind of care that happens in our tertiary care hospitals. And this 
is a challenge for a province like Saskatchewan. 
 
What we have done on a consistent basis for the last number of 
years is provide more and more dollars into health care. This 
year, it’s $173 million more, giving us about $2.7 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes there are choices that have to be made 
across the province. There will continue to be discussions 
through the regional health authorities around how we make 
decisions in communities. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
continue to make changes. We’re going to continue to work and 
make a better health care system for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the minister is 
right; choices do have to be made, most assuredly. But it seems 
reasonable to think that those choices could be improved, the 
decisions could be better, with the input of communities that 
will be affected by these changes. 
 
That minister will know, Mr. Speaker, that many communities 
who thought they might be on this list, that was mercifully 
shorter than what everyone anticipated, but communities who 
. . . some communities who are on this list and came to this 
Legislative Assembly actually were proposing alternatives. 
They were proposing specific alternatives to enable them to 
continue to provide the health care services they were providing 
— including raising money; including taking over, I think, the 
operation of some facilities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we’re asking for here, what the 
community’s asking for, is very reasonable. They’re asking for 

MLAs, their elected representatives, to travel to their 
communities and to consult with them directly before these 
closures take place. 
 
Yes or no — will the minister agree that that is a reasonable 
request and will he support our resolution later this day? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that 
we’ve been able to provide access across this province is 
because of the ingenuity of the people who are working within 
the health care system, working within local municipalities, 
villages, towns because everybody looks at, how can we 
provide this service in our area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regional health authorities and their 
management have been meeting with many communities across 
the province as they try to sort out how to use the resources they 
have to provide the health care that’s necessary. I know that 
many of the MLAs who are in this Assembly have also been 
meeting with these communities to try to understand how those 
things work. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the place where 
this kind of discussion should take place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with our regional 
health authorities as they provide the health care across the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these communities know that there 
is a commitment on the part of their MLAs to be heard and to 
deal with this issue. What they don’t know is whether or not 
there’s a commitment from this NDP government to listen to 
their concerns and their potential alternatives on this issue. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, yesterday we saw the government 
trivialize the concerns of rural Saskatchewan. The Premier 
wouldn’t talk to them. The minister responsible threatened 
them. The NDP staffers mocked them, Mr. Speaker, mocked 
them because the staffers didn’t feel their crowd was sufficient 
enough. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has an opportunity to set a 
different tone today, a different tone than what was, I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, a fairly arrogant tone yesterday. He has a 
chance to do better than that on behalf of these communities 
concerned about bed closures. And he can do that by asking his 
MLAs to support our resolution so that their elected 
representatives and, more importantly, a committee 
representing their government, can travel to each of these 
communities before the closures take place. Will the Premier 
support that resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t met with groups 
from all of the communities that have been affected, but I have 
met with many of them and I know that the officials and boards 
from the regional health authorities have gone to public 
meetings in many communities. And I know that people are 
working hard to try to figure out how to provide services as we 
move forward. 
 
One of the challenges, Mr. Speaker, is that many of these 
services in some of these communities are not being used to 
their fullest extent, and we need to get the resources to the 
places where people require those services. So, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s trying to balance the requirements for service in a particular 
area with the actual resources that we have. That’s an ongoing 
process. 
 
There will continue to be change. We’ve had change in our 
health care system for 50 years; I think for the next 50 years 
that’s going to be there. We’ll do it with the officials and with 
the senior people and the doctors and staff who are working on 
this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Closure of Herbert Hospital 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
After 12 years of NDP health care mismanagement, the Premier 
campaigned during last fall’s election on a promise to rebuild 
the NDP’s crumbling health care system. Nowhere in the NDP 
platform did the Premier mention his plan to cut health services 
and close hospitals. But that’s exactly what the Premier did as 
soon as the election was over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are representatives in the legislature today 
from the Herbert area. Will the Premier explain to the people of 
Herbert and southwest Saskatchewan why he broke his election 
promises and slammed the door on the Herbert hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what has been done by this 
government to preserve health care and build health care across 
the province has been very open, very direct. And also we have 
been improving it. Mr. Speaker, in our action plan of December 
2001 we set out very clearly the fact that there would have to be 
changes in communities. And if you read on page 35 of that 
document you can see it says: 
 

Over time, communities may find it necessary to look at 
other options due to factors such as: 
- difficulties in retaining a minimum number of physicians 

and nurses; 
- a shrinking population; 
- ability of other nearby hospitals to admit more patients; 
- disruptions in providing 24/7 services due to lapses in 

staffing, particularly during the summer or holiday 
week-ends; 

- declining levels of service volumes; or 

- ability to better meet local needs through other kinds of 
service delivery. 

 
Mr. Speaker, you look at all of these changes, they will fit into 
these categories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister would read on in 
that report he would run into a chapter that talks about 
consulting with communities before any such changes were 
made. And he knows it very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Premier never mentioned during the election 
campaign that he planned to close the Herbert hospital and 
reduce the number of acute care beds in Swift Current as well. 
No wonder nobody in the town of Herbert or the Herbert area 
trusts a single word this Premier says. 
 
Now the Premier is asking health regions to come up with 
another $20 million in cuts and that would mean more 
long-term care beds closed, more seniors kicked out on the 
street courtesy of a Premier that nobody in Saskatchewan can 
trust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health has been making excuses 
for the Premier’s actions for months. Will the Premier get out of 
his seat and explain to the people of Herbert and area why they 
should trust him after he broke his word and slammed the door 
on the Herbert hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that my colleagues, 
and I know that I listen very carefully in all the communities 
that I go to visit across the province and when they come here 
to visit with delegations, because we are concerned about the 
care that’s provided in some of the areas of the province where 
the population is sparse. 
 
But we also, Mr. Speaker, listen very carefully when they talk 
to us about making sure we spend their resources as carefully as 
possible. So, Mr. Speaker, in this budget we’ve increased the 
amount for health by $173 million so that now our health 
budget is 44 per cent of all the dollars that we spend on service 
in our provincial budget. And, Mr. Speaker, we end up having 
to make some hard choices but we also are very concerned that 
people will have access to care, both in their local areas but also 
the very expensive care that’s required in the cities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Closure of Long-Term Care Beds in Davidson 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. We all know last fall the Premier went around the 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

province promising better health care, but nowhere in his NDP 
platform did he mention a plan to close hospitals, to cut jobs, to 
cut long-term care beds. But right after the election that’s 
exactly what he did. 
 
Well today there’s a number of people up here in the gallery 
from the Davidson area to get an explanation of that. Yesterday 
we all know the Premier didn’t go out and address the residents 
out there on the steps, but I’m hoping today — today — that he 
will explain to the people from the Davidson area why he’s 
cutting 10 long-term care beds in Davidson, why he’s cutting 
jobs, and why he’s creating a waiting list in the town of 
Davidson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has asked 
questions about this issue for quite a number of days now and 
practically, one of the discussions that happened with the 
Davidson facility — and the mayor himself confirmed this in 
the newspaper a few weeks ago — was that when the new 
wings were built on the Davidson hospital, there was a 
recognition that eventually the old wing, which was not up to 
standards, would be closed and that it would proceed in an 
orderly fashion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that discussion happened many years ago 
and it’s continuing now. That orderly closure of that particular 
wing is going ahead. And, Mr. Speaker, it will be done in a way 
that makes sure that the present residents are treated well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people at Davidson, the 
senior citizens of Davidson and area — in fact everyone in this 
province — is quickly finding out that you just can’t trust this 
Premier or this NDP government. You can’t trust the Premier 
on keeping his election promises. You can’t trust the Premier 
when he says he won’t kick seniors out of their beds. And you 
definitely can’t trust this Premier or his NDP government when 
it comes to health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s habit of saying one thing and doing 
another means the people at Davidson will have fewer 
long-term care beds, and sick senior citizens who currently 
occupy these beds may be out on the street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain to those seniors why they 
should trust his word on anything? Will he at least explain to 
the people in the gallery why should they trust his word? Will 
he at least support the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just caution members not to be 
involving members of the gallery in their statements. The 
Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Melfort, 
who is the opposition party critic for Health, was asked by a 
reporter on April 30, “Is the Sask Party categorically opposed to 
any closures or conversions?” He said: 
 

No, we haven’t said that; we said that we would look at all 
of these issues on their merits, that we would look at the 
statistics. If there are incidents and cases where it can be 
clearly identified that the facility is not being utilized, that 
there are no waiting lists, indeed that there are significant 
vacancies of use, then we think that those decisions might 
be the right decisions and the community should be 
involved in understanding that it is the right decision. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we are going forward, providing information to 
communities, working with the regional health authorities, and 
making sure that we use our health dollars to the best effect 
possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Emergency Room Service at the Border Health Centre 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, my question too is for the 
Premier. Last week I introduced to the Premier and his NDP 
government two young people from southwest Saskatchewan 
whose lives may have been saved because of timely emergency 
medical attention they received at the Border Health Centre in 
Climax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the same health centre where this Premier 
and his NDP government have decided to cut back hours of 
emergency service. 
 
A group of concerned citizens from Climax and the surrounding 
area are in the gallery today, Mr. Speaker. They’ve come to let 
the Premier know that they don’t support his NDP 
government’s decision to cut health services to their families 
and their communities. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain to 
these families from southwest Saskatchewan why his NDP 
government doesn’t think they deserve to have access to timely 
emergency health services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the regional health 
authorities, working with the staff throughout their regions, and 
in this case the Cypress Health Region, have been looking at 
how to provide care in some of the areas that are clearly on the 
edges of our province. And, Mr. Speaker, they work hard to 
make sure that they can provide some of the emergency care 
that’s necessary and also balance it with some of the access to 
other services. 
 
This is a challenge as the communities change, as the ability to 
get staff changes. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the solutions 
will have to come working with the local doctors and with the 
local people there and working with Cypress Health Region. I 
know that they are working on this. I know that the community 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

is working on this. 
 
I appreciate the fact that they come here. I know when a group 
came last time I was very pleased to meet with them. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll continue to do that, but we have to do it in a 
orderly way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, just a few moments ago the 
Minister of Health referred to consulting with communities. I 
assume that that would mean in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Climax has a doctor. They have 
nurses. What we’re talking about is cutbacks in hours of 
service. Mr. Speaker, the Premier may be aware that 
communities like Climax and Frontier are isolated places a long 
way from major health centres, even like Swift Current or 
Regina or Saskatoon. The people of those communities rely on 
quick access to emergency services provided by the doctor and 
the nurses right at the Border Health Centre today. 
 
And these people, the people in the gallery, took the Premier at 
his word when he said during the last provincial election that he 
would strengthen health services. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Climax found out what thousands of families in 
Saskatchewan are finding out for themselves — that you can’t 
trust anything this NDP government says. 
 
Will the Premier stop hiding behind his Minister of Health and 
explain directly to the citizens of Climax, Frontier, and 
surrounding area why his NDP government thinks their 
communities deserve to have their already minimal health 
services cut even further? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the language that the 
member used doesn’t assist in getting this problem solved. 
 
What has to happen, Mr. Speaker, is that the people who are 
organizing the health care for the Cypress Health Region, or for 
any other health region in the province, have to continue to 
work with the doctors, with the nurses, with the other people in 
the community, with the mayors and the RM councillors and 
other people to sort out what can work best in their particular 
community. And, Mr. Speaker, it depends on the statistics, as 
the member from Melfort says. It depends on the usage; it 
depends on what kinds of things are there to make sure that 
we’re using our health dollars to the best purpose possible. 
 
The members opposite, including the member who has just 
raised the question, talk about the very expensive care that we 
need in the cities and for some situations, but they also need to 
recognize that the costs are shared right across the whole 
system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

Métis Nation of Saskatchewan Elections 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in 2001 there was a huge 
problem with the Métis election. In fact in committee just a few 
days ago, one of the minister’s officials called the election a 
disaster. 
 
Over the last few months I have heard from many Métis people 
who were worried that it could happen again. On March 9 I 
wrote a letter to the minister raising these concerns, and the 
minister wrote back saying that the federal and provincial 
government had provided $100,000 to ensure a fair Métis 
election in 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, the Métis elections were held on 
May 26 and the results are still being disputed. Yesterday one 
candidate was declared president, and a few hours later another 
candidate was declared elected. 
 
Métis people deserve to have an election process they can trust. 
What is the minister doing to address the problems in the Métis 
election? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The member raises, I think, a very legitimate concern, and the 
hon. member and myself have had a number of discussions on 
this very issue. 
 
We have, as of this morning, still received word from the chief 
electoral officer from the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan that the 
official results still see Mr. Doucette as the president. There’s 
an appeal process that clearly is allowed through the bylaws of 
the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. I suspect there will be a 
number of challenges yet over the next period of time, but as it 
stands now, currently Mr. Doucette is still recognized officially 
as the newly elected president of the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Repairs to Diefenbaker Bridge 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this 
week we had the opportunity again to travel to the great city of 
Prince Albert and actually view the Diefenbaker bridge, which 
is currently under repair — no thanks to the government, Mr. 
Speaker. The taxpayers of the city of Prince Albert are picking 
up the tab for repairing that bridge even though there is a 
longstanding agreement signed between Tommy Douglas, then 
premier, and the people of Prince Albert to share the costs of 
maintaining that bridge. 
 
(10:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mayor and the Saskatchewan Party is . . . 
we’re still hopeful that the Premier will do the right thing and 
keep that promise, keep that agreement. And I understand that 
officials from the city of P.A. (Prince Albert), mayor and 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

council, will be requesting a meeting with the government 
officials — maybe even the MLA who’s chirping from his seat 
— to further deal with this issue, to ask again for the 
government to keep its end of the bargain. 
 
Yes or no — will the Premier agree to meet with the mayor of 
Prince Albert when that meeting is requested? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. Well on this 
issue, as I’ve indicated before a number of times, we’ve had a 
very good working relationship with the city of Prince Albert. 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s evidenced by the fact that through the 
Prairie Grain Roads Program, Mr. Speaker, we accessed some 
$693,000 — a significant portion of the cost — and directed it 
already to the construction, to the repair of the road across the 
bridge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, I have also indicated in every response — 
both inside the House and outside of the House — that the 
dialogue continues with the city. I want to, as well, 
acknowledge the assistance provided in those discussions by the 
MLAs from that area, Mr. Speaker, who have also assisted in 
the communication, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am confident, as I’ve said before, that we will 
find resolution in working in partnership with the city of Prince 
Albert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Public Consultation on Health Facilities 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the minister is 
acknowledging the work of the MLA for P.A. Northcote 
because not very many people I’ve talked to in P.A. over the 
last number of weeks are acknowledging the work that that 
member is doing on this issue. 
 
I didn’t hear the yes-or-no answer to the question. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s indicative, frankly, it’s indicative of what is 
wrong with this government. This Premier had no problem in 
travelling to these . . . to the communities that we’re talking 
about today to make promises in the last election campaign. He 
had no problem travelling to SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities) to make them a promise, going to 
communities to promise to keep facilities open in terms of 
health care, to improve health care. He had no problem telling 
people that he would continue to cut taxes. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we can’t get him up out of his chair to 
explain why these promises are broken. How come, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier was willing to go across the province and 
say what he would do, and now that he’s broken those 
promises, he won’t get out of his feet and defend his record and 
support our motion to go to these communities and meet on this 
important issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had an illustration 
again here today of how the opposition has much more interest 
in partisan politics than finding solutions to the problem and 
issues that face the communities and the people of 
Saskatchewan. What we hear is an ongoing partisan attack. And 
fair enough — I guess that’s how they choose to do opposition. 
 
On the question, Mr. Speaker, which we’ve been debating this 
morning on health care. When we laid out our action plan we 
set before the people of Saskatchewan a very consistent and 
clear plan for the direction for health care in the future. That 
plan indicated there would be changes, yes, changes even in 
some local facilities. 
 
But what the opposition leader today does not want to mention 
in this House is what this government has been about in this 
very session, where we have announced for the people of Swift 
Current, by the way, other communities in the province, new 
diagnostic equipment in CT (computerized tomography) scans; 
where we have announced to the people of southern 
Saskatchewan a new MRI (magnetic resonance imaging); 
where, Mr. Speaker, we have put in place $173 million — new 
dollars — for the provision of health care for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. We’re following that plan and 
we’re building quality health care for the people of 
Saskatchewan everywhere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier characterizes the questions today as partisan. That’s 
what he said — partisan politics. Mr. Speaker, when there are 
people who are visiting the legislature today, who are watching, 
watching proceedings on TV, watching this issue, who want, 
Mr. Speaker . . . What do they want? Is it that radical? They 
want to be consulted before facilities are closed. That’s what 
they want. They want to have a sense that their government is 
listening to them. 
 
And so that’s the questions that we’re asking this morning. 
We’re saying, will this government support a motion that says, 
before those closures happen, the Premier needs to have the 
courage to send out the appropriate committee and do that 
consulting? Maybe there are alternatives out there that can be 
proposed. Certainly in fairness and just out of respect, there 
would be . . . just eminent good sense in going out to those 
communities before those closures happen. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding all the rhetoric from the 
Premier, yes or no, does he agree that it is fair and meet and 
right for elected officials to be consulting with those 
communities before those closures happen in those 
communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition well knows and members of this House well know 
that the Minister of Health has conducted regular meetings even 
with some of the folks who are here in the gallery this morning. 
There has been ongoing discussion between the minister, the 
department, the communities. Even more significantly, there is 
ongoing discussion with the district health authorities who 
make important decisions on a local level. We trust those 
decisions. We trust those communities working together to 
make those decisions. If there are alternate ideas, of course the 
health districts and regions are anxious to listen to them and 
find options. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but what is missing from this debate, what is 
missing from this debate is any clear statement from the 
Saskatchewan Party about health care. I asked the Leader of the 
Opposition this morning, does he adopt the policy of health care 
that he sees in his colleagues in British Columbia, for instance, 
where their answer, where their answer to health care is to 
simply slash the wages of the health care providers? Is that the 
solution of the Sask Party to find resources? Or is it the solution 
of the Sask Party to do what the Government of Ontario has 
done, which is layer on a huge health care premium on the 
people of Ontario? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have important, important decisions to make in 
this province and in this country, and what we need is an 
informed debate by people who care about the future of 
publicly funded and publicly administered medicare in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Credit Rating 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 
pleasure today to announce that Standard & Poor’s rating 
service has raised the province’s credit rating to AA minus from 
A plus positive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We are delighted with the 
improvement, Mr. Speaker. In the early 1980s, Saskatchewan 
had a remarkable A plus plus rating. We have been rebuilding 
our credit ratings since it began a slide in the 1980s, and are 
very pleased with the progress we’ve made. Today’s rating 
marks the first time since 1985 that Saskatchewan has had a AA 
credit rating from both major US (United States) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I would also like to note that this 
is the 11th credit rating upgrade since 1991. Standard & Poor’s 
notes that this rating reflects the province’s diverse economy; 
still moderate, tax-supported debt burden; and the adoption of 
prudent budgetary policies. 
 
Standard & Poor’s, Mr. Speaker, also acknowledges this credit 
rating comes in the face of the many challenges facing the 

province of Saskatchewan over the past several years — 
challenges such as the issues in the agricultural sector and 
perennial spending pressures in health care, both of which 
necessitate ongoing cautious spending management. 
 
The steady credit upgrades this province has achieved are good 
news for Saskatchewan. This particular upgrade will open up 
additional portions of the world capital markets for R-bonds. It 
will also provide new opportunities to ensure our interest costs 
are the lowest possible. 
 
Today’s upgrade confirms that we are addressing peoples’ 
priorities in a responsible manner. It is a vote of confidence in 
this government’s budget and balanced financial management 
approach. We are committed to continue improving our fiscal 
situation in the near term so that our credit rating continues to 
improve. 
 
This province’s economy is performing well. It is growing and 
we remain optimistic. From this government’s perspective, the 
future of this province continues to look very bright. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, while today’s news is good news for all of the people 
of Saskatchewan, when we look at the kinds of things . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I’ve indicated to the Minister of Finance, as 
we’ve had many discussions over the last couple of months 
regarding concerns about equalization, while we’ve talked 
about interest rates in the entire country and in North America, 
there are changes that have occurred that are positive for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the changes, Mr. Speaker, is most . . . that affects this 
province greatly is of course the interest rates. And I noted, Mr. 
Speaker, in the preparation of the budget documents by the 
Minister of Finance, that he’s indicated that short-term interest 
rates, which are expected to be at about 2.9 per cent for this 
year, have had a dramatic effect on the cost of servicing the 
public debt. And I note in the article this morning from 
Standard & Poor’s, that it suggests very clearly and I quote 
from that article. It says: 
 

The ratings are also supported by the province’s . . . 
adoption of prudent budgetary policies such as the new 
summary financial plan and the routine use of conservative 
economic assumptions . . . 
 

You know, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — We’ve stood in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve stood . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I would like the 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

member . . . Order please, members. Order. Order. Member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know I listened to the member from Saskatoon Nutana over the 
last number of years in Public Accounts Committees state every 
reason why this province should not move and get with the 
terms of other provinces and move to summary financial 
budgeting. She had an excuse. She had a reason why this 
province shouldn’t move forward. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the Minister of Finance finally 
listened to the people of Saskatchewan, listened to the 
Provincial Auditor, and moved to summary financial budgeting 
because that’s one of the reasons why Standard & Poor’s has 
changed the rating for the province of Saskatchewan today. 
That’s one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker. And the Minister of 
Finance can look directly at that document. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the other concerns, one of the other 
concerns that Standard & Poor’s brings in their announcement 
this morning is this, it says: 
 

(The) Risks to the province’s economy are associated with 
the modest population decline in the past several years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at those two things. Let’s look at interest 
rates and let’s look at population. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we continue to have a position in this 
province where the population continues to decline, if there is a 
sudden turn in the interest rates, if there’s a sudden turn back to 
the 9, 10 per cent interest rates — heaven forbid that we ever 
move in that direction — Standard & Poor’s says that our 
economy is subject to those kinds of changes, that we will see a 
drop in those rates, Mr. Speaker. I predict that this is a very 
volatile economy that we have in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while today’s news is good for the province of 
Saskatchewan, Standard & Poor’s has identified some of the 
things that create a situation in this province where we need to 
move forward. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in the preparation of the document, the 
budget document, the very document of the Government of 
Saskatchewan . . . makes reference to the improvement in the 
North American economy. It makes reference to the 
improvement of the Asian economy. It makes reference to the 
fact that we anticipate a better harvest condition. Mr. Speaker, 
in all of those concerns, they’re not directly related to the 
policies of this government. There’s someone else that is 
controlling the economy of this province. 
 
We hear from the Finance minister how we need to change 
equalization. We need to change equalization to the point, Mr. 
Premier, that the situation in this province is that we will be a 
have province, that we won’t have to rely on Ottawa. We don’t 
have to allow on the economic conditions of other ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I commend Standard & Poor’s for looking at the 
economy of this province, but the debt of this province 
continues to increase, and it will be a problem in the future. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Members of the 
Assembly, order please. Order, please. Order. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to bring down 
a ruling. Yesterday the Government House Leader raised a 
point of order regarding a statement made by the member for 
Saltcoats. The Government House leader said, and I quote: 
 

. . . the member imputed that the Premier personally 
benefited from tax increases by — in the member’s words 
— by putting the money in his pocket. 

 
I have reviewed Hansard on this matter and find that the 
member for Melville-Saltcoats did indeed use the words: 
 

He raised our taxes, put it in his pocket . . . 
 
This statement alone can be interpreted several ways. On one 
hand, the fact that it caused disruption in the Assembly 
indicates that several members felt the statement was offensive. 
On the other hand, when the Government House Leader and the 
Opposition House Leader spoke to the point of order, both 
House leaders acknowledged that there was no attempt on the 
part of the member for Melville-Saltcoats to imply wrongdoing. 
 
It is also on record that the member for Melville-Saltcoats later 
clarified his intent with the following statement: 
 

. . . but I know the Premier had no personal gain. 
 
When ruling in a case like this, the Speaker is obliged to take 
into account actual words said and the effect of the words used. 
I accept the statement of both House leaders and the member 
for Melville-Saltcoats that the words used were not meant to 
imply wrongdoing on the part of the Premier. I also wish to 
emphasize that it is unparliamentary for any member to state 
that another member put money in his or her pocket. 
 
I refer members to Marleau and Montpetit, page 522: 
 

Remarks directed specifically at another Member which 
question that Member’s integrity, honesty or character are 
not in order. 

 
I therefore rule the line, “put . . . in his pocket” is personally 
directed and therefore out of order, and I ask the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats to withdraw that statement. 
 
I recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there certainly was no intent on my part that the Premier had 
any personal gain by raising the PST (provincial sales tax) by 1 
per cent. And I apologize to the Premier and to the House. 
 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
Motion No. 2 — Proposed Inquiry on Health Care Facilities 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
time the government got its head out of the sand and stopped 
pretending that everything is fine, and begin to fix the problems 
in health care. The last time this NDP government engaged in 
health reform, it fired 500 nurses and closed rural hospitals, 
putting loads on Regina and Saskatoon that are unacceptable 
and creating the longest waiting lists for surgeries and 
diagnostics in the country. 
 
Now this government is asking regional health authorities to cut 
an additional $20 million out of their budgets. This cannot be 
done without reducing services, closing facilities, and cutting 
programs. 
 
So the question for the minister is, which facilities will be 
closed? What programs are going to be cut? What services will 
he reduce? And how much longer are people in this province 
going to have to wait for surgeries or diagnostics? Mr. Jim 
Fergusson stated that the budget for the Saskatoon Health 
Authority won’t even keep up with the status quo. So what 
programs, Mr. Speaker, are going to go? 
 
Over this session, we in the opposition have demonstrated the 
state of health care in this province. People have come to the 
legislature in desperation to get help for serious medical 
conditions. Some of them have been ridiculed by the members 
opposite for their trouble. Some of them have been chastised by 
government officials for embarrassing the government in the 
media, and all the Health minister can do is talk about 
challenges. 
 
Everyone in this province knows there are challenges, and the 
majority of these challenges have been created by this NDP 
government’s neglect. The people of Saskatchewan demand 
leadership, Mr. Speaker. They want solutions, not more 
excuses. 
 
It’s easy to identify the problems. We have the longest surgical 
waiting lists in Canada, with people waiting as long as three 
years for surgeries. We have a shortage of urologists in Regina. 
We have a bureaucratic maze where patients get little direction 
from the health district as to how to navigate their way through 
it. We have a severe nursing shortage that is being managed by 
overtime, which only burns out nurses and forces them into 
early retirement, further exacerbating the problem. We have 
ERs (emergency room) that are jammed to capacity and no staff 

to manage hospital beds. We have people laying in gurneys in 
emergency rooms for in excess of three days. And now this 
NDP government wants health care regions to cut back. 
 
How about managing the province’s finances? How about 
setting some priorities, Mr. Speaker? How about some 
leadership out of this mess that the NDP government has 
created? 
 
Roy Romanow said it’s time for action, and governments need 
the political will to do the right thing, to know what’s right, and 
to not act is unforgivable. Even Romanow acknowledges that 
his NDP government made huge mistakes when it made 
changes to health care by closing hospitals, firing nurses, and 
now this government is doing the same thing all over again. 
 
November 14, 2003, the Regina Leader-Post, Romanow has 
admitted the deep-cuts to provincial health care services in the 
1990s were a mistake. Romanow also admitted that his 
government was wrong to slash enrolments in nurse training 
programs. It was the NDP, Mr. Speaker, that created this huge 
mess that we’re faced with now. This government has no one to 
blame but themselves. 
 
The NDP has slashed and burned health care. And now that 
they realize the colossal damage they’ve created, all they know 
how to do is the same — to repeat the same old mistakes over 
again. So this government continues to make the same mistakes, 
but we all know that this government can’t be trusted to make 
things right. This government put us where we are now with the 
longest waiting lists in the country. 
 
Here’s this government’s track-record on health care: the 
longest surgical waiting lists in the country; longest diagnostic 
waiting lists with in excess in some cases of two years for an 
MRI; horrendously long waiting lists in emergency rooms; a 
mass exodus of nurses and other health care professionals; a 
College of Medicine going on probation, the first entire college 
in Canada to risk losing its accreditation; longest strikes of 
health care workers in this province’s history; and — then this 
government says it cares about workers — shortages of nursing 
education seats due to the NDP’s decision to cut them back in 
1996 to 180 from 364. 
 
People are dying on waiting lists, Mr. Speaker. This 
government tries to deny these realities but we talk to people 
who work in health care every day and they tell us the stories of 
how this government threatens to fire them if they speak up, 
how this government puts out gag orders to staff to try to cover 
up what is really going on as a result of the poor decisions that 
have . . . made and continues to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have had 12 years to work out a plan for 
reforming health care and yet the system continues to 
deteriorate with the longest waiting lists in Canada for surgeries 
and diagnostics. Decisions the NDP made in the ’90s that 
drastically reduced the number of nursing education seats has 
created a domino effect. In many cases there is not adequate 
nursing staff to administer care to acute care beds, so acute care 
beds are closed. In other cases the patient ratio to nursing staff 
is dangerously increasing, making it more difficult to provide 
quality care. 
 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

When acute care beds are closed, patients from emergency can’t 
be admitted. Backlogs in emergency rooms occur and hospitals 
go into code burgundies, deferring to other ERs. As a result, 
surgeries are cancelled. The NDP’s decision to cut nursing 
education seats and fire nurses when it closed hospitals has 
created the longest surgical waiting lists in Canada. 
 
This government’s commitment has amounted to little more 
than lip service. For 12 years the NDP have done nothing more 
than create more problems by making poor decisions and using 
band-aid solutions for a health care system that is in critical 
condition. 
 
Why should anyone trust the NDP now? We have seen what the 
last reforms this government implemented have done to our 
health care system. This NDP government has only one thing in 
mind, and that is to preserve its power by deception — by 
deceiving the public, Mr. Speaker, about the realities in our 
health care system. 
 
Lorne Calvert is destroying medicare. To know right . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think the member knows why I 
brought him to order. That is, he should not be using the names 
of any members here by name except use . . . he should be 
referring to titles or constituencies. 
 
The member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — The Premier is destroying medicare. To know 
right and not act is criminal. This government has let health 
care implode. It’s crumbling before our very eyes. Tommy 
Douglas must be rolling over in his grave. 
 
The Minister of Health continues to say that everything is fine. 
Well he might be able to convince himself with his words, but 
his words give little comfort to people with family members on 
Saskatchewan’s waiting lists. 
 
When people come with health care concerns, they’re ridiculed 
by this NDP government. The Health minister says in the House 
that he’ll meet with people, and then refuses to. He sends a 
staffer down to tell them that the minister doesn’t get involved 
in individual cases. He doesn’t care, Mr. Speaker. The only 
thing he cares about is protecting his seat and creating the 
illusion that everything is fine in health care in this province. 
 
Doctors and nurses are frustrated because they can’t provide 
adequate patient care with the resources they are given and 
that’s why many are leaving the province, compounding the 
problem. The only planning this government does is to develop 
creative ways of rationing health care. 
 
What makes sense is to get people diagnosed as quickly as 
possible, treated as quickly as possible, and returned to work as 
quickly as possible. SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
and WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) realize that, and 
that’s why they send people out of the province. That’s why 
they are now paying for MRI services in the province. But if 
you don’t fall under SGI or WCB, you wait 22 months or more. 
 
That’s how this government rations health care, Mr. Speaker. It 
figures that as long as everyone waits 22 months then it’s okay 

because people are all waiting about the same length of time. 
Mr. Speaker, this is simply unacceptable. This government’s 
performance is unacceptable. 
 
And what did this government do during the election? Well, it 
made some convenient omissions in the NDP platform. Did this 
NDP government tell the people that taxes were going up? No. 
Did this NDP government tell people it was closing long-term 
beds? No. Did this NDP government tell people it was making 
further cuts to health care? No. 
 
What are the government’s plans to deal with the increasing 
demand for long-term care beds with our aging population, Mr. 
Speaker? Our young people are moving to Alberta in masses. Is 
this the NDP’s plan to force our seniors to move to Alberta as 
well? 
 
We ask the government to listen to the words of Roy Romanow 
who admits that the cuts he made to health care in the 1990s 
were too deep and a mistake that we are paying for now. 
 
Public consultation, Mr. Speaker — people in the system, 
people in the community know the effects of these cuts best. 
This government ought to talk to them and come up with a plan 
that will work before they make changes. Public hearings 
before closures or conversions of facilities and changes to 
services, Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s required here. Accordingly, 
Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to get up to discuss 
this motion. And like the Leader of the Opposition had 
mentioned, you know, it’s a very basic motion. It’s a motion 
that deserves respect that the government should be looking at, 
and I can’t understand why the government wouldn’t support 
this motion. 
 
(11:15) 
 
The motion deals with a legislative committee to come out and 
meet with these people. We changed the rules last year. We 
changed the committee structure up here in this House. And I 
think that was one of the things that I can remember the Premier 
was saying in November, or December when he made the 
announcement, that it would allow more input, more consulting 
from the people, in legislation, in budget process, in different 
things, in Committee of Finance, into estimates. 
 
And I can’t think of one piece of legislation that’s passed 
through this House this session that is probably more important 
than closing long-term care beds, moving seniors. It’s more . . . 
(inaudible) . . . out there that affects everybody out there. It 
affects the seniors; it affects the staff. It affects the families of 
everybody that worked there, the families that have seniors in 
that home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it affects a whole community at that. And I think 
that this government owes it to the people to go out to these 
communities. Because that’s what we’re asking in this motion 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

that’s going to be debated here today, is that the people can 
actually ask the officials, the people that are making the 
decisions, or the committee, and offer some input into why 
these closures are happening, why these job cuts are happening. 
And I can’t think of another reason why this government would 
use not to go through it. That’s what this committee was set up 
for. It would allow to travel out to these affected areas at that 
end of it. 
 
You talk in my area — there’s 12 affected areas — but I’ll talk 
a little about how it affects my area. On Tuesday there was a 
meeting of 300-plus people. And that was on very short notice. 
But that was pressure from here, questions we asked here. The 
CEO (chief executive officer) finally came out. He didn’t want 
to. He met with the staff. He met with the mayor and the reeves 
on the side. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, at that end, I think there’s enough public 
pressure put on here he finally had a public meeting. But we 
wanted the people that are actually making the decisions to 
come out there. Because he had hinted at that meeting that the 
decision was made up here in Regina. He submitted a couple of 
proposals. But he said, I didn’t know which one they propose, 
or chose, till the day before the announcement. And he says, I 
did not do anything at that end. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Wood River on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Wood River has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
thank my colleague from Arm River-Watrous for interrupting 
his speech. But I’d like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly, a group of 36 grade 4 
students in the east gallery that are from Assiniboia Seventh 
Avenue School. Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by their 
teachers Bill Lothian, Paula Fondrick, and Cindy McSorley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had a chance to meet with this group yet, 
but I will shortly after. When they’re done in the gallery, I’ll go 
out and meet with them. I’m sure they’re going to have an 
awful lot of questions. And what we’re doing right now, we’re 
debating a private member’s Bill on health care, so I hope you 
enjoy it and I’ll be speaking to you afterwards. 
 
And I wish all members would welcome them to their 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
Motion No. 2 — Proposed Inquiry on Health Care Facilities 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to join 
with the member from Wood River to welcome this school 
group here today, and I hope they find these proceedings 
entertaining. 
 
Talking a bit about . . . I’ll talk a bit about the facility that’s in 
Davidson. You know it was built in 1965, not, not 1905, like 
the minister almost sounds like when he gets up and says, well 
it’s way out of code. Well there’s some doorways that are a 
little small. 
 
There was a question asked at that meeting, well how much 
would it cost to widen the doorways? And of course he . . . you 
know I . . . he said, I don’t know. But those are basic solutions 
that could’ve been evolved from the community, that could be 
looked at to see to maybe make, out of 10 rooms, make 6 
rooms; or just widen the doorways. 
 
There isn’t a lot of change, when he talks about this old wing. It 
was built in 1965, Mr. Speaker. It’s in very good condition. I 
know that because I’ve been there, toured it. There is facilities 
are probably a lot older than that with smaller rooms that are 
being used throughout this province, unfortunately. 
 
But they can still be used, Mr. Speaker, and there is a need. The 
thing is, there is a need for them beds there. There is a need to 
keep that wing open. There is a need to do the renovations 
there. They’re talking about saving $100,000. That’s what 
they’re going to save by basically shutting down a whole wing 
and creating a waiting list in Davidson, for $100,000. 
 
You could probably do some small renovations in there just to 
make the doorways a little bigger, probably for 5 to $10,000, 
and keep them residents in there. And you have a waiting list. 
The people, that was brought up at that meeting on Tuesday, got 
up constantly and saying, talking about their parents, relatives, 
people they know that are going to need the home in them, in 
the next few years. 
 
You know, and it’s really sad, because I talk about that building 
being built in 1965; that building was built in 1965. The 
residents that built it, that raised the money, they’re just starting 
to go in there now. A couple of them need it, and they were the 
people that raised that money there, that helped build that 
facility, and now they can’t use it. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
saddens me. You know that . . . they will be moved out of that 
community. 
 
One of them was Mr. Elmer Laird, and I know he was a big 
push when that was built in ’65. He stated, you know, I’m 80 
years old; I may need this facility. I don’t have, he said, 
immediate family to look after me. He says, I want to have 
some friends around me. And he says, now if something 
happens to me in the next few years, I will be moved out of 
there because the CEO cannot . . . All he could talk about was, 
well we’ve got a few beds open at the far end of the health 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

region. That’s 3 to 400 miles away, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know so he says, well we’re just going to close these and if 
you need them, well you can move them there. These are people 
we’re talking about, human beings, not product — not grain 
that can be okay, we have some storage at the far end of the 
land, we don’t have to bring it to the home quarter. We’re 
talking about people here, Mr. Speaker, at that end of it. 
 
You know people that . . . And there was a lot of 
misinformation with that meeting on Tuesday, and they still 
didn’t get a lot of answers. And even before that there was a lot 
of misinformation. 
 
The Minister of Health talked about a quote in the Davidson 
Leader. Well there was also another quote in Davidson Leader 
from the CEO, that said he would be talking to the six people 
affected — their families — when they had to be moved out. So 
that shows me either he was wrong and misquoted at that, or he 
was going to move them six people out of there. And maybe the 
pressure from here, raised here, maybe is keeping them there. 
We don’t know. But right now he said at the meeting, oh, they 
would not be moved out. But what about three, four months 
down the road? 
 
And there was also job loss — I asked in committee — I think 
the member said probably three or four full-time equivalent 
jobs. Well right now I think there’s some staff here today. I 
think they informed me that probably close up to six are going 
to be affected, possibly seven people are going to be affected 
with the job cuts and the job losses there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ten, ten, Greg. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — They’re up to ten now I hear. There could be as 
many as ten. So that’s the information that’s coming out there. 
They don’t know that. And right now that community, that 
makes them very angry that this government isn’t listening to 
them. That they’re getting one story from here in Regina, 
getting another story from the CEO of the Heartland Region. 
 
And I think that’s what this motion basically speaks to. This 
committee, where the decisions are made that affect that 
community, should go out there and meet with them so that it’s 
on record, so that it’s set straight, because they’re getting 
basically two different stories out there. And right now the 
people out there don’t trust the CEO out there because there has 
been so many different stories and he’s changed kind of how 
they’re going to do things out there. 
 
So they’re scared that this summer that all of a sudden he’s 
going to move them people out of there. They’re going to be 
gone, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to move them out of the 
community. That the job cuts will be greater than the minister 
had announced here; that there’s going to be more cuts. 
 
There’s also the fear of, I believe the minister had said there’s 
still $20 million yet to be absorbed by health districts. How is 
that going to affect out there? Is there going to be more services 
cut out to Davidson, to the area? 
 
They said that they would increase home care. You know what 
they’re doing in Davidson right now? You know what they did 

a couple of months ago? Home care only operates Monday to 
Friday now — Monday to Friday. After they make the 
announcements, that was about . . . they made that 
announcement about three weeks before they made the cuts. 
They changed home care, Monday to Friday. 
 
Well like one resident or one person got up and said, if you 
need home care Monday or you need it Tuesday, you need it 
Saturday and you need it Sunday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — So they’re just chipping away at the basic 
health care in this province, Mr. Speaker, the foundation of 
what this province and the people are paying taxes for. I mean if 
nothing else, they look at their last years that the people that 
they love will be looked after and respected in their home 
communities — and when this government is chipping away at 
that one year at a time — and they’re scared that the facility’s 
going to be gone. 
 
And if the cuts keep going on and the closures keep going on, 
what is going to happen to health care in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker? And that scares the people out there. And that’s 
why I think this committee . . . And that’s what we’re debating 
here, this motion for this committee, a moratorium be put on the 
job cuts, the bed closures, the facility closures put on hold at 
least until this committee can go and talk to each affected 
community so the communities can come up with ideas. 
 
At that meeting on Tuesday there was many people that come 
up and spoke to the mike and come up and said, you know, how 
can we help to . . . what changes do we need; maybe we don’t 
need as much here. These are the people that work in these 
facilities that are making . . . that are saying this, that we can 
work together to keep these beds open. You know, how can we 
help to keep these beds open? 
 
The people, all they want is their input. And there is a lot of 
good input. They were the ones that built that facility, Mr. 
Speaker. They were the ones that put the money into it in 1965 
— the equity, the sweat to build that. 
 
Another thing is when they went to the big health districts, there 
was no . . . Or nobody represents, represents the area of 
Davidson, you know. And I think that’s wrong. I think each 
facility should be able to at least have one person from that 
hospital, from that long-term care should be at least on the 
board, so at least the people in the area have a say on that board 
that goes on there. 
 
And basically they’ve felt they’ve been left out. And this is one 
way that this government can correct that, Mr. Speaker. They 
can send this . . . They can put a moratorium on these closures, 
on these cuts, and send this committee out to meet with the 
people, to listen to them, to listen to their ideas, to come back 
with recommendations to this legislature, to the budget. That’s a 
basic motion when you look at it, at the end here, is: 
 

. . . that this Assembly strongly urges the Government to 
place a moratorium on all health care facility closures and 
conversions until such time as this inquiry has been 
completed and a . . . (sustainable) report presented to the 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

Assembly pursuant to Rule 133 . . . 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I urge this government, I urge the 
Premier, with the questions that have been raised, the people . . . 
even the minister — I’d asked him to come Tuesday to 
Davidson and wish he’d have come or at least sent some staff 
there to see the questions and the people that were out there and 
the questions that were asked. And basically a lot of them 
weren’t answered. 
 
The CEO, he couldn’t answer some of them because it wasn’t 
in his priority. And he says, I’m getting directed from the 
government; I only get so much money and that’s it. And then 
he said, I present them several proposals and they pick one, he 
said. And when asked what the other proposals was, he says, 
well I can’t release that, he said, that’s in the government hands 
right now and that. 
 
So there was a lot of questions that were asked that night that he 
could not answer, that that board could not answer, that this 
inquiry . . . they can ask an inquiry. They can make a report 
with that and bring it back to the legislature. 
 
So with that ending, Mr. Speaker, I urge the Premier to vote and 
let his MLAs to vote for this basic motion, to vote for 
democracy. We set this . . . We changed the rules in this House, 
this legislative rules in this House, and I think that’s one of the 
things that was allowed for, for more input into these 
committees from people that is affected by this legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
With that, I urge him to do that — to respect democracy. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today in this 
House with mixed emotions. I’m pleased to be able to speak on 
behalf of the constituents of Cypress Hills and some from the 
constituency of Wood River as well. But I’m disappointed, Mr. 
Speaker, that I have to be doing this today. I’m disappointed 
that it has come to this — that we would have to stand in this 
House and beg for consideration of service cuts that are 
proposed for the community of Climax and Frontier and the 
surrounding rural area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis for the last month, I have 
presented a petition in this House on behalf of the 700 or more 
people who have signed, concerning their worries with the 
government proposal about cutting back services at the Border 
Health Centre. Day after day I presented the petition and read 
the prayer. But, Mr. Speaker, as part of that process, I’m unable 
to give some of the background information that attends or 
accompanies that petition. I’m going to use some of the 
information on the petition as a basis of my comments today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Border Health Centre serves the communities 
of Climax, Frontier, Bracken, Orkney, Val Marie, and Claydon, 
plus surrounding areas for a total population of approximately 
1,800 people. The area served is 125 kilometres long and 50 
kilometres wide, with an excess of 4,000 square kilometres. 

(11:30) 
 
This is a vast, underpopulated area, Mr. Speaker. But not only is 
it large, it’s also really quite isolated by geography, by natural 
features, by international borders. We’re bound by the US 
border on the south, their Frenchman River Valley which is 
large and very difficult to cross to the north, and with 
impossible distances to the east and west. 
 
Well if you go west from there, the first large community 
you’re going to come to is Maple Creek, and that would be in 
excess of 100 miles. Beyond that, Medicine Hat. If you go east, 
the first large community you’re going to come to is Swift 
Current; again, roughly 100 miles. 
 
The Border Health Centre district is home to a manufacturing 
plant that employs about 155 people, two large compressor 
stations, and the Talisman oil fields. Now all of these 
companies involve high hazard work areas which legally 
require the provision of a medical facility in close proximity. 
Emergency services have to be available at all times. In fact the 
manufacturing plant, Honeybee Manufacturing in Frontier, 
operates from 7 a.m. to 2 a.m. most of the season. When they 
get real busy, they work around the clock. 
 
The Border Health Centre district is primarily inhabited by 
young families and elderly citizens, including three Hutterite 
colonies in immediate proximity. They’re all prime users of 
health care services, and are especially in need of emergency 
health care provision. 
 
In addition, the elderly population is further handicapped by the 
difficulty many of them have arranging transportation to travel 
to neighbouring communities if they needed medical services 
out of the immediate area. In reality, Mr. Speaker, those elderly 
citizens would most likely have to move from the community of 
Climax, from the community of Frontier, or Val Marie and 
Bracken, if the facility in Climax suffers further reductions in 
hours of service. 
 
Right now, Mr. Speaker, there is only one ambulance in the 
entire area that serves that community, serves that vast area, 
serves that number of people — one ambulance located in the 
community of Frontier. And to make matters worse, Mr. 
Speaker, to rub salt in the wound of this situation, the Minister 
of Health and the NDP government just recently introduced The 
Ambulance Act, which will make it more difficult to maintain 
ambulance service for the people of that remote area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a situation that is deteriorating rapidly. And 
it’s done by design; it is not done by accident. Mr. Speaker, 
these kinds of actions are not only unacceptable, they’re 
intolerable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Climax, serving that whole 
area, currently has a doctor. They’ve been very successful over 
the years in having doctor services provided, medical services 
through professional practitioners. And right now they have a 
doctor. They have enough nurses to maintain the facility’s 
operations. If the hours of service are reduced any further, the 
community is in threat of losing whatever medical services they 
have. 
 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

This whole situation, Mr. Speaker, becomes a self-fulfilling 
prophesy. You cut back hours of operation. You limit services 
by stealth, and pretty soon the doctor who is there can’t 
continue to perform his duties. Then the government or the 
health district says, you don’t have a doctor; you can’t maintain 
your operation — and find a legitimacy in closing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is unacceptable. It’s completely unacceptable, 
especially from a government who prides itself in its history of 
having originated and provided the very health system this 
province takes such pride in. Mr. Speaker, this government may 
look back on its history with pride, but it won’t be able to look 
forward with any significant pride, as it continues to undermine 
the services of health care provision to remote areas, to small 
communities, to those people who are most vulnerable and in 
need of service as the years go forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a rural hospital committee report, 
written in 1974 by a committee of three who were struck to 
look at the delivery of health care services in these remote and 
small communities. And if the minister would go back that far, 
he would find in rereading that report that the conditions and 
the rationale, the justifications for having a 24-hour emergency 
health care facility in the town of Climax are as relevant today 
as they were 30 years ago. In fact, Mr. Speaker, maybe more so, 
because even though the population has dwindled, the need is 
just as great and maybe greater. Mr. Speaker, nothing has 
changed in terms of need. 
 
Those arguments summarize the petition that I have been 
presenting to the House on a daily basis over the last month. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is some other things that I want to 
address as part of our comments in favour of the official 
opposition’s motion today. I want to talk about the effort that 
the people have gone to in the community of Frontier and 
Climax to make sure that awareness is part of this campaign, to 
make sure the government is aware. They have undertaken 
letter-writing campaigns, telephone campaigns. The mayors of 
the two most immediately affected communities have been here 
as part of a delegation before. We’ve had a youth group come 
and watch the proceedings here, and presented petitions for me 
to present on their behalf. We have a delegation of 50 people in 
the gallery, in your gallery today to see how the government 
responds to their concerns. 
 
The people of the community have undertaken everything they 
can to bring awareness to this issue. Mr. Speaker, the part of the 
equation that’s missing is how the government and the health 
district at their behest is responding to the people of that area. 
 
Now I will give the minister his due. He offered to meet with 
the delegation when they came here previously. And they spent 
some time together. But, Mr. Speaker, when the minister stands 
in the House and says repeatedly that there is a consultation 
process that is undergone, that everything is being done in their 
power to find a suitable solution to the difficulties of health care 
provision and the budgetary limitations, let me tell you what 
consultation really amounted to, Mr. Speaker. Zero. Zero, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The day the delegation was here from Climax and Frontier, a 
week or 10 days ago, the health district showed up in the 

community of Climax to tell the people there what was going to 
happen. By any definition, Mr. Speaker, can that be called 
consultation? Is that consultation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What has happened since? The health district entertained a 
delegation at their meeting. Could they give them an answer? 
Would they give them an answer? No, they delayed and 
postponed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this process of consultation has been a one-way 
street. And there’s no sense offering consultation after the 
decisions are made, before you’ve heard any alternative options 
presented by the people whose lives are affected. And I’m sure 
that the people in the gallery today, the people who have been 
here on behalf of their communities have had ideas that they 
would gladly present to the government that would help salvage 
the delivery of health care services in their communities. 
 
Has the government listened? Have the health districts listened? 
No, Mr. Speaker. You can’t call that consultation; it’s an abuse 
of the definition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if these people in the gallery and the citizens of 
that immediate area are concerned today, they have reason to be 
concerned. This particular cutback in service is just the latest of 
a number of cutbacks in service. 
 
The health centre in Climax used to be a 24-hour, 7-day-a-week 
hospital, and then it went to a health centre. Then it went to a 
health centre that only operated five days a week, and on 
weekends they had to bundle patients up, put them in an 
ambulance, and truck them to Shaunavon over some of the 
worst roads in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a facility today that operates 
24 hours a day, four and a half days a week. And now, the hours 
of operation are being cut back to 8 to 4, five days a week. Mr. 
Speaker, emergencies do not happen neatly between 8 a.m. and 
4 p.m. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of the local community’s representation to 
the health board, health district, they presented this submission, 
this brief. It’s substantive. It is very conclusive about justifying 
the need for that facility. But what it also contains is no less 
than four or five, maybe half a dozen, written testimonials from 
people whose lives were saved because of the access to 
emergency services at times other than the neatly packaged 8 
a.m. to 4 or 5 p.m. scenario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what emergency service is about. It’s about 
providing it in a timely, in an immediate way when incidents 
happen. And if we’re going to pretend that we’re able to 
provide emergency service in the community of Climax for the 
people of that region, it’s got to be available more than eight 
hours a day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the loss of the health care services in the 
community is sad enough, but it’s just one of a long list of 
cutbacks to service that have happened to the community of 
Climax, to the whole southern region. Rural Climax and 
Frontier and Val Marie, that area is no different than rural 
communities all around the province. But, Mr. Speaker, when 
you’re that remote, when you’re that isolated, cutbacks of any 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

kind are felt much more specifically and urgently. 
 
We’ve seen reduction in school services a number of years ago. 
I’ve already talked about the cutbacks to health care services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government gutted the highways budget to the 
point where the people of Climax were among the first in the 
entire province to get their own picks and shovels, their own 
tractors, and repair their own roads. Mr. Speaker, if you’re not 
going to provide health care services, the very minimum the 
government needs to provide is transportation and safe 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community suffered the loss of RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) services just recently. 
 
Their rail line is under threat; at one time, it was going to be 
abandoned. A short-line rail has come in and taken up business 
activity there, but there’s some concern about where that effort 
is going to go. And as I mentioned earlier, now ambulance 
service is again under threat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to comment briefly on how ill-advised 
these kinds of decisions are. Premier Romanow led his own 
emasculation of health services in Saskatchewan and after some 
consideration of the impact that that had had, he offered these 
comments. 
 
In the November 14 edition 2003 of the Leader-Post, Mr. 
Romanow “admitted the deep cuts to provincial health-care 
services in the 1990s were a mistake.” Romanow also admitted 
that his government was wrong to slash enrolments in nurse 
training programs. 
 
I want, I want you, Mr. Speaker, and the members of the House 
to pay particular attention to this next comment. He also said 
that the NDP “pushed the costs out of the government’s pockets 
and right into the pockets of farmers and business people and 
nurses.” 
 
That is especially true in small town Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Romanow said, “I don’t take any pride in this but it’s now 
reduced to basically those at the very bottom (the very) end of 
our scale, the very poorest.” And I might add my own words, 
the very most remote. Those are the people who are bearing the 
costs of those health care cut decisions. 
 
It was the NDP that created this mess that we’re faced with 
today and this government has no one to blame but themselves 
for the cost and the impact. Mr. Speaker, if we don’t learn from 
our mistakes, we’re doomed to repeat them; and the 
government is in jeopardy of making the same mistake again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Climax was known as an NDP stronghold. At one 
time people who ran for the NDP Party could guarantee support 
from the community of Climax. When I first moved there that 
was understood. Mr. Speaker, in the last election the NDP 
counted no more than 26 votes in the community of Climax. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not because they were enthralled with the Sask 
Party candidate. It wasn’t because of the wonderful personality 
of the Sask Party candidate. Mr. Speaker, the turnaround in the 
polls in Climax are a direct result of the disillusionment of the 
people of that community with the policies of this government 

over the last 12 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I know an 80-year-old man who, 
when I first met him, said, I have been an NDP member all my 
life; I just found out that Tommy Douglas is dead because this 
government doesn’t care about health care. That was his first 
response on meeting me. Mr. Speaker, a government that 
doesn’t remember where it came from certainly can’t 
understand where it’s going. And this government has failed the 
people of rural Saskatchewan. They continue to do so. And if 
they proceed with this move in Climax, I can guarantee them 
the NDP votes will be counted on one hand after the next 
election. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable behaviour on the part of this 
government. Their philosophy is to provide equity, equality for 
all people. Why are the people of the most remote part of rural 
Saskatchewan, save the far North, why are their lives any less 
important? 
 
What about the principle of equity? What about the principle of 
fair treatment? 
 
This is the government who prides itself in defending the weak, 
the defenceless, the vulnerable. The vulnerable are the ones that 
are going to be most immediately impacted by this decision — 
the elderly in the communities of Climax and Frontier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable; it’s unconscionable. And I 
will be moving . . . or voting with the opposition in favour of 
the amendment we have been asked to support here today. I am 
asking the government members to support this private 
member’s motion because it’s important not only to their 
integrity, but to the future of health care in the community of 
Climax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, I certainly 
caught most of the words of the member for Cypress Hills, and 
I’ve heard of what else was said by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous and the member for Thunder Creek, and it is 
very likely beyond my ability to add or detract from anything 
that they have been able to say here today. 
 
I think members of this House have heard a very, a very 
reasoned argument in favour of the motion that’s presented here 
before members of the Assembly today. I think they have also 
heard a little bit of the, of the emotion, frankly, that surrounds 
. . . that is the basis, the underpinning for the motion that is 
presented here today, that we have the opportunity to support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess it’s fair to say that those in public life, 
whatever their affiliations might be or whatever level of 
government, understand that leadership is not necessarily an 
easy thing, that there are significant challenges that come with 
leadership at all levels. Mr. Speaker, leadership is not always 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

about simply acting, however, making decisions. Certainly 
that’s a large part of it; certainly that’s an important part of it. 
But sometimes leadership is about ensuring you have all of the 
information — every single bit of available information that 
you can possibly have to make a decision, a wise decision. 
 
And that is particularly important, I think, for people that 
occupy seats in this House or in any other elected capacity. That 
is what our constituents, that is what the taxpayers expect of us 
and should be able to demand of us, all of us — that we are 
doing everything we can possibly do to ensure that the 
information is presented to those who make decisions before 
those decisions are made. 
 
And I’d like to talk about that just for a minute. I frankly don’t 
want to belabour the point much because I think we should 
vote; I think we should vote fairly soon on this, frankly. I think 
this resolution should be passed and we can move on and get on 
with the work that the motion calls us to do, which is to meet — 
get out and meet with those folks that are affected by it. 
 
But I do want to address for a minute the kinds of information I 
think that legislators will need, that communities would need 
before we could make these decisions, before we could close 
beds — for which there are waiting lists, mind you, Mr. 
Speaker, let’s not forget that. Many of the beds that we are 
talking about today that we are proposing to close, there are 
waiting lists behind them. They’re not empty; they’re not 
abandoned; they’re not forgotten. There are waiting lists. 
They’re occupied, and there are lists of those who need them. 
 
So before we decide to close them, before the NDP government 
decides to close them, let’s consider the information we might 
want to have. Mr. Speaker, let’s, let’s consider what was 
referenced actually in the NDP’s own Throne Speech this 
session. And I remember it well. I think members on this side of 
the House will remember a reference in that Throne Speech to 
the need for the government of the day, this government, to 
ensure that all of the health care dollars we currently spend in 
Saskatchewan — some 40-plus per cent of the budget — are 
being spent most effectively. 
 
It sounded a lot to me like something we talked about in 1999. I 
think we . . . I think it was called a value-for-money audit is 
what we talked about in that campaign, and it was openly 
mocked by the government of the day, by the NDP. But I saw 
that concept appear again in public debate in an NDP Throne 
Speech, and we were grateful for that. We thought, that is a step 
in the right direction. 
 
There is a interesting piece of information that the Deputy 
Premier, who’s chirping from his seat, should want before he 
decides to close a bed. He should be determined to find out that 
every health care dollar that we spend in the province is being 
spent in the most effective way — that’s getting to the front-line 
delivery of health care in the best possible way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Before, before we begin to close the beds, let’s make sure in 
Saskatchewan, let’s make sure in Saskatchewan — as 
apparently the Throne Speech committed to do, but now they 
have forgotten of it because we haven’t heard a word of this 
since the Throne Speech; we haven’t heard a word of it since 
the Throne Speech — but let’s be absolutely convinced, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are no dollars being unnecessarily diverted 
to activities in our health care system that should be directed to 
health care delivery. 
 
Because we’re not talking about cutting administration here, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re talking today about closing beds that are 
occupied. We’re talking about taking away health care services 
in a remote part of the province, taking away emergency health 
care services, Mr. Speaker, which of course should be a concern 
to every resident of the Climax area but not just from a health 
perspective, Mr. Speaker — and I’m sure the member covered it 
— but also from an economic standpoint as well. 
 
Because, you know, there is a pretty exciting company called 
Honeybee Manufacturing down there and they are in large 
measure helping a remote rural part of this province survive 
because of what they have risked and what they have invested. 
And due to the fact that they employ a large number of people 
— thankfully, Mr. Speaker — due to that fact, there are health 
implications for their operation as well, Mr. Speaker, and the 
government officials are there to remind them of it. 
Occupational health and safety officials are there to remind that 
business, those entrepreneurs, that there needs to be access to 
health services, there needs to be certain standards in their 
business. And as far as I know, that very solid business in the 
province of Saskatchewan honours those standards. And now 
they have questions: what more will be required of them if the 
government does close down or reduce the emergency services 
that are available there? 
 
We aren’t talking about cutting back on administration in the 
health care system with this resolution, as the government 
seemed to imply they might do in the Throne Speech. We are 
talking about beds. We are talking about emergency care. We 
are talking about the health of Saskatchewan people. And 
doesn’t it seem meet and right and eminently reasonable then, 
that legislators here in this place should go to the communities 
that are affected and look them in the eye and determine 
potentially, Mr. Speaker, if there are alternatives — affordable, 
doable alternatives that will maintain health care in those areas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s the kind of information we need as well. 
We don’t just need an independent review in this province that 
will tell us if we are indeed using the health care dollars — the 
precious health care dollars — that we have most effectively. 
That’s one very, very important part of it. I would say that we’d 
probably need to find out before we close down a health care 
bed in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But there are other more local bits of information that might be 
available, that might improve this process and lead to a different 
decision, and I would suggest to you that kind of information 
we can garner, we can gather when we meet with the 
communities that are affected. 
 
Those communities that perhaps know better than anybody in 
this Assembly, they know better than anybody in this Hon. 
Assembly what may be possible, and the impact of a closure in 
their community or several closures . . . or what happens to 
those that are on the waiting list or what happens to other 
communities that aren’t talked about as much, frankly, since the 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

government made the announcement. 
 
I’ll give you a good example. In the community of Herbert, 
those health care facilities, they don’t just provide health care 
facilities for the people of Herbert and area. Often they’re there 
to help out the Swift Current Hospital. When the Swift Current 
Hospital needs to send someone out to recuperate and they’re 
out of beds, the Herbert hospital is there. The people of Herbert 
are there. I don’t think they’ll be able to be there in the future 
after the government’s decision is made. 
 
Do all the members on that side of the House know that? 
Maybe they do; maybe they don’t. But if they don’t know it, 
shouldn’t all of us — not just members on that side but 
members on this side of the House — shouldn’t we all get the 
information, all the information and then make a decision on 
behalf of the taxpayers and those who need the health care 
system, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We’ve seen communities come forward. We’ve 
asked the minister to meet with them, and I would suggest to 
you that he has met with them. I think reluctantly so, but he has 
met with them to be sure. And I remember one community in 
particular. I think they were proposing some very specific 
measures that they would undertake themselves if their health 
care facility was to be closed. I think it was one of the 
communities represented by the member for Kindersley. And 
they had some pretty specific ideas how they could fill the gap 
if the government left them a gap. They were willing to do that. 
 
How many other communities, how many of those communities 
affected by this decision and by this motion are also wanting to 
have that discussion? And isn’t that a discussion worth having? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had it in this province for 100 years where 
communities have come together and said, you know what? 
Maybe we can’t do this individually. Maybe we can’t do it in 
the way we’ve always done it, but maybe there’s some 
innovative way we can come together and get this job done. 
That’s how this province was built. And I would suggest to you 
that’s also the foundation for the motion that we’re proposing 
today. Maybe those alternatives exist. And wouldn’t we want to 
move heaven and earth and turn over every single stone and 
find out if an alternative solution like that exists here in 
Saskatchewan today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And so, Mr. Speaker, I do encourage. I even 
understand . . . I know I wasn’t here, but I understand members 
opposite have been listening carefully, and I thank them for 
that. I understand that some have even come across to 
congratulate various members on their speech, on their 
discussion. And you know, I congratulate them for that as well. 
 
But I encourage them to support the motion, Mr. Speaker. It 
doesn’t reverse the decision that they’ve made, even though 
some would say that that’s actually probably the step that needs 
to happen. It doesn’t do that. It says, Mr. Speaker, it says to all 
of us in this House, let’s do our job; let’s do our job. Let’s go to 
these communities where we are going to . . . where the 

government’s going to take decisions that will impact them 
forever and let us find out directly from them of the impact and 
maybe of potential alternatives, maybe of solutions. 
 
That’s our job, Mr. Speaker. And I encourage all members of 
the House to vote to do our job. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
start my remarks this afternoon by thanking the members 
opposite for their comments. I think that you very eloquently 
shared the views of your constituents, and I think that’s very, 
very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition talked about 
leadership. And I have to agree that leadership is part of what 
this is all about. But leadership is about having to make 
decisions and not simply trying to be all things to all people at 
all times. 
 
Unfortunately governments have to make decisions. And they 
have to make those decisions based on the information provided 
to them by the professionals who run the systems, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s the responsibility of those professionals — in this case 
the regional health authorities, the doctors, the professionals in 
their communities — to talk to the people in the communities 
and to understand the services required in those communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen day after day, the opposition 
advocating for spending literally hundreds of millions of 
additional dollars each year. But at the same time they’re also 
advocating and promising hundreds of millions of dollars in tax 
cuts. It doesn’t add up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Governments do not make tough decisions like this with any 
idea that people are going to necessarily thank them, or 
necessarily are going to be happy. Mr. Speaker, they make these 
decisions because they have to make decisions based on what’s 
better for the entire province and is better for the systems in 
which we all must rely upon, both in the short-term and in the 
long-term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government now spends $2.7 billion on health care. We 
added an additional 173 million new dollars this year alone. The 
cost of health care spending is rising at about 2.5 times the rate 
of GDP (gross domestic product) growth. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all wish — we all wish, on both sides of the 
House — that we could maintain every single service from now 
into the future. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not possible. With 
health care costs rising at 2.5 times the rate of economic growth 
or GDP growth, Mr. Speaker, we cannot do that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is not a challenge faced by the 
Government of Saskatchewan alone. Every single jurisdiction 
in Canada is facing the exact same challenge. And every single 
government in Canada is faced with making the same very 
difficult choices. These are not choices we would choose to 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

make if we didn’t have to. And, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite can say whatever they want and chirp whatever they 
want, Mr. Speaker. But this is a very serious issue when every 
single government in Canada is forced with making these types 
of choices. This is not a Saskatchewan problem. It is a Canadian 
problem, and it is a problem faced by all Canadians, Mr. 
Speaker. And we wish that these difficult choices were not have 
to be made, but they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to balance accessibility of service with affordability, 
with the types and design of service that can be made available 
to all Saskatchewan citizens. We need to also balance the 
expectations and demands with resources across the entire 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, we can’t make these choices based 
on today only. We must make those choices based on delivering 
these services for our children and our grandchildren, Mr. 
Speaker. Choices that have been made over the last number of 
years to put the fiscal house of Saskatchewan back in order 
haven’t been to the benefit of the government. They have been 
to the benefit of future generations in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Today, today, Mr. Speaker, we heard of a credit rating upgrade. 
That’s not to the credit of the government alone, Mr. Speaker. It 
is to the credit of every citizen in this province. It’s the citizens 
of this province that have worked with the government to 
ensure that we can put our fiscal house back in order so that we 
pay less money, less interest rates, Mr. Speaker, and less money 
on interest. That money then can be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I ask that members allow the 
debate to proceed unimpeded. The member for Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I know that every single member 
on this side of the House thanks the citizens of this province for 
the hard work and some of the hardship that they’ve endured in 
order to put our fiscal house back in order. But, Mr. Speaker, 
not doing that would have left a much more dire situation for 
future generations, our children and grandchildren. And, Mr. 
Speaker, tough decisions need to be made. They’re not popular; 
we don’t enjoy making them. But, Mr. Speaker, we have to 
make those decisions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard about the issue of consultation. 
Mr. Speaker, regional health authorities represent local people 
and the areas in which those decisions are made. They present 
options, Mr. Speaker, and they make decisions. We as a 
government must respect those decisions; we have to 
understand that the local people understand what’s best for their 
communities. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, those who do not 
like the decisions can make . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 
Order. The member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I heard the members opposite 
referring to people who work in the communities in which 
they’re talking about as puppets. Mr. Speaker, those are caring, 
compassionate people in those communities. It’s offensive to 
have people who are working on behalf of people in this 
province to be called puppets. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, by their tone and 
referring to members of regional health authorities as puppets, 
need to examine why their approach to this particular issue is 
the way it is. Mr. Speaker, those people are as caring about their 
communities as the members opposite are about their 
constituencies or, for that matter, as the members of 
government are about delivering quality health care in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t pleasure the Minister of Health, the 
Premier, or any member of the government that we have to 
make these tough choices. We have to make these tough 
decisions, but they need to made. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to the Action Plan for Health 
Care and from criteria that were established after extensive 
hearings throughout the province of how we would face 
challenges in health care with an ever changing demographic 
and face in rural Saskatchewan. Something we wish wasn’t 
occurring as well, but we all know that communities in rural 
Saskatchewan are continuing to change. We all know that 
services in rural communities are continuing to change. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to quote from the Action Plan on 
Health Care: 
 

. . . we all know that our province and the delivery and 
health care, will continue to change. As well, people will 
continue to make choices to seek care in larger centres. 
Over time, communities may find it necessary to look at 
other options due to factors such as: 
- difficulties in retaining a minimum number of physicians 

and nurses; 
- a shrinking population; 
- ability of . . . nearby hospitals to admit more patients; 
- disruptions in providing 24/7 services due to lapses in 

staffing, particularly during the summer or holiday 
week-ends; 

- declining levels of service volumes; or 
- ability to better meet local needs through other kinds of 

service delivery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all those things are occurring in rural 
Saskatchewan, not all to the negative though. 
 
I’d like to remind members opposite that just 20 years ago in 
rural Saskatchewan, ambulance services were provided largely 
by individuals that had basic first aid and CPR 
(cardiopulmonary resuscitation). Today, ambulance service is 
provided by qualified emergency medical technicians — far 
better trained, far better able to deal with those types of serious 
issues that face individuals in their homes and in the back of the 
ambulances en route to a health care facility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, even as we talk today, new technologies are 
developing new equipment that even provide greater skills and 
abilities for these very same people. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
going to continue to change, as is rural Saskatchewan and is the 
face of the entire province. And we have to accept that those 
changes are going to occur, and we have to accept that we are 
going to have to make decisions as those changes do occur. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House have 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

listened to the members opposite. We share their anxiety about 
those communities. It’s not that these decisions were made out 
of any disrespect for those communities, those families, or the 
people who live there. Mr. Speaker, we care, as the members 
opposite care. And, Mr. Speaker, at this time, I would take my 
seat. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I see that there are no more people that arise 
to speak so I will be putting the question forthwith. 
 
But before I do, I want to refer back to a statement made — it’s 
a procedural item — a remark made by the member from 
Thunder Creek who used the words deceived or deceive in 
reference to members of a House. And I’ve had in the 
intervening time an opportunity to double-check the meaning of 
the word in Oxford which is to mislead purposely. And I’ve 
double-checked in Beauchesne’s. The use of that word has been 
declared unparliamentary several times. 
 
So I would like to bring that to the member’s attention that the 
use of the words deceive or deceived aimed at a member or at a 
group of members is unparliamentary, and before we proceed 
further I would request of that member from Thunder Creek 
withdraw those words. 
 
I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I withdraw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Melfort, seconded by the 
member for Wood River: 
 

That pursuant to rule 133(1), The Standing Committee on 
Human Services shall hold an inquiry and make 
recommendations regarding the future of health care 
facilities throughout Saskatchewan, and that the committee 
shall: 

a) obtain from the Department of Health a 
comprehensive list of all health care facilities scheduled 
for closure or conversion; 
b) hold public meetings away from the seat of 
government in order that the fullest representations may 
be received without unduly inconveniencing those 
desiring to be heard; 
c) hold at least one public meeting in each community 
with a health care facility scheduled to be closed or 
converted; 
d) have the authority to send for persons, papers, and 
records, and to examine witnesses under oath; 
e) have the authority to receive representations from 
interested parties and individuals; and 
f) have the authority to engage such advisors and 
assistants as are required for the purpose of the inquiry; 

And that this Assembly strongly urges the government to 
place a moratorium on all health care facility closures and 
conversions until such time as this inquiry has been 
completed and a substantive report presented to the 
Assembly pursuant to rule 133(4). 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members 
for the standing vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:12 until 12:15. 
 
(12:15) 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Melfort, seconded by the 
member for Wood River. Will the members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Morgan 
McMorris Eagles Gantefoer 
Harpauer Bakken Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Brkich 
Weekes Kerpan Merriman 
Chisholm Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 
 

Nays — 29 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Taylor 
Morin Borgerson  
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 
favour, 28; those opposed, 29. 
 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
The Speaker: — Government orders . . . no, I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave 
to move to government orders. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move to government orders. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 35 — The 
Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the minister for the Crown Management 
Board that Bill No. 35, The Crown Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the minister for Crown Management 
Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I move that Bill 35, The 
Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister for Crown 
Management Board that Bill No. 35, The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 41 — The 
Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the moved 
. . . has been moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 41, 
The Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Bill No. 41, The Contributory 
Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the standing 
committee on human resources. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 41, The Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 
2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 41 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 54 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 54 — The 
Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly has been 
moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 54, The Tobacco 
Control Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that Bill No. 54, The Tobacco 
Control Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 54 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 55 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 55 — The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 55, The Regional Health Services Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Question has been called. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that Bill No. 55, The Regional 
Health Services Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 55 be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly do adopt 
that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 66 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 66 — The 
Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly has been 
moved by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 66, The 
Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk — Second reading of the Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 66, The Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 
2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill 66 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 64 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 64 — The 
Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly, it has been 
moved by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 64, The 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that Bill No. 64, The 
Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that Bill No. 64 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 64 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 69 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 69 — The 
Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly, it has been 
moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 69, The Public 
Inquiries Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 69, The Public 
Inquiries Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the standing 

committee on human resources. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 69 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 60 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 60— The 
Public Service Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly has been the 
one moved by the minister for the Public Service Commission 
that Bill No. 60, The Public Service Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that Bill 60, the Public Service 
Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister for the 
Public Service Commission that Bill No. 60 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill 60 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 61 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly, it has been 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

moved by the Government House Leader, the Minister of 
Finance, that Bill No. 61, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To what committee shall this Bill be referred? 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
61, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 61 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 68 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 68 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure 
today to rise in the Assembly to speak to Bill No. 68, An Act to 
amend the Assessment Management Agency and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this deals with SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency); it deals with the assessment. Obviously 
it affects property in the province, and the assessment around 
this is also affecting how school boards are going to be funded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to speak to this today. Yesterday we had 
a large delegation come to our legislature from SARM and one 
of the members there was a cow-calf operator and told me that 
the SAMA had reassessed his pasture land by an increase of 42 
per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, something not only is wrong with this Bill but it’s 

extremely wrong with this process. The member was . . . the 
individual I was speaking to was from my area. Mr. Speaker, 
the province of Saskatchewan has been aware of the BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy) crisis, we’ve been aware 
of the drought. It happens that for this cow-calf producer both 
of these things couldn’t have hit harder. And on top of all of the 
problems facing agriculture, all of the challenges farm families 
are facing, SAMA comes along and through some 
misunderstood process reassesses that pasture land and 
increases the assessment and the taxes thereby by 42 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s absolutely unacceptable. It begs the 
question on how such a grievous error could have occurred. 
 
Farm families, Mr. Speaker . . . I know this individual and 
where he farms and I don’t know how one would be able to 
assess pasture land in that particular area, where there has been 
no rain for five years, at any higher level than the previous 
assessment. What would look better to an assessor? It’s 
mind-boggling, Mr. Speaker, that such a grievous error could 
occur. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen from time to time in this legislature 
around property tax . . . And this is essentially what SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) is dealing 
with. They’re dealing with the essence of how those taxes are 
levied, because those taxes, Mr. Speaker, are levied relative to 
the questioned worth or the assessed worth of the property. 
 
And we’ve seen this NDP government download and download 
and download for over a decade onto the backs of property 
owners. It’s a horrible way, Mr. Speaker. It’s unprogressive as a 
matter of taxation. It’s true we have to have taxes levied from 
somewhere. But there is no correlation necessarily, Mr. 
Speaker, between taxing a property and having the ability to 
pay. 
 
It’s an anachronistic system that hasn’t been addressed by this 
government for pure partisan reasons. It’s because, by and 
large, the members on this side happen to represent rural 
constituents, and the members on the other side represent urban 
constituents, where it is still significant, but it is not taking such 
a big ability out of their gross incomes as tax on — specifically 
education tax — on property. In rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, it is absolutely unacceptable. 
 
Again yesterday the Premier has said the status quo is not on. 
He told SARM this on more than one occasion, and he said that 
on more than one occasion in this House. And yet his actions 
speak entirely different. 
 
Yesterday the minister on Intergovernmental Affairs had the 
gall — had the gall, Mr. Speaker — to scold individuals from 
SARM that came out to voice concern over the property taxes 
they were facing. And he told them that if they weren’t quiet, 
they wouldn’t be heard at all. Mr. Speaker, it was a horrible, 
disgraceful display of arrogance. It’s just been demonstrative of 
this current NDP government and what they really feel about 
rural people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of problems around Bill No. 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2004 

68. One of the particular problems on assessment has to do with 
the way that individual municipalities will either use a 
government assessor from SAMA or a private assessor. And the 
long and short of it, Mr. Speaker, is that this particular Bill will 
change the ability, the oversight of those assessors to the school 
boards. 
 
It’s going to pit communities against communities. They have 
RMs that may have children that go to different towns. And it’s 
once again we see very poor vision from this NDP government 
on how to solve very serious issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there are a number of members on this 
side of the House who need time to review this Bill, who intend 
to speak to this Bill because there are a lot of affected parties. 
And the status quo on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is not on. And 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we now adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 68. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate on Bill No. 68, second reading, be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 65 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 65 — The 
Agri-Food Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure today 
to speak to Bill No. 65, The Agri-Food Act. Mr. Speaker, this is 
a very important piece of legislation and we want to go on 
record to say that Bills this important and this voluminous 
should not be brought before us so late in the session. It’s been 
a common practice of this government to leave its most 
important Bills for late in the session, and it’s a practice that 
must and should end if the government wants the legislature to 
work effectively and properly. 
 
That being said, we have been in contact with some of the 
agencies affected by this legislation and we understand that 
those agencies do want this Bill to proceed. It is not their fault 
that the government is unwilling or unable to get these Bills to 
this Assembly in a timely fashion, and they should not be 
affected by uncertainty just because this government can’t get 
its ducks in a row. 
 
We understand that this Bill is necessary to provide greater 
clarity for those development boards and commissions who 
operate a check-off system among their producers. We are led 
to understand that more legislative clarity is needed to ensure 
those check-offs operate in a proper fashion. This Bill will also 
give those agencies more flexibility as to how they use the 
money they collect, through giving them the ability to provide 

loans to individuals or corporate entities to conduct research 
and industry development. 
 
The Bill certainly does empower marketing boards to a greater 
extent than now is the case, and that might be of some concern 
to those producers operating in a unregulated environment 
outside of the supply-management quota system. 
 
There has been concern particularly among unregulated egg 
producers that there is a movement to lower the legal limit of 
the birds that they’re allowed from the current 299 to that . . . 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has provided me a letter that states 
that the government will not be lowering that limit. That 
threshold is not dealt with in this legislation, but it’s dealt with 
in regulations. And the commitment from the minister, which 
we appreciate very much, is that the government has no 
intentions to change that. We trust this minister’s word in that 
regard. 
 
Many in our province do not think the supply-managed system, 
as mandated by the federal government, serves our province 
well necessarily in terms of growing agricultural industries. 
However the fact is that the system is here and we have to work 
within it unless and until changes are made at the national level. 
 
The debate over the merits of supply management, Mr. Speaker, 
while important, are outside of this Bill, although the Bill does 
very much affect how that system will operate within our 
province. There are a great many questions to be asked about 
the powers enumerated in this Act and how they will affect 
individual producers. Too much of the detail once again is 
going to be left to regulations written after this Bill is passed. 
And that does cause us concern. 
 
We have concern as well over the appeal process that is set up 
under this Bill. It appears to give the appeal committee wide 
powers to dismiss appeals before hearing anything. We will 
need more clarification on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a very long Bill and certainly we will be taking time in 
committee to get the minister on record to address many of the 
concerns we have. But hopefully they can be addressed in 
committee, Mr. Speaker, and accordingly I’d move this on to 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 65, 
The Agri-Food Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 



June 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

The Speaker: — To what committee will this Bill be referred? 
I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 65, The Agri-Food Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 65 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. I wish all members a safe 
journey home. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:39. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1546 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1559 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Young Entrepreneurs Silver Spade Awards in Saskatoon 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
 Saskatchewan Air Show 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1548 
 Tim Hortons Children’s Foundation Camp Day 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1548 
 Regina Artists Receive National Recognition 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1548 
 University of Regina Spring Convocation 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1549 
 Moose Jaw Students Awarded Certificate of Merit 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1549 
 Postmaster Celebrates 25th Anniversary 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1549 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Public Consultation on Health Facilities 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................1549, 1554 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1550 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1554 
 Closure of Herbert Hospital 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1551 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1551 
 Closure of Long-Term Care Beds in Davidson 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1551 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1552 
 Emergency Room Service at the Border Health Centre 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1552 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1552 
 Métis Nation of Saskatchewan Elections 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
 Funding for Repairs to Diefenbaker Bridge 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1554 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan’s Credit Rating 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1555 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1555 
 



 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1556 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1556 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Proposed Inquiry on Health Care Facilities 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1558 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1561 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1563 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1565 
 Recorded Division ......................................................................................................................................................................1567 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 ............................................................................................1568 
 Bill No. 41 — The Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004......................................................................................1568 
 Bill No. 54 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 ...................................................................................................1568 
 Bill No. 55 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2004 .....................................................................................1569 
 Bill No. 66 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2004 ..............................................................................1569 
 Bill No. 64 — The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 ................................................................1569 
 Bill No. 69 — The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 2004.....................................................................................................1570 
 Bill No. 60— The Public Service Amendment Act, 2004.........................................................................................................1570 
 Bill No. 61 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2004 .....................................................1570 
 Bill No. 68 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1571 
 Bill No. 65 — The Agri-Food Act, 2004 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1572 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




