















































Hansard: April 01, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 11A  THURSDAY, APRIL 1, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 281 
 April 1, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on a subject that has been brought 
before this House in previous years. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
community of Abbey. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise 
with a petition from citizens in southern Saskatchewan that are 
extremely concerned about the condition of their highway, and 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by the good citizens from Davidson, very worried about 
possible reductions of services at Davidson, Imperial Health 
Centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
Health Centres be maintained at their current level of 
service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care emergency 
and doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 

from the Davidson, Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and 
to ensure the current specialty services are sustained to 
better serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 43; 
 
A petition praying against the rise in the provincial sales 
tax in the fiscal year 2004-2005; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 47, 48, 49, 58, 63, and 65. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
for fiscal year 2004 and ’05, how many employees in this 
department will be receiving cost-of-living allowance 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
cost-of-living allowance percentage, and what will be the 
total value of the cost-of-living allowance increase? 

 
I also, Mr. Speaker, give notice that I shall ask the question: 
 

Responsible to the minister of Investment Saskatchewan: 
for the year 2004 and ’05, how many employees in this 
department will be receiving scale increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the total value of those 
increases, and what is the total value of all salaries and 
remunerations paid to employees in this department? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Management 
Board: for the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many 
employees in this department will be receiving scale 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
total value of those increases, and what is the total value of 
all salaries and remunerations paid to employees in this 
department? 
 

I have a similar question directed to the minister responsible for 
Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Management 
Board: for the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many 
employees in this department will be receiving 
cost-of-living allowance in their wages? And further to 
that, what is the cost-of-living allowance percentage, and 
what will be the total value of the COLA increase? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: for the fiscal year 
2004-2005, how many employees in this department will 
be receiving scale increases in their wages? And further to 
that, what is the total value of those increases, and what is 
the total value of all salaries and remunerations paid to 
employees in this department? 

 
I have a similar question for the Minister of SGI dealing with 
the cost-of-living allowance. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day 16 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority: for the fiscal year 2004-2005, how 
many employees in this department will be receiving scale 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
total value of those increases, and what is the total value of 
all salaries and remunerations paid to employees in this 
department? 
 

And I will also be asking that question of the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I give notice that I shall on day 16 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation: for the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many 
employees in this department will be receiving a 
cost-of-living allowance, COLA, increase in their wages? 

And further to that, what is the COLA percentage, and 
what will the total value of the COLA increase be? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Finance: for the fiscal year 
2004-2005, how many employees in this department will 
be receiving scale increases in their wages? And further to 
that, what is the total value of those increases, and what is 
the total value of all salaries and remunerations paid to 
employees in this department? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I will also ask the question of the Minister of 
Finance on day no. 16 that’s stated: 
 

For fiscal year 2004-2005, how many employees in this 
department will be receiving cost-of-living allowance — 
that is, COLA — increases in their wages? And further to 
that, what is the COLA percentage, and what will be the 
total value of the COLA increase? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: in the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many 
employees in Exec Council will be receiving cost-of-living 
allowance increases in their wages? And further to that, 
what is the COLA percentage, and what will be the total 
value of the COLA increase? 
 

In addition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Premier: for fiscal year 2004-2005, how many 
employees in Exec Council will be receiving scale 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
total value of those increases, and what is the total value of 
all salaries and remunerations paid to employees in this 
department? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Aboriginal Affairs: for the 
fiscal year 2004-2005, how many employees in this 
department will be receiving scale increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the total value of these 
increases, and what is the total value of all salaries and 
remuneration paid to employees in this department? 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

On day no. 16 I’ll ask the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs: 
 

For the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many employees in 
this department will receive the COLA increase in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the COLA percentage, 
and what is the total value of the COLA increase? 

 
I also give notice that on day no. 16 I’ll ask the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment: 
 

How many incidents have occurred in 2003 where the 
Community Resources and Employment have removed 
children or foster children from their homes, these broken 
down by regions. Of these incidents, how many have 
resulted in criminal charges being made against a member 
of the family? 

 
I also have a similar question for 2002 and 2001. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: for fiscal year 
2004-2005, how many employees in this department will 
be receiving scale increases in their wages? And further to 
that, what is the total value of those increases, and what is 
the total value of all salaries and remunerations paid to 
employees in this department? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: for fiscal year 
2004-2005, how many employees in this department will 
be receiving cost-of-living allowance increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the COLA percentage, 
and what will be the total value of the COLA increase? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Government Relations: for 
the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many employees in this 
department will be receiving cost-of-living allowance 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
COLA percentage, and what will be the total value of the 
COLA increase? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister: 
 

For the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many employees in 
this department will be receiving scale increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the total value of those 
increases, and what is the total value of all salaries and 

remunerations paid to the employees in this department? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the minister responsible for Agriculture and Food and 
Rural Revitalization: for the fiscal year 2004-2005, how 
many employees in this department will be receiving scale 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
total value of those increases, and what is the total value of 
all salaries and remunerations paid to employees in this 
department? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker: 
 
For the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many employees in this 
department will be receiving cost-of-living allowance 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
COLA percentage, and what will be the total value of the 
COLA increase? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Information Technology: 
for the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many employees in this 
department will be receiving scale increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the total value of these 
increases, and what is the total value of all salaries and 
remunerations paid to employees in this department? 
 

And to the same minister, I direct this question for the fiscal 
year 2004-2005: 
 

How many employees in this department will be receiving 
cost of living or COLA increases in their wages? And 
further to that, what is the COLA percentage, and what is 
the total value of the COLA increase? 
 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have similar 
questions for the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Justice: for fiscal year 
2004-2005, how many employees in this department will 
be receiving scale increases in their wages? And further to 
that, what is the total value of those increases, and what is 
the total value of all salaries and remunerations paid to 
employees in this department? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask the 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Justice: for fiscal year 
2004-2005, how many employees in this department will 
be receiving cost-of-living adjustment increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the COLA percentage, 
and what will the total value of the COLA increase be? 
 

And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation: for the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many 
employees in this department will be receiving scale 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
total value of those increases, and what is the total value of 
all salaries and remunerations paid to employees in this 
department? 
 

And I also ask the following question on day 16: 
 

To the minister of Sask Water Corp: for the fiscal year 
2004-2005, how many employees in this department will 
be receiving cost-of-living allowance increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the COLA percentage 
and what will the total value of the COLA increase? Thank 
you. 

 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a number of questions for the Minister of Health as a 
result of yesterday’s budget. I give notice that I shall on day no. 
16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many long-term care beds 
will be closed in the fiscal year 2004-2005 in each health 
authority? 
 

To the minister while I’m on my feet: 
 

How many acute care beds will be eliminated in the 
fiscal year of 2004 and 2005, in each health authority? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of these questions that I will 
table. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

For the fiscal year 2004-2005 how many employees in this 
department will be receiving scale increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the total value of those 

increases and what is the total value of all salaries and 
renumerations paid to employees in this department? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have an additional 
question. 
 

To the minister responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: for the fiscal year 2004-2005 how many 
employees in this department will be receiving COLA 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
COLA percentage and what will be the total value of the 
COLA increase? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment: for fiscal year 2004-2005 how many 
employees in this department will be receiving scale 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
total value of those increases and what is the total value of 
all salaries and renumeration paid to employees in this 
department? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment: for fiscal year 2004-2005, how many 
employees in this department will be receiving 
cost-of-living allowance increase in their wages? And 
further to that, what is the COLA percentage and what will 
be the total value of the COLA increase? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: for the fiscal 
year 2004-2005 how many employees in this department 
will be receiving scale increases in their wages? And 
further to that what is the total value of those increases and 
what is the total value of all salaries and remunerations 
paid to employees in this department? 

 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, a second question. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the 
following question: 

 
To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: for the fiscal 
year 2004-2005 how many employees in this department 
will be receiving cost-of-living allowance increases in 
their wages? And further to that, what is the COLA 
percentage and what will be the total value of the COLA 
increase? 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Environment: for fiscal 
year 2004-2005, how many employees in this department 
will be receiving scale increases in their wages? And 
further to that, what is the total value of those increases 
and what is the total value of all salaries and remuneration 
paid to employees in this department? 
 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a similar 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask the 
government the following question: 

 
To the minister responsible for the Environment: for fiscal 
year 2004-2005, how many employees in this department 
will be receiving COLA increases in their wages? And 
further to that what is the COLA percentage and what will 
be the total value of the COLA increase. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Northern Affairs: for fiscal 
year 2004-2005, how many employees in this department 
will be receiving cost-of-living allowance increases in 
their wage? And further to that, what is the COLA 
percentage and what will be the total value of the COLA 
increase? 

 
Now while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have another 
question. I give notice on day no. 16, I will ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Northern Affairs: for the 
fiscal year 2004-2005, how many employees in this 
department will be receiving scale increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the total value of those 
increases and what is the total value of all salaries and 
remunerations paid to employees in this department? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation: for the fiscal year 2004-2005, 
how many employees in this department will be receiving 
COLA increases in their wage? And further to that, what is 

the COLA percentage of what we . . . the total value of the 
COLA increase. 
 

While I am on my feet, a similar question to the same minister: 
 
For the fiscal year 2004-2005, how many employees in 
this department will be receiving scale increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the total value of those 
increases and what is the total value of all salaries, 
remunerations paid to employees in this department? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: for the fiscal 
year 2004-2005, how many employees in this department 
will be receiving cost-of-living allowance increases in 
their wages? And further to that, what is the COLA 
percentage and what will be the total value of the COLA 
increase? 

 
And while I’m on my feet: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: for fiscal year 
2004-2005 how many employees in this department will 
be receiving scale increases in their wages? And further to 
that, what is the total value of those increases and what is 
the total value of all salaries and remunerations paid to the 
employees in this department? 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the minister responsible for Corrections and Public 
Safety: for fiscal year 2004-2005 how many employees in 
this department will be receiving scale increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the total value of those 
increases, and what is the total value of all salaries and 
remunerations paid to employees in this department. 

 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Corrections and Public 
Safety: for fiscal year 2004-2005 how many employees in 
this department will receive cost-of-living allowance, 
interest . . . increases in their wages? And further to that, 
what is the COLA percentage and what will be the total 
value of the COLA increase? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

shall on day 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Industry and Resources: for 
the fiscal year 2004-2005 how many people in his 
department will be receiving scale increases in their 
wages? And further to that, what is the total value of those 
increases, and what is the total value of all salaries and 
remunerations paid to employees in his department? 

 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Minister . . . or, Mr. Speaker, I have 
another question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Industry and Resources: for 
the fiscal year 2004-2005 how many employees in his 
department will be receiving cost-of-living allowances 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
COLA percentage and what will that total value of COLA 
increase be? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation: for fiscal year 2004-2005 how many 
employees in this department will be receiving scale 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
total value of those increases, and what is the total value of 
all salaries and remunerations paid to employees in this 
department? 

 
Further to that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll also be asking: 
 

For fiscal year 2004-2005 how many employees in this 
department will be receiving cost-of-living allowance 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
COLA percentage and what will be the total value of the 
COLA increase? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Labour: For the fiscal year 
2004-2005, how many employees in this department will 
be receiving scale increases in their wages? And further to 
that, what is the total value of those increases and what is 
the total value of all salaries and remunerations paid to 
employees in this department? 

 
I also have another question. I give notice that I shall ask on day 
no. 16 the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Labour: for the fiscal year 
2004-2005, how many employees in this department will 
be receiving the cost-of-living allowance increase to their 

wages? And further to that, what is the COLA percentage 
and what will be the total value of the COLA increase? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have one more question. I give notice that I 
shall ask on day no. 16 the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: what will the annual savings be 
to the government for the termination of 500 government 
workers as announced in the budget delivered March 31, 
2004? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for the constituency 
of Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company: for the fiscal year 2004-2005, 
how many employees in this department will receive scale 
increases in their wages? And further to that, what is the 
total value of those increases and what is the total value of 
all the salaries and remunerations paid to the employees in 
this department? 

 
Also I give notice that on day no. 16 I shall ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company: for the fiscal year 2004 and 
2005, how many employees in this department will receive 
cost-of-living allowances increase in their wages? And 
further to that, what is the COLA percentage and what will 
the total value of that COLA increase be. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure, 
Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
the House a very good friend of mine from the community of 
Eastend. I’d like to introduce Jim Fletcher who is in your 
gallery. 
 
Jim and his wife, Deb, and family moved back from Alberta to 
the family farm about the same time my wife and I moved to 
Eastend. We had children about the same age. Our lives have 
been intertwined as a result of those personal connections over 
the last 20 years or so and it gives me pleasure to introduce him 
today. 
 
I might add that he is the author of many quick-witted 
statements and I shared this with my colleagues this morning. 
But when Jim heard about the government’s added $160 million 
expenditure in health care he indicated that he thought that was 
like throwing good oats after a dead horse. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, Dave 
Dutchak, president, and Garry Towler, vice-president, of the 
Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services Association. 
They’re sitting in your gallery. And they’re people who 
represent many, many able people who provide care across the 
province to our Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the Minister of Health in welcoming the 
representatives to the emergency medical association in 
Saskatchewan. These gentlemen and their organizations 
tirelessly respond to emergencies across this province and 
provide quality care for the many people that they come in 
contact with. And it’s a pleasure to see them in the House, and 
we welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it is my great privilege to welcome 
a long-time co-worker of mine, Don Ackerman, to the House 
today. There’s also a very special little intricacy here. He’s a 
constituent of Mark Wartman’s — and Mark Wartman also 
brings greetings — but he is also the proud father of one of our 
Pages, Donovan Ackerman. 
 
So I’d like to thank Don for coming and welcome him here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
in the east gallery a number of students. Thirty grade 8 students 
from the Winston High School, which is in town of Watrous, 
have come here to do the proceedings with their teacher, Denise 
Thoner, and six chaperones. I hope that they will enjoy the 
proceedings, and I look forward to answering any questions that 
they have afterwards. And I hope all members will join me in 
welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
House . . . People will recognize one of our former Pages, Cam 
Wensel, and friend in the gallery. And I’ll just mention that the 
whole Wensel family’s very talented, and Cam’s sister was just 
nominated in the young women category in the arts for her 
work in dance in Saskatchewan, so a little more reflected glory 
on the Wensel family. And thanks for visiting here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

Reaction to Budget 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
Saskatchewan families found out they can’t trust the Premier or 
his NDP government. They raised the PST (provincial sales tax) 
by $135 million just five months after campaigning on a 
promise to cut taxes. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Yesterday government employees found out they can’t trust the 
Premier and his government and 500 of them paid the price 
with their jobs, after the Premier railed against cuts to public 
employees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yesterday senior citizens found out they can’t trust the 
Premier, as many seniors will soon pay the price when the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) closes hospitals and long-term care 
beds. That doesn’t seem to bother the Premier or his Finance 
minister. 
 
In fact, this morning the Finance minister said he wished 
Saskatchewan was in the Maritimes — at least that way the 
NDP budget would look good. Mr. Speaker, in many ways NDP 
Saskatchewan is behind the Maritimes. After all under the NDP, 
Saskatchewan already shares many things with our friends in 
Newfoundland — the worst job creation record, the worst 
population loss record, the worst economic growth record in 
Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in many ways the incompetence of this 
Premier and his Finance minister and the NDP government has 
made Saskatchewan a lot like the Maritime provinces. But even 
Newfoundland has hope for a better future. 
 
Here, losing young people, losing jobs, losing hope is what the 
NDP have inflicted on Saskatchewan. So I’m guessing even the 
Maritime provinces wouldn’t be anxious to be associated with 
this Premier, this Finance minister, or anyone in the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Youth Forum on Sustainability 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In some ways, we’re 
getting it right. Imagine high school students, just imagine high 
school students actually being supported as they work on 
sustainability issues. And who has a bigger stake in 
sustainability and the future than high school students? 
 
As I speak, Regina and district high school students are 
developing ways to make their neighbourhoods, our 
community, more green and prosperous. These students are 
participating in Saskatchewan’s first youth forum on 
sustainability. Through the Royal Saskatchewan Museum, 
students are getting a hands-on approach to identifying issues of 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

concern. They are creating action plans to address these 
concerns and gaining skills to become tomorrow’s leaders 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this three-stage forum involves 125 participants 
— 75 students from Regina and nearby communities. And it 
brings high school students, teachers, researchers, and local 
experts together to foster learning and provide students with the 
opportunity to take action and make a real and lasting 
difference. 
 
Today students and teachers are working with their local 
experts to develop action plans. The next stage of the forum 
will take place in October when they reconvene to share their 
successes and failures, and the challenges faced. Mr. Speaker, 
let’s recognize and congratulate the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum, the experts, and all of the students for their great 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Reaction to Budget 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today’s 
newspapers are full of reaction to yesterday’s provincial budget. 
And for most people, the reaction has come down somewhere 
between shocked and appalled. The headline on Leader-Post 
Ron Petrie’s column is, tell me the budget was a joke. Well 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it’s no joke. What this NDP 
government has done to the people of Saskatchewan with 
yesterday’s budget is not funny. It’s appalling and disgusting, 
but not funny. 
 
And maybe the worst part in this NDP budget — it’s designed 
to divide urban and rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, setting 
Saskatchewan families against each other is an old NDP tactic. 
And at times in the past, it’s worked well for the NDP. But this 
time, the NDP’s political divisions has turned out to be an 
attack on everybody in Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s what the Ag Producers Association of Saskatchewan had 
to say about yesterday’s budget: 
 

With this budget, the government has virtually guaranteed 
an even tougher year for producers . . . (in) this province 
. . . 
 
This budget is extremely detrimental to the producers of 
this province, and will further shrink the economy of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s budget was an attack on every family 
in Saskatchewan. And that’s why Saskatchewan families will 
reject this budget, and maybe, sooner or later, will reject this 
NDP Premier and this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 

The Bannock Shack 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to 
Regina’s Chamber of Commerce, there are about 400 food and 
beverage establishments in the Queen City. But there’s only one 
that I know of that sells bannock. That’s right, Mr. Speaker, 
Regina is home to its first bannock restaurant, the Bannock 
Shack. And it’s located in the heart of my constituency, Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Bannock is an unleavened flatbread that has served as a staple 
of the Aboriginal diet for many years. And today it’s selling 
like hotcakes, Mr. Speaker, so to speak. Louis Kenny of the 
Ochapowace First Nation opened the Bannock Shack late last 
year. Since November, the restaurant has averaged about $1,000 
a day in sales, and about half of this revenue comes from the 
sale of bannock alone. 
 
But it’s not just the bannock that’s attracting customers, Mr. 
Speaker. What other restaurant in the city offers an Indian soul 
food menu that includes Kookum’s tasty bannock pizza, bullet 
soup, and Indian tacos? This unique restaurant has not only 
developed its own following of customers, but it’s also helped 
increase business at neighbouring stores. And the Bannock 
Shack helps out in the community by donating bannock to feed 
the hungry with groups like the North Central Family Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people in my constituency are very proud to 
have a locally owned First Nations business in the area, and 
many hope to see more to come. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Mr. Kenny and 
everyone at the Bannock Shack for their success and I would 
like to take this opportunity to thank the staff for their friendly 
service and great food. Megweech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Reaction to Budget 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to young 
people and those who have returned to Saskatchewan from 
elsewhere, this NDP budget of betrayal will make their future 
here either bleak or non-existent. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
share some of their reaction. And I quote: 
 

I recently moved back to the province from Alberta to 
complete my education. With the continued incompetence 
of the NDP, I will move back as soon as I finish my 
education. 

 
Here’s another, and I quote: 
 

I am one of the employees cut by the Saskatchewan 
government. I returned from a great job in Alberta a few 
years ago to serve my home province at a lower salary. I 
will take my degree and seek gainful employment in 
Alberta or the USA. This time I won’t be coming back. 

 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I quote: 
 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

The NDP government which I voted for has betrayed the 
people of Saskatchewan. I have heard repeatedly the 
government line that jobs will be created for youth in this 
province in the public sector. Yet I was working for 
Saskatchewan Environment; now I find myself 
unemployed. Tomorrow I leave for BC to look for work. 

 
Mr. Speaker, comments echoing similar concerns abound. 
Unfortunately, due to the unparliamentary nature of the 
language used, I cannot share them with the Assembly today. 
 
This NDP budget has now confirmed the travel plan for many 
of our young people and they are not buying return tickets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Reaction to Budget 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government made 
a commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to provide the 
best health care in Canada, and the people of this province 
know that this government will keep that commitment even in 
the face of challenging circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget delivered yesterday is a budget that 
responds to fiscal realities of this province — a budget that 
reflects our prudent fiscal management, but not at the expense 
of vital public services and programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have told us that quality 
health care is their number one priority and health care spending 
is increasing by 6.3 per cent to almost $2.7 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This increase will support top public priorities such as 
expanding MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) and CT 
(computerized tomography) scan services, increasing the 
capacity of the cancer agency, and an additional $16 million for 
the drug plan. 
 
In keeping with our commitment, Mr. Speaker, to young 
people, education spending will also increase this year by 
almost 4 per cent to slightly more than $1.2 billion. This 
includes $24 million to capital improvement for K to 12 
(kindergarten to grade 12) schools and $16 million for 
post-secondary institutions. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
people have made it clear that health and education are their 
priorities. This is a sound responsible and balanced budget that 
delivers on those priorities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

Reaction to Budget 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 
the budget the Premier told CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation), and I quote: 
 

There is tremendous hope in our province, tremendous 

hope. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what I hope is that after this budget families 
and businesses won’t pick up and leave this province. 
Unfortunately the reactions tell a different story. Like the quote, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

This budget is nothing more than an incentive for many 
Saskatchewan families to pick up and move. How can 
anyone say they are attempting to create any kind of 
welcome business environment with one breath and then 
announce they’re increasing taxes with another. The final 
result is that at least four people in this province, myself 
and my family, are leaving. 
 

One more quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Two years ago my wife and I decided to come back to 
Saskatchewan and purchase a business. Since then we 
have sold our business and intend to either be moving to 
Alberta or BC. In listening to the budget today, it has only 
reinforced our decision. Without business you have no 
economy and yet there has been absolutely nothing in this 
budget to provide any confidence to business owners to 
reinvest in this province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, with a budget so devoid of vision and direction, 
it’s no wonder there’s a lot of hoping going on. Let’s hope it 
doesn’t mean more Saskatchewan families will be leaving our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Effect of Budget on Citizens 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s now clear how far this 
Premier was prepared to go to hold on to his chair. He was 
prepared to say anything, he was prepared to do anything, and 
he didn’t care who he hurt — just so long as he could cling to 
power. 
 
For 28 days he looked Saskatchewan voters in the eye and said 
one thing after another that just wasn’t true. He said he would 
cut taxes and he said would protect civil service jobs. He said 
he would look after seniors. And now this Premier is raising 
taxes, firing civil servants, and kicking seniors out of their beds. 
 
Why did this Premier betray Saskatchewan voters? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, some things 
never change in Saskatchewan — we continue to have a 
opposition that prefers to dwell on the past, live in the past, 
fixate on the past. We as a government, however, are entrusted 
with the responsibility of dealing with the realities of today, 
moving Saskatchewan forward into the future. 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

We have identified, I think correctly, the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. Those priorities are health, education, 
support for our young people, also support for vital programs 
and services in areas such as agriculture. That is what we are 
doing with this budget, Mr. Speaker. That is why we are cutting 
public spending in areas with all of the problems that creates. 
That is why we are raising revenues — because we are firmly 
committed to those priorities now and will be into the future, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier ran a despicable and mean-spirited 
campaign. He knew all along he was going to have to step on 
Saskatchewan people to get back into that chair. And you know 
what? He didn’t care. For 28 days he told Saskatchewan 
families he was going to cut their taxes. And he knew all along 
it wasn’t true. But he didn’t care, just so long as he got . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The member’s language 
in his questioning is just sort of bordering on the 
unparliamentary. It is . . . Order. Order. It is unparliamentary for 
a member to impute wrongdoings on the part of another 
member, and I would ask the member to adjust his remarks so 
that he can express things in this Assembly in a way that he is 
. . . I’m not asking to limit his freedom of speech but I want to 
make . . . Order. But I’m asking the member to respect all other 
members as honourable members and address the issues instead 
of personalities. 
 
I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll let 
the people of Saskatchewan take a look at the platform that said 
it was going to cut taxes, and then I ask the people of 
Saskatchewan to read yesterday’s budget and make their own 
decision as to what the Premier really said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, how could the Premier attack 
Saskatchewan families by raising their taxes after promising to 
cut their taxes just five months ago? Why did the Premier 
betray Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I do hope that lots of 
Saskatchewan people will be watching this exchange in the 
Legislative Assembly and they will see how out of touch and 
irrelevant, I guess in some ways, the opposition is, to be 
dwelling in a period of a history as opposed to dealing with the 
present and the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I might say that the language that the member uses is the 
same language that they use no matter what the pretext might 

be. They used it in the election campaign, probably used it 
before the election campaign, use it again. But, Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of the day, all of us are elected here to provide 
leadership for the people of Saskatchewan and deal with the 
priorities that the people have identified. Those priorities are 
health, education, support for important areas such as 
agriculture. That’s what they want from us and that’s what we 
should be getting on with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind the member opposite 
of a comment that was made by this Premier. And I quote from 
a NewsWatch of January 8, 2004 and it says: 
 

Do you have a mandate to change or raise the PST? The 
Premier responds, no, no. 

 
That’s the response of this Premier, Mr. Speaker. That is not the 
words that we expected to hear in the budget yesterday. What 
we heard, Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier dropped a bomb on 
all of Saskatchewan — $187 million in tax and fee increases. 
That’s $187 million this Premier is taking out of the pockets of 
men, women, and children right across this province. But he 
doesn’t care. He was prepared to say whatever it took to trick 
voters into supporting him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did this Premier betray Saskatchewan 
families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here again we 
have an example and it’s . . . You know, you hate to point these 
things out and perhaps many people who are watching this, who 
are faithful watchers, will remember this. But you know, that’s 
the problem with oppositions — that there’s never any real 
consistency. And I guess that’s why people become cynical 
about opposition parties and especially this opposition. 
 
Because it was just some years ago, Mr. Speaker, when this side 
of the House . . . We had a Finance minister that lowered the 
PST at that time and provided significant tax relief for the 
people of Saskatchewan at that time, and lowered the PST from 
7 points at that point to 6 per cent. And the reaction from that 
side is contrasted with now in their over-the-top rhetoric about 
it being a bomb. Well in those days they said that kind of tax 
relief was just simply pathetic, Mr. Speaker, and listen to them 
now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to share some 
over-the-top rhetoric with the Finance minister. And I quote 
from a NewsWatch document of January 13 where a reporter 
interrupts the Finance minister, and he says this: 
 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

You’re saying the NDP didn’t talk about raising taxes 
during the election because it wasn’t politically popular. 
That’s outrageous! 

 
The Finance minister responds: 
 

Well maybe it may be outrageous but that’s the truth of the 
matter. 

 
That’s the rhetoric that we heard, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
rhetoric that we heard in his platform. We heard the Premier 
talking as he travelled across the province. He was going to be 
the protector of government jobs; he was going to ensure that 
the workers would be protected. 
 
Well let’s look at what happened yesterday. Five hundred 
workers out of a job, Mr. Speaker. The Premier knew he was 
going to fire people and for 28 days he ran around this province 
saying the opposite. Why did the Premier betray government 
workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this is another thing 
that we have to be wary about when it comes to the opposition 
is their use of quotations to represent the facts of the matter, 
because we know from experience that we should examine very 
carefully when they use quotes and how they’re used and what 
juxtaposition they’re used, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again what we are faced with today is the fact that 
we need to find the resources to support the important priorities 
that Saskatchewan people have — the important priorities of 
health care, education, support for our young people, important 
priorities too in areas such as agriculture, Mr. Speaker, where 
we have needs and demands in that system, and we need to 
support that. 
 
That’s what we are doing with this budget. That’s what we are 
moving forward with. We’re doing this in a sustainable way, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what the people of Saskatchewan want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing that the 
Finance minister can stand there and does not recall his own 
comments of January 13. Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the 
Finance minister I’ll read an entire paragraph of the minister. 
The minister says: 
 

Why don’t parties want to talk about tax hikes during 
elections? I don’t know. I suspect that anyone who talks 
about tax hikes is not likely to be very popular during the 
course of an election campaign. But again, during the 
course of the election campaign we were some months 
removed from the end of the fiscal year and from knowing 
what our exact financial position is, what the challenges 
will exactly be during the course of the coming four years. 
But again the Premier was very clear . . . 

You know, Mr. Speaker, that was the government before the 
election and that was the government that was elected after the 
election. They didn’t know what the true financial picture of 
this province was? Well I would venture to say that their 6.8 per 
cent promise that they made last year was a little out to lunch. 
But, you know, they should have known. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we saw the Premier take his disguise 
off. Why did the Premier betray Saskatchewan seniors 
yesterday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it appears that the 
opposition is still fighting the last election campaign and 
dealing . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Can’t get over it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — As the member says, can’t get 
over it. 
 
I remember reading many years ago as a student a book by a 
psychologist called Elisabeth Kübler-Ross, and she identified 
various stages that one goes through when you experience a 
loss. And the first, the first stage of that is one of denial. And I 
believe that the second stage is one of isolation, which they will 
feel because they’re no longer as popular as they thought they 
were once, prior to the election campaign. And then the next 
stage is one of anger, Mr. Speaker. And I think we’re hearing a 
lot of anger these days. 
 
But all I can say, and I think what the people of Saskatchewan 
would say, get real, get responsible, get over it. Start dealing 
with the issues of the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s deal with, 
let’s deal with the issues of the day as to how this government 
reacted yesterday to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier also launched a vicious and 
vindictive attack on rural Saskatchewan. He campaigned by 
saying he would help rural communities. But now that he’s 
safely back in that Premier’s chair, he has decided to exact 
revenge on rural people for not supporting him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the most vindictive, petty, and coldly 
calculating part of his budget. Rural supporters did not support 
this Premier so this Premier has decided to make them pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had one rural person tell us, and I quote: 
 

I didn’t know they hated us this much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this Premier betrayed rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we 
made many difficult decisions in arriving at the budget that we 
have. We cut public spending in many areas of government to 
support our important priorities and the people’s priorities. 
 
One of the areas where we have increased spending . . . are 
proposed for this year — and hopefully the opposition will 
support that — is in the area of agriculture where there is an 
increase over the projected amount last year. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, that last year, outside of the budget 
process, that we added $130 million to support people in 
agriculture in Saskatchewan because we know that’s the thing 
that we have to do. And I think everybody in Saskatchewan 
understands that’s what we have to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we remain committed to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan, the people all of Saskatchewan and to reflect the 
priorities they are telling us that we should be supporting; 
health, education, and indeed support in an important area such 
as agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Long-Term Plan for Saskatchewan Future 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the difference between this side and 
that side of the House is that this side of the House believes that 
a government can support and understand rural Saskatchewan. 
It’s not a choice between health and education or rural 
Saskatchewan. They need each other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you know at least when Roy 
Romanow . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, at least when Roy Romanow and 
Janice MacKinnon were bringing in tough budgets in the early 
1990s, at least when they did that, Mr. Speaker, there was a 
plan. There was a plan. It was short-term pain for long-term 
gain. 
 
But with this new sheriff in town, Mr. Speaker, now, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a situation where it’s short-term pain for 
long-term pain. The message coming from the NDP yesterday 
was yes, we know this is bad but at least it’s going to get much 
worse, Mr. Speaker. That was the message. 
 
The question to the Premier is this . . . I think we’ve established 
that the Premier betrayed those he committed to in the 
provincial election with his promises. We’ve established that. 
What the Premier can do now though is stand up and tell us 
where is the long-term plan? Where is the hope for the province 

of Saskatchewan as a result of that budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It 
appears that this is one of the things that the people at home will 
pick up when they watch the legislative proceedings is that 
sometimes no matter what answer we give, they can’t deviate 
from the script that they have in their questions and so they’re 
not in a position to really absorb the answers. 
 
But let me say again, Mr. Speaker, that not only does our 
budget contain an increased support for the area of agriculture 
that’s there in our budget, we will continue to provide in the 
neighbourhood of a quarter of a billion dollars in tax 
expenditure support for rural agriculture, Mr. Speaker. I think, 
all totalled, this is in the area of a half a billion dollars. 
 
We need to continue to support this industry in Saskatchewan. 
This is an industry that has faced very, very difficult times over 
the last years. This has added budget pressure to our finances. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we remain committed to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We remain committed to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. We stand behind them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear that 
this Premier had no plan beyond November 5. He had 
absolutely no plan beyond getting elected, beyond saying 
whatever he had to say to anybody that he could say it to, to get 
elected, Mr. Speaker. Beyond the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — For that fact, Mr. Speaker, for the fact that the 
Premier had no plan beyond getting re-elected, the people of 
Saskatchewan are now paying the price. 
 
I ask him to take to his feet now, Mr. Speaker, and explain to 
the people of the province, what is his plan, what is his 
long-term plan for the future of this province. Does he even 
believe that we need to grow, that we need more people here in 
the province. Will he stand up and give us some indication of a 
plan for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, earlier in this question 
period the new Leader of the Opposition talked about what’s 
been established. He said, I tell you what’s been established, 
particularly in this question period, is there absolutely no 
difference, there is absolutely no difference today in the 
opposition than in the opposition we saw before the general 
election. Except, except if I may say, Mr. Speaker, under the 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

leadership of the member from Rosetown, I think the rhetoric 
was even less agitated. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, we went to the 
people with a plan, with a plan for the people of Saskatchewan. 
That plan has been, has been debated in our Throne Speech, that 
plan is reflected in our budget, is a plan which says we are 
going to build a green and prosperous economy in this province. 
We are going to make this province a place of opportunity for 
our young people. We are going to provide affordable utilities 
to the people of Saskatchewan. We are going to build the best 
possible health care system that we can and we are going to care 
for the community needs of Saskatchewan. That’s our plan, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s in the budget. And this budget shows a very 
clear, definite plan on how we are going to do that in a fiscally 
sustainable manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier before question 
period began, members of the House were reading the 
numerous e-mails that are coming into various Web sites, media 
Web sites across the province. And it speaks to these series of 
questions, Mr. Speaker. Some of the quotes are interesting. 
Here’s one: 
 

They have proved . . . (the NDP have proved) they are 
incapable of telling the truth . . . My decision to leave the 
province has now been confirmed.  

 
(14:30) 
 
Another one: 

 
I recently moved back to the province from Alberta to 
complete my education (but) with the continued 
incompetence from the NDP I will move back as soon as 
I’ve finished my education.  

 
And there are literally dozens of them, just on these pages 
alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I note — I note — that the Premier did not answer the 
question. In light of the budget yesterday, in light of the 
complete omission of any indication that they have a plan for 
the future of the province, does he or does he not agree that the 
surest hope for the province is to grow the population, to 
increase, increase investment activity? Does he believe we need 
to grow? Yes or no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The answer to the member’s question is 
absolutely yes. And that is the intention, that is the goal, that is 
the plan, and that is the direction of this government, with a 
sustainable, realistic, a practical approach to making that 
happen, as opposed, Mr. Speaker, to the plan that that member 
and that party put before the people of Saskatchewan in the fall. 
 

What did that plan say? We’re going to grow the Saskatchewan 
economy by selling off the heritage of Saskatchewan people. 
That was their plan. We were supposed to grow the 
Saskatchewan economy by massive, unsustainable tax cuts. 
That was their plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan rejected that plan and they’re so 
embarrassed about it today they don’t even have it on their Web 
site any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear that the Premier was 
willing to campaign for 28 days and say anything to anybody 
that would listen to him so he could get his old job back, even if 
that meant firing the same people that supported him from the 
jobs in his very government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But perhaps more damning for the province in the long term is 
the fact that there is no long-term vision. Yesterday’s budget 
had nothing in it . . . nothing of hope for the future, no plan for 
the future. At least with Mr. Romanow and Ms. MacKinnon 
there was a plan and there was a clear goal at the end of the day. 
That doesn’t exist today under this current government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the Premier fails to realize that there are more than two 
options. It’s not only about cutting expenses or increasing taxes. 
We can get our economy growing. That must be the third 
choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why was the budget devoid of any long-term plan to get our 
province growing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, oh how the times change. 
How I recall the comments of those members when the former 
premier, Roy Romanow, was here; when the former minister of 
Finance was here. I mean it was the same kind of an attack, the 
same kind of rhetoric levelled at those two individuals at that 
time. Nothing changes, Mr. Speaker, nothing changes. 
 
We have laid before the people of Saskatchewan through an 
election campaign, we’ve laid it out now in our Throne Speech, 
it’s laid out now in the budget — a plan, a vision for this 
province. A vision that is practical, that is achievable, a vision 
that says we are going to build a green and prosperous economy 
in this province. A vision that says we are going to make this 
province first choice for our young people, Mr. Speaker. A plan 
that says we are going to build the best public health care in 
Canada, that we are going to provide a quality of life in the 
province of Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people, and for all 
of those who will come to our great province, that is second to 
none in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

Members’ Support for Budget 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s one particular e-mail on the 
CBC Web site that was directed at me actually. It was directed 
at me so I’d like to share it with members. It says: 
 

In the retail world, they used to call it bait and switch. If 
the intent of our newly re-elected NDP government was to 
be the first or best at applying this concept to electoral 
promises, I’d say they met their target. 

 
The e-mail goes on to say that I should, quote: 
 

Work diligently to unseat this undeserving, deceitful 
government in the days, if not the hours ahead. 

 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? I think that’s pretty good advice, 
Mr. Speaker. Immediately after question period the 
Saskatchewan Party will introduce a motion of non-confidence 
in this Assembly for the Government of Saskatchewan 
betraying the people of this province. 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, through you, is there any member over there 
with the courage to support that motion, to stand up for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure of the exact 
time frame — it’s four or five months ago — we went to the 
people of Saskatchewan on a confidence, on a confidence 
question. We asked the people of Saskatchewan in a general 
election, in a general election, who do you choose? Who do you 
choose to take this province forward into its great future? And 
44.7 per cent of the population of Saskatchewan gave the 
support to the New Democratic Party, to this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the confidence, 
that’s the confidence upon which we build. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve had to make some tough and difficult decisions. We’ve 
put forward a tough but very practical budget. But what have 
we heard from the opposition through the Throne Speech and 
now into the budget speech debate — not one suggestion of an 
alternative, not one new idea for health care. When asked what 
they would do in a budget, they have no answers, Mr. Speaker. 
That is why there is no confidence in this leader or this 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on Thursday of next week the 
non-confidence motion will come to a vote, this NDP’s budget 
will come to a vote. That fact that it said one thing in the 
election and is doing another thing now, the fact that the 
Premier has done that, that will also come under the scrutiny of 
this legislature. 
 

It will only pass if every single NDP MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) votes for it. It’ll only pass if every single 
NDP MLA stands in his or her place and betrays the people that 
voted for them; if every single NDP MLA votes to raise taxes. 
It’ll only happen if every single NDP MLA votes to fire the 
government employees that worked for them in the campaign. 
It’ll only happen if every NDP MLA decides they will vote to 
close hospitals and kick seniors out of long-term care beds, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the only way they will win that vote. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we ask if there is one, even just one NDP 
MLA over there who will stand up for Saskatchewan, stand up 
for truth and integrity in this Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. Will any of them stand up for the people of this 
province when it comes to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this — every 
member of this legislature who sits in the government benches 
will stand up for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Stand up for a green and a prosperous economy. Will stand up 
in this House for building a future for our young people, will 
stand up for the best public health care that we can build, Mr. 
Speaker. You bet they’ll stand up. But they won’t be standing 
up just to feather their own political futures or their own 
political nests, as we see across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government, these NDP MLAs will stand up for the people 
of Saskatchewan — you can mark my words on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Moose Jaw North on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw North has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. members for 
leave. I’ll be very brief. I think there’s a little extra pressure on 
the Pages because as I look to the Speaker’s gallery, I see that 
we have not one but two former Pages here. This must be 
Pages-come-back-tour today. 
 
Joining Mr. Cameron Wensel is also Mr. Luke McWilliams, a 
former Page here in the House. And I know that we’ll also want 
to welcome him back and wish him well in his current 
endeavours, and good to have him back. And Pages, you’ll have 
a difficult act to follow because you’re following the best. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

Mr. Hagel: — Good to have you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Workers’ Compensation Board 
Pension Implementation Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 15, 
The Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation 
Act be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister responsible 
for the Workers’ Compensation Board that Bill No. 15, The 
Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation Act be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read 
a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Geographic Names Board 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 16, The 
Geographic Names Board Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 16, The Geographic Names Board 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read 
a second time at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 17 — The Department of Energy and Mines 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 17, The 
Department of Energy and Mines Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No 17, The Department of Energy and 
Mines Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read 
a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 25 through 33 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 25 through to 33 
have been submitted. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day I would ask leave of the Assembly to move a motion with 
respect to consideration of interim supply. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked 
leave of this Assembly to move a motion with respect to interim 
supply. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTION 
 

Deferral of Budget Motion 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, because of changes 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

in the government’s computer system and its ability to track 
expenditures and the like more quickly than has been the case in 
the past, we are faced with a circumstance where we will need 
to move interim supply very quickly in order to meet some 
obligations. 
 
I’ve held discussions with members of the opposition in this 
matter, and I want to recognize and extend our appreciation to 
the opposition for agreeing and allowing for us to move to 
interim supply tomorrow. I mean that sincerely. We appreciate 
their co-operation in this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, I would move: 
 

That on Friday, April 2, 2004, the special order for 
consideration of the budget motion shall be deferred in 
order that interim supply resolutions and the related 
Appropriation Bill may be taken into consideration. 
 
And further that on Monday, April 5, 2004, the debate on 
the special order for the consideration of the budget 
motion shall be resumed. 

 
Thank you. And I move that, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Regina Douglas Park, and seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That on Friday, April 2, 2004, the special order for 
consideration of the budget motion shall be deferred in 
order that interim supply resolutions and the related 
Appropriation Bill may be taken into consideration. 
 
And further that on Monday, April 5, 2004, the debate on 
the special order for the consideration of the budget 
motion shall be resumed. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen, seconded by Mr. Hagel, 
that this Assembly approves in general the budgetary policy of 
the government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker. It’s 
again a pleasure to rise and continue with the reply to the 
budget speech. I had an opportunity yesterday to share opening 
thoughts on that budget. 
 
And as you heard, Mr. Speaker, and people across this province 
heard, that we’ve seen a tremendous reaction by people from all 
parts of the province. We hear from people in urban 
Saskatchewan who are very much concerned about the fact that 
there will be job losses, that there will be closure of long-term 
care beds, that there will be closure of health facilities and will 
further bottle up the health services that are currently provided 
in cities like Yorkton and Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we hear from rural Saskatchewan that rural 
Saskatchewan has been devastated not only in the fact that the 
revenue-sharing grant to rural Saskatchewan is very, very small, 
but the tremendous cuts that have been made to rural 
Saskatchewan, the job losses, the loss of services, the loss of 
programs. Those are the kinds of things that we’re hearing 
about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also hearing from people who live in 
northern Saskatchewan who are very upset with this 
government for the fact that they betrayed them. They told them 
one thing during the campaign, and now they’re doing the exact 
opposite. And they have hurt northern Saskatchewan, rural 
Saskatchewan, and urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of questions have been posed by many 
individuals in the public, people who want to understand, want 
to understand the budget, want to know what has changed as far 
as the way this government reports. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to indicate because I’ve stood in 
this House for, you know, year on year asking this government 
to follow the recommendation of the Provincial Auditor who 
has stated many, many times that the province of Saskatchewan 
needs to catch up. It needs to change like seven other provinces 
did in this nation — and the federal government has also 
followed this type of accounting system — and to move to 
something that is referred to as summary financial budgeting, 
where the entire economic picture is presented to the 
Legislative Assembly. And then not only do we as the elected 
representatives have an opportunity to look at it, but so do the 
people of Saskatchewan. They also have that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so I want to first of all say congratulations to the 
Finance minister who’s kept his word and has ensured that we 
have moved to summary financial budgeting this year. That was 
a move that was expected, and he has moved forward. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, it has also brought into light the 
full economic picture, and we can take a look at where this 
government has put its priorities, where it has put its plans . . . 
and in fact to have a better understanding of Crowns. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in so doing, the people of Saskatchewan have 
many questions, and they want to try to understand exactly what 
are the terms deficit and debt . . . really mean for this province. 
What are the terms deficit and debt . . . mean for this year, the 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

fiscal year that we start today? Or for that matter, what did they 
mean the year-end of March 31, 2004? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to put on the record a number of quotes. 
And I want to quote from Hansard which is the document that 
records all of the words of this Legislative Assembly. Mr. 
Speaker, the quote is from Hansard, May 31, 1991, so a number 
of years ago. And the quote is this: 
 

. . . if they think they can go to the people of Saskatchewan 
and say, we need more money, then you . . . better clean 
up your own act first. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, that quote is made by the now Premier 
of the province of Saskatchewan, the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another quote from Hansard of April 9, 1990. 
And I quote: 
 

Well now it all begins, it seems to me, with the simple 
truth: if you spend more than you bring in, you’re going to 
have a deficit and you’re going to have problems. 

 
Hansard April 9, 1990, as I’ve indicated. The speaker, the 
current Minister of Finance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those were the . . . that was the language that 
was used by the Premier and the Finance minister back in 1990 
and 1991. 
 
Now let’s turn to more recent language. Let’s turn to language 
used by the Premier on October 17 of 2003, in Yorkton, 
Saskatchewan when the Premier released the platform that the 
NDP campaigned on. And it says this: 
 

It is a platform that provides the room, fiscally, for the 
ongoing and growing base funding to health and education 
and other valuable public services. 

 
He said it had the fiscal ability to deal with the promises in 
health and education. He didn’t say that there was going to be 
an increase in the provincial sales tax or the tobacco tax or the 
liquor tax or there were going to be hikes to fees. He didn’t say 
that there was going to be a de-indexing of the exemptions of 
personal income tax. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet a 
number of times with the executive of the Saskatchewan 
Government Superannuates Association. And they are lobbying 
this government to ensure that all superannuates are treated 
equally, that there is an equitable treatment of them, and that all 
pensions should be indexed because there are a number of 
pensions that are not indexed. They are at the whim of the 
Finance minister as to whether or not there will be indexing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these people were very pleased when they 
heard that this government had put in place a plan to at least 
deal with exemptions, deal with the personal exemptions that all 
of us deal with, and that they would be indexed on a yearly 
basis to accommodate at least for the cost of living because 
there’s no guarantee that many of those superannuates, in fact, 
are going to get a cost-of-living increase. But at least there was 

going to be a change to the exemption which would technically 
mean that it would put a couple of dollars back in their pockets. 
 
Now the government opposite in yesterday’s budget has said, 
that’s not on any more; it will now be at the whim of the 
Finance minister whether indexing takes place on exemptions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to look to what people consider to be the 
reality in Saskatchewan. When you look at the province of 
Alberta and exemptions continue to rise. Mr. Speaker, a 
personal exemption in the province of Saskatchewan now is 
well over $14,000, because it’s indexed. It moves up, year after 
year. Province of Saskatchewan — $8,000. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think you need to be too much of a 
mathematician to realize that if you have a $6,000 difference — 
6,000 and change — and you look at the bottom figure in 
Saskatchewan, the bottom percentage which is 11 per cent, you 
will be saving an additional $660 of tax, Alberta versus 
Saskatchewan, on that simple, low income level. 
 
And that’s what people are looking at, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
looking at how can I, how can I survive? How can I continue to 
grow my family? How can I continue to build? And what this 
government has done is said, pack your bags, move into your 
. . . get into your vehicle and look for a job elsewhere. 
 
And as we heard today in a lot of the comments that my 
colleagues introduced in members’ statement and in question 
period, we’re hearing from many people that this is, this is the 
camel . . . that this is the straw that has broke the camel’s back, 
if I might. They’re ready to move. And they’re going to move. 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t need more taxes in this province. We 
need more taxpayers. And what this government did yesterday 
is to, is to drive people out of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before, on January 8 the Premier 
was asked, do you have a mandate to change or raise the PST? 
And he said, no, no. He repeated that word — the word no — 
twice. That’s pretty emphatic, Mr. Speaker. That’s to tell people 
we campaigned on a promise to cut taxes; we campaigned on a 
promise to support rural Saskatchewan; we campaigned on a 
promise to ensure that health care would get better; we 
campaigned on not raising taxes. That was still January 8’s 
story. 
 
And yesterday, what did we see? We saw that entire document, 
that entire platform that we have been looking at over the last 
number of days literally fly out the window because it was 
political rhetoric and they were not going to keep the promises. 
The Premier had no intention of keeping those promises that he 
was making during the election campaign. They were there to 
ensure that he would get re-elected. But they were not there to 
ensure that they would be kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at those two words as I indicated 
— deficit and debt. Now that we’ve got the complete summary 
financial statements, we can compare what the government has 
put forward for us today versus what is contained in the 
auditor’s report of the last two years. 
 
And I want to share a few numbers, Mr. Speaker, because I 
think people will have a better opportunity to understand. 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

According to the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Fred Wendel, in his 
2003 Report Volume 2 called Understanding the Finances of 
the Government, Mr. Wendel indicates that for the fiscal year 
that ended on March 31, 2002 the total deficit of the province 
for that year of all the economy of the province was $483 
million — clearly a deficit year. For the year ended March 31, 
2003 the auditor reports that the deficit was $654 million. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, from yesterday’s budget, from the Finance 
minister’s own document on page 78, the net debt, he indicates 
that the net debt for March 31, yesterday, was $299.8 million, 
or in other words $300 million. The projected debt for the year 
that we are starting today and will end on March 31, 2005 is 
$312 million debt and deficits. 
 
Take those four numbers, the last three years and the expected 
year that we’re starting today, Mr. Speaker, and you have a total 
number that is now a debt for the province of Saskatchewan of 
$1.749 billion. One and three-quarters of a billion dollars have 
been added to the debt of this province since that Premier took 
that chair four years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the problem is in this province. We 
hear the Premier say one thing during an election campaign, 
make promises based on a platform that he had no intentions of 
keeping, and the end result now is that the debt of this province 
is larger today than it was in 1991, the overall debt. 
 
Liabilities of this province continue to grow. We now have an 
opportunity to look at all of the liabilities that are on the books 
of the government if you like, and that number is huge, Mr. 
Speaker. We have over $4 billion of pension liabilities. So 
when you add in Crown corporation debt and you add in the 
General Revenue Fund debt and you add in all of the other 
liabilities, Mr. Speaker, you have a debt that is unbelievably 
high — $17 billion according to the document. 
 
And there are some questions about what has been left out in 
terms of other liabilities that may still be incurred. We 
recognize that there are lawsuits against the province of 
Saskatchewan. There are lawsuits dealing with SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) and there 
are lawsuits dealing with justice issues that may, may, Mr. 
Speaker, translate into hundreds of millions of dollars worth of 
settlement. So, Mr. Speaker, we have a province who is moving 
backwards. 
 
Nineteen quarters of the last 21, this province has had a 
population drop. We have many times, Mr. Speaker, been 
indicated . . . it has been indicated that the province of 
Saskatchewan has the poorest job creation record of all 
provinces. We heard some comments about the minister 
wanting to, you know, be closer to Atlantic Canada because 
we’ll, you know, we’ll look good. Well, Mr. Speaker, even they 
beat us in job creation. We are last. And it’s time that we need 
to move forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s not what we saw in yesterday’s budget. We will not 
see those businesses on the western side of the province who 
have been struggling to stay afloat with this 6 per cent increase 
. . . 6 per cent PST, we will not see them survive if the PST is 
now going to 7. How will they keep those buyers? Well the 
only way, Mr. Speaker, is you have to reduce the amount of 

income that you’re going to hope for by at least 7 per cent to 
compare to purchases made in Alberta, just across the border. 
That’s the only way you’re going to survive. 
 
And the markups that this province continues to look at — the 
increases in telephone rates and power rates and energy rates 
and all of the vehicle registrations that this province just 
announced — those are costs that businesses have to pick up. 
And this government continues to download on them as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the problems that is going to face a number 
in my constituency is the uncertainty about the plan around 
long-term care beds. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the age grouping statistics have been put out 
as a result of the last election. And it’s interesting. I had an 
opportunity to take a look at age groupings. The document 
divides the population into six categories: zero to 14 years of 
age; 15 to 19, etc.; and the last category being 65 plus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the population of 978,000 people in 
Saskatchewan, the percentage of 65 plus . . . And you know, we 
should play a little trivia game. I should ask you, Mr. Speaker, 
what do you think that number would be? But I know I can’t 
involve you in the debate, so we’ll just pose that to my 
colleagues and the members opposite. What is the percentage of 
people in Saskatchewan that are over 65 plus — 14.2 per cent; 
that’s the number of 65 plus. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to take a look at my own 
constituency, the constituency of Canora-Pelly; the constituency 
that I live in, which is Kelvington-Wadena; the constituency of 
Melville-Saltcoats, which are all east central Saskatchewan 
constituencies. And I had a look at Canora-Pelly. The 
percentage of 65 plus — 23.6; nine percentage points higher 
than what is the average in Saskatchewan. In 
Kelvington-Wadena, 21.9; and in Melville-Saltcoats, 20.7. Mr. 
Speaker, that area of the province, as many know, we have a 
tremendously large senior citizen population. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Everyone, everyone knows that the people in their last four 
years of their lives require 80 per cent of health care dollars. So 
it’s not something that we’re going to hide from the, from the 
rest of the world. We’re not going to hide from reality. That’s 
what’s going to happen to east central Saskatchewan. We have 
an older population that is going to require more dollars. 
 
And there is tremendous fear in east central Saskatchewan with 
this government announcing that they’re going to trim the 
number of long-term care beds. Many seniors are saying we 
will need those beds. We hope we don’t, we hope we don’t, but 
we’re going to need them. 
 
This is an attack on the seniors, Mr. Speaker. It is an attack, as 
I’ve indicated when we talked about de-indexing the exemption. 
That’s the only thing that the seniors were hopeful for — that at 
least exemptions would continue to rise so that a few dollars 
would be left in their pockets to be able to pay for the increases 
of utility rate costs. And now that has been taken away. So, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s tremendous fear in east central Saskatchewan 
about what will long-term care bed cuts really mean to that side 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

of the province. 
 
I had the opportunity to hear from the chief executive officer of 
Sunrise Health Authority. And, Mr. Speaker, for your benefit 
and the people of Saskatchewan, Sunrise Authority contains 
pretty well all of Canora-Pelly and a large chunk of 
Kelvington-Wadena, Melville-Saltcoats, Yorkton. It’s the east 
central side of the province. And the gentleman has indicated 
that to remain in a status quo position, to be able to meet the 
costs of the WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) increases, 
the joint job evaluation, the regular costs that they have no way 
of changing, the Sunrise Authority would have needed between 
seven and a half and eight per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look at the budget and I look at the Sunrise 
Authority. They had a budget that ended yesterday of 104 
million and they’ve now moved to 108 million — $4 million 
which is just under 4 per cent. Mr. Speaker, to stay even, they 
would have required over $7 million; they’re only going to get 
four. 
 
There will be cuts in east central Saskatchewan in the Sunrise 
Health Authority. What cuts are they going to be? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, for a number of years now the community of 
Preeceville and district — and I say Preeceville and district, Mr. 
Speaker, because it is the . . . it involves the communities of 
Sturgis and Stenen and Hyas and all of those communities 
stretching north almost to Hudson Bay — they have been 
lobbying this government for a new health care facility. They 
need to do a renovation to their current hospital that would 
move over the long-term care beds, put the two facilities 
together into a structure that probably is going to be more 
efficient, it’s going to be more cost-effective; but most 
importantly, it’s going to deliver needed care to that group of 
people who live in that part of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough, in the fall of 2003, 
specifically September 19, just as we found out about three 
weeks before the call of the election, the Minister of Health was 
in Preeceville. The Minister of Health was in Preeceville to 
meet with the committee and the minister promises that the 
today’s . . . and I quote again from the Preeceville Progress of 
September 25, and says: 
 

Today’s announcement is about moving ahead and 
building a better future for the people of Preeceville and 
surrounding area. 

 
That’s a quote of the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ironically the picture in the Preeceville Progress 
that was put in there of the mayor of Preeceville, Mr. Grant See, 
and the minister and Mr. Joe Kirwan, the CEO (chief executive 
officer), and Mr. Weber and Mr. Peterson from the board also 
contained another gentleman. And his name was Brian Rusnak, 
and he was the candidate for the NDP. 
 
So on September 19, the Minister of Health came to Preeceville 
to talk about an announcement and he included the candidate 
for the New Democratic Party in a picture that was not political, 
as I was told. This was not a political trip. This was to confirm 
that the government was indeed going forward with the 
construction of the Preeceville hospital. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard from a number of Preeceville 
residents since yesterday. And what they are asking very clearly 
is they want this Minister of Health to announce immediately 
. . . and I say immediately, Mr. Speaker, because they’ve been 
asked to put their $1.6 million into a fund to go ahead with 
construction. They have it. They’re ready to go. They’ve been 
ready to go for years and this government continues to delay, 
make excuses, delay. Come and announce . . . come and 
announce a project that was already announced before, 
interestingly enough only three weeks before the election 
campaign was to begin. 
 
But setting aside all of that, the people of Preeceville and area 
want this government to indicate immediately that that facility 
will go ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the estimates of Health contain capital funding for 
Health. That number is exactly the same as it was in the 
previous year. But there is a budget for capital expenditure in 
Health. The Sunrise Authority through to the people of 
Preeceville, they need to know that this government is 
committed to building a facility in Preeceville that is needed, 
that is needed drastically, Mr. Speaker. And I want to ensure 
those people in Preeceville and area that I will hold the minister 
accountable for the promises that he made — the promises that 
he made to ensure that that facility was going to be built. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of concerns that we have had 
from a lot of different people. We indicate that we were 
concerned that the budget didn’t have any mention of a health 
sciences centre. And I am going to stay on that topic of health 
sciences for just a minute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is interesting numbers when we look at how 
people across this nation deal with growth and the ability to 
attract people. In the province of Alberta, in the city of 
Edmonton, the region that Edmonton is part of is referred to as 
the Capital Health Authority. And there is tremendous support 
for that area, in fact so much so that it has now attracted 
world-renowned specialists. A heading in the paper said, 
“Medical specialists lured to Edmonton by high-calibre 
research, facilities.” 
 
And that’s the point we’ve been making. My colleagues from 
Saskatoon have been making this point for days and days and 
weeks. Even back in last fall’s campaign we said we need a 
health sciences centre — a centre where we could extend the 
number of nurse training positions, just for some novel idea; 
some place where we could be recognized in Western Canada 
as a facility that would attract specialists and would attract 
doctors. And that is exactly what’s happening in Alberta. 
 
This facility in Edmonton is recognized as being world class. 
They’re luring specialists from Ottawa. They’re luring 
specialists from other cities. And it says, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

The emergence of Edmonton and Calgary as major 
medical centres can be attributed in part to the support of a 
provincial government. 

 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, it’s essential that we have a vision. 
That this NDP who lacks a vision, who lacks a plan, will cause 
the province of Saskatchewan to take a step backwards. We 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

needed a plan to say we are moving forward, that we are in fact 
going to have a health sciences centre. It was going to be state 
of the art, and it was going to be recognized and draw those 
people. It’s not there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other concerns of course is, in the area 
of health, is professionals. And in east central Saskatchewan 
and Canora-Pelly, there is tremendous concern about the fact 
that the baby boomer group is nearing the end of retirement. A 
number of nurses are nearing their retirement, and there is fear 
that if those nurses retire, there will not be any people, any 
professionals to take their place. There’s a fear that X-ray 
technologists, lab technologists, as those people retire, will we 
have the graduates necessary to be able to take their place? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on January 27, 2004 you recall the discussion 
about the possible construction of an MRI clinic in Saskatoon 
by a First Nations group. And one of the technologists said MRI 
machines are not the problem; lack of technologists is the 
problem. So, Mr. Speaker, I listened yesterday to the fact that 
the province of Saskatchewan is going to actually look at 
another MRI machine. And based on numbers, probably that 
machine is needed. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance . . . I’m 
sorry, the Minister of Health has responded to me in a question 
that I posed to him, where he stated that the current MRI 
machines, the three that we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan, they’re not working 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week. You know, Mr. Speaker, they operate on a 5-5-4 week 
schedule, that is, 5 days in week one, 5 days in week two, and 4 
days in week three. And on average they work about ten and a 
half hours per day. They’re not even working 16 hours, in other 
words, at least two shifts of 8-hour shifts. Mr. Speaker, what we 
need — we need to have those machines working at 16/7 at 
least, if we can’t go 24/7. Let’s at least go 16/7 and be able to 
have the MRI machines doing the utmost to ensure that the 
waiting lists can be reduced. 
 
But what did we do? We haven’t talked to Winnipeg where a 
technologist training program exists and say to the province of 
Manitoba, we’re not going to start a training program here in 
Saskatchewan, but can we contribute to maybe adding five 
more spots to the current, I believe, 20 that are enrolled on an 
annual basis. We haven’t done that. 
 
What have we done in the nursing program, Mr. Speaker? I 
want to share some numbers with you and I . . . and I’ve 
indicated that this is a chart that has been prepared on all of the 
provinces. In 1999 Manitoba graduated 119 nurses, 
Saskatchewan 147. We’re pretty low, both of us, both Manitoba 
and Saskatchewan. The year just past, 2003, Manitoba’s 
graduating 272 and Saskatchewan 145. We didn’t move. But 
Manitoba’s already up to 272. And you know, Mr. Speaker, for 
2004, the current year, the number of nurses that will graduate 
in the province of Manitoba is 479 and in the province of 
Saskatchewan 210, and projected to be 210 for at least the next 
three more years. Because it’s not until this last year, just prior 
to the election call, that the government has recognized that we 
need to increase the number of nurse training spots. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s no vision. There’s no vision in this 
budget about how we’re going to grow this province, how we’re 

going to ensure that communities like Preeceville and Canora 
and Kamsack, who have current health care hospitals, are 
maintained. 
 
There is a threat out there that the health authorities are going to 
have to deal with reduced budgets. And as I’ve indicated to you, 
there is at least a $3 million shortfall in the Sunrise Health 
Authority. How will the Sunrise Health Authority deal with the 
fact that it is $3 million short? They’re going to cut jobs. 
They’re going to cut facilities. They’re going to cut services to 
people in east central Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
not what this government campaigned on in the year 2003. 
 
They did not campaign on cancelling the Conservation Cover 
Program. You know the Premier stands and he talks about a 
green economy. I recall the member from Yorkton, the minister 
of Agriculture, standing and talking about how important it was 
to have a Conservation Cover Program for the province of 
Saskatchewan to make sure that we could take some acres out 
that were currently marginal acres and move them out of grain 
production and move them into forage production. And that was 
just an outstanding program. 
 
We poked a little fun at him, Mr. Speaker, because it was a $15 
per acre charge for a maximum of 50 acres, which really was 
about $750 per person. But you know what? Some people took 
advantage of that and we see that there are forage acres out 
there. But guess what? This government cancelled it. This 
government cancelled it. No campaigning that it was going to 
eliminate the Conservation Cover Program. 
 
The farm family opportunities initiative, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government, you know, touted as being just an excellent 
program — chopped. No longer in existence. 
 
The livestock and horticultural facilities incentive program — 
done, gone, chopped out of there. 
 
The farm fuel rebate program, either chopped and . . . when we 
look at retail, the businesses, or reduced to 80 per cent when we 
talk about bulk dealers. 
 
The agrologist inspection services, Mr. Speaker, those are also 
eliminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a tremendous amount of closures in rural 
Saskatchewan — 22 rural service centres are gone. A number of 
those service centres are in the Canora-Pelly constituency. 
 
Farmers relied on the information that would be provided. 
People were employed in those service centres. There’s no 
accurate financial account yet of what that closure will mean for 
communities like Preeceville and Canora and Kamsack, but 
there are going to be a tremendous loss of income in those cities 
. . . I’m sorry, in those towns. It will mean that there will be less 
people there, Mr. Speaker. How do you attract people if you 
don’t have the services in a community that people expect? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns in my area of course is with 
provincial parks, Duck Mountain Provincial Park and Good 
Spirit Provincial Park — two parks. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

told that the Duck Mountain Provincial Park will be opening on 
May 20. Excellent. You know, just before the long weekend in 
May people will be able to go to Duck Mountain Provincial 
Park. But Good Spirit Provincial Park, it isn’t going to open 
until June 18. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial parks are an essential part of 
attracting tourism. It is shocking how many people you will see 
travel to those parks — come from cities, come from Manitoba, 
come from the United States — to enjoy the scenery, to enjoy 
our lakes, to enjoy fishing at the Good Spirit Lake. Now they 
can’t even come into the park until June 18. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the plan of this government? For saving a 
few dollars they have now jeopardized the incomes of retail 
outlets. There are confectioneries, there are gas bars, there are 
riding stables in these parks across the province that now have 
to remain closed because there are going to be no attendants 
taking care of these parks. So people aren’t going to take the 
chance to go to these camps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, I think not only has this budget 
been very, very negative to workers in this province — those 
that lost their jobs, to workers who are now having to pay 7 per 
cent PST, for de-indexing of exemptions — but most 
importantly I think, Mr. Speaker, the slam in this budget is to 
the seniors in this province when we look at the burden that 
we’ll put on seniors as health care facilities close, as they have 
to travel further and further. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Sunrise Authority, Joe Kirwan as 
the CEO was indicating that they were going to try to expand 
— I say expand — the services of the dialysis machine in 
Yorkton. There is a dialysis machine in Yorkton and it’s 
working, but it’s not working full-time because they don’t have 
the staff. But they were going to try to expand it because, Mr. 
Speaker, through the area north of Yorkton — through Canora, 
Pelly, Arran, Norquay — there are many people who have to 
have dialysis. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, they have to travel by bus, or they 
have to travel by having somebody else drive them if they’re 
older, or they drive themselves if they’re capable. But you 
know, Mr. Speaker, they drive right through Yorkton and they 
go all the way to Regina to get dialysis. So there was, there was 
a need. And Sunrise Authority was going to try to meet that 
need by expanding dialysis services in Yorkton. 
 
What will it have meant? It will have meant, I think, greater 
freedom for seniors — not having to travel for a whole day or 
two days to Regina to have a dialysis treatment, but be able to 
do that in Yorkton. But that is not going to be able to happen, 
Mr. Speaker. This government has not looked at a vision about 
how to grow this province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I took a look at four pages of permit 
fee increases, four pages in all departments — $3 for a campfire 
fee and a $7 . . . you have to spend $7 to ask for a big game 
application fee. Never mind the licence to get it, but you just 
have to spend $7 to get the application. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has placed a tremendous 
burden on so many people. We’ve heard from outfitters in our, 

in my constituency who are very concerned about the Crown 
land disposition fees because they have made contracts in 
outfitting. You plan a year ahead. You know that there are 
American hunters that will be coming already for next year and 
you’ve already locked in a contract. The outfitter will now have 
to absorb that total fee increase because a deal is a deal, Mr. 
Speaker, in that kind of business. They’re not going to pass 
those additional costs on to the people that have signed 
contracts. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, this budget does not meet the plan of 
this government. It does not meet the plan. And most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, what it did, what it did is it betrayed 
the people of Saskatchewan. They made promises. This Premier 
went around the province and made promises that he had no 
intentions of keeping. They were just made, as I indicated 
before . . . political rhetoric for the purpose of getting 
re-elected. So there is no way, Mr. Speaker, that the official 
opposition can support a budget like this. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the 
member of Rosetown-Elrose: 
 

That all words after “that” be deleted and the following 
substituted: 

 
the current Premier and cabinet have betrayed 
Saskatchewan voters with the 2004-2005 provincial 
budget and therefore this provincial government does not 
enjoy the confidence of the Assembly. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly, and seconded by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose . . . it’s an amendment to the main motion of 
the member from Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the 
member for Moose Jaw North. And the motion for the 
amendment, the wording of the amendment is as follows: 
 

That all the words after “that” be deleted, and the 
following substituted: 
 
the current Premier and cabinet have betrayed 
Saskatchewan voters with the 2004-2005 provincial 
budget and, therefore, this provincial government does not 
enjoy the confidence of the Assembly. 

 
Debate will continue concurrently on the amendment and on the 
motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order for one minute, the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose. Why is the member from Moose Jaw North 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the House to 
introduce guests, if I may. 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I want 
to say thanks to the hon. member from Rosetown for permitting 
me to take a moment out of debate to introduce some people 
who have made a difference in our province. 
 
Earlier this afternoon the Minister for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation spoke in a private member’s statement about the 
youth forum on sustainability that was going on here in town 
which focused on the ability of young people to make a 
difference in their society. 
 
And in fact, just a few minutes ago we were talking privately 
about a presentation that she described to me as awesome. And 
lo and behold we looked up into the gallery and saw that a 
teacher from Prince Arthur School and three students who were 
involved in making that presentation have come to take in 
proceedings of the Assembly. 
 
Members may be aware that Moose Jaw recently made the 
decision to become smoke-free, and what you may not be aware 
of, Mr. Speaker, is that that was an initiative in our community 
that was started by young people at Prince Arthur School in 
Moose Jaw, a community school where young people decided 
they wanted to make a difference, and could make a difference, 
and got a community to make a big decision. 
 
And I want to . . . I don’t know the names of the students who 
accompanied her but I do recognize Lucy Dalgarno, who is a 
teacher who is held in high regard in our community and I 
would simply ask all hon. members to show their appreciation 
for the interest in the political system. These, I suspect, are 
politicians of the future and they’re certainly politicians of the 
present and I would ask all hon. members to show them 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I am pleased to second the amendment put forward by my 
hon. colleague, the member for Canora-Pelly. But this is also 

my first opportunity to speak in this new legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, and so I would like to take a few minutes to offer 
some congratulations and some thank yous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to congratulate you on your 
re-election as the Speaker of this Assembly. You have the 
opportunity to serve those of us who are sitting in the chairs on 
both sides of the House, along with your deputy who is also 
elected . . . or acclaimed, and we express our thanks to the 
Deputy Speaker, as well. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the new members on their 
election to this Assembly. I heard most of the speeches of the 
new members, at least parts of the speeches, and I was 
impressed, as other members have mentioned, with the quality 
of the speeches that were delivered first time in this Assembly. 
It can be a little bit intimidating for a first-timer. These 
members are not going to be rookies very long in our midst. 
 
And I was particularly impressed with the five new MLAs that 
were elected to the Saskatchewan Party official opposition. The 
quality of their speeches are better than I have heard — either in 
the federal House of Commons or in this legislature — in my 
previous political experience and I want to congratulate them on 
a job especially well done. 
 
When we’re doing congratulations and looking at new things, I 
want to express my congratulations to the new Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party — my replacement, my successor. And 
looking at a man who is younger than myself, who is certainly 
endowed with a lot of political skills, it probably wouldn’t have 
mattered too much who the leader was prior to his assuming the 
leadership. He will do a fine job. 
 
But we hope that we’ve had a bit of a chance to be a mentor and 
positive influence on the member from Swift Current and we 
wish him well in this new role that he plays. And we know that 
he will do it very effectively for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Also I want to join with others in 
expressing my concern for the member from Yorkton, who I 
understand watches by television the proceedings in the House. 
And so if the member from Yorkton is watching now, I want to 
assure him of my wishes for a speedy recovery and I also want 
to tell him that . . . He might be surprised to hear me say this but 
if the member from Yorkton is listening, we really do want you 
to have a speedy recovery because this House and that 
government needs him back. 
 
The replacement, the new Minister of Agriculture, has just been 
a part of the worst budget, the hardest hitting budget on 
agriculture that I have ever experienced in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I have not often agreed with 
the member from Yorkton, and I have my differences with the 
member from Yorkton over his vision for agriculture in the 
province of Saskatchewan. But that member, that member from 
Yorkton could not do the damage in 1,000 years that the new 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

Agriculture minister from Regina Qu’Appelle has done in the 
first budget that he had a chance to put input into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was at a hockey game just up the road in 
Bethune last night, which is almost in the minister’s riding — 
it’s not quite and they’re very thankful that it is not part of his 
riding. But I did not hear one word, I did not hear one word — 
and there were 1,000 people at that hockey game last night — 
one word of accommodation for this new Minister of 
Agriculture. But I heard a lot of things, Mr. Speaker, that I am 
not permitted by the rules to share in this legislature. 
 
So to the member from Yorkton, please come back soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the voters of Rosetown-Elrose 
for returning me to this legislature. I was awestruck with the 
support I received from the voters of that constituency, humbled 
by the fact that I received more votes in Rosetown-Elrose than 
any other candidate did in the last provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And I want to thank the 51 . . . 5,173 
voters who voted. I even beat the member from Cannington, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is a feather in my cap, let me tell you. It 
was close but I did beat the member from Cannington. 
 
And I really sincerely want to thank the people of 
Rosetown-Elrose who came out in thousands to vote for me. 
And I want to assure them and all of the people of the 
Rosetown-Elrose constituency that I hold them in the highest 
regard and that I will do my best to serve those that I am 
committed to represent to the best of my ability. 
 
I need to thank my campaign team. Tammy Danychuk and the 
team of people throughout the Rosetown-Elrose constituency 
did a fine job, a tremendous job, campaigning in my absence 
because I could only spend a few days in my own riding. And it 
is a real tribute to the work that they did to go door to door and 
talk to just about everyone in the riding. And it certainly paid 
out, paid with great returns on election day. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity too to thank my family for their 
support. Now this last campaign I had the support of my wife to 
a degree that she hadn’t been able to give in past elections 
because she had been working. But she wasn’t working in the 
last election, and Gail spent hours and hours on the bus going 
from community to community, city to city, in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It made the campaign one of the most enjoyable 
ones for me — just the fact that I was able to have her support 
and have her by my side. I also appreciate the support of our 
three children: Ehrin, Byron, and Marlyn. Marlyn was a long 
ways away in Australia, but she would contact us and let us 
know that she was pulling for us. 
 
(15:30) 
 
I have to say goodbye as a representative to the people of 
Biggar. Biggar is a community that hadn’t voted much other 
than NDP for decades and decades. And when I first ran, I think 
I got about six or seven votes per poll in the community of 
Biggar. That’s back in 1988. But through the years we’ve built 
up a very good relationship with that community to the point 

that we win the majority of votes in the community of Biggar. 
And I just want to thank publicly all those fine friends that I 
have in that community. 
 
I know that they’ll be well served by the new MLA for the 
Biggar constituency, a man that I respect and a man who 
actually lives right in the midst of his riding in the community 
of Biggar. I’m sure that the folks in that community will be 
pleased. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Also, Mr. Speaker, I get to say hello to a 
bunch of new constituents — at least some of them are new, 
and some of them we used to represent when we served on the 
federal level. And I want to say hello again to the people of 
Eston and Brock, Plenty, Dodsland communities. I’m very 
pleased to be their representative here in the legislature. Years 
ago I had the pleasure of serving them in the Parliament of 
Canada. 
 
And then I have some new, brand new constituents in the areas 
of Outlook, Broderick, and Glenside. And I look forward to 
working with these new constituents, the constituents which 
I’ve taken away from the member from Arm River-Watrous 
who used to serve those people and did a fine job of it I might 
add, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The riding hasn’t changed a lot other than in size. We’re not so 
much north and south; we’re a little more east and west. We’re 
still a riding that is dependent upon grain, livestock, natural gas 
production. There’s irrigation, small business, recreation and 
tourism. Just not enough, Mr. Speaker. Like much of 
Saskatchewan, we need a stronger economy and we will be 
working toward that end. 
 
I want to speak about the budget. But in a prelude to speaking 
about the budget, I want to reflect just for a few moments on the 
election campaign because it was about the fifth one that I’ve 
been involved with in my political career. It was very different 
from some of the other campaigns. 
 
I first ran in 1988. I was green as grass, in my 30s, a little wet 
behind the ears, ran against a Conservative cabinet minister, 
Mr. Bill McKnight. It was the free-trade election, and I guess 
we surprised the people but certainly got beat rather soundly in 
1988. And Mr. McKnight was returned to the Parliament of 
Canada with a rather overwhelming majority of support. But 
that opportunity . . . And maybe that surprises some of the 
members of the other side to know that I did a lot of 
campaigning against Conservatives. In fact I’ve probably done 
more campaigning against Conservatives than a lot of they . . . 
than a lot of they . . . a lot of those people have. But 
nevertheless, that being said, my appetite was whetted. I 
enjoyed the political arena and I decided to stay involved. 
 
And then I had the thrill of my first win. It was a big win, back 
in 1993. It was an election where I received the second highest 
plurality of votes in all of Saskatchewan second only to Mr. 
Goodale, who has also had a very illustrious political career 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. And I was able to serve 
Saskatchewan at the federal level, something that I enjoyed and 
appreciated very much. 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

Then I experienced the uncertainty of redistribution, lost my 
riding; had to run in a riding that wasn’t familiar to me and lost 
it. And it was an interesting experience because I lost when all 
of my colleagues around me were winning. And so it was with 
mixed emotions that I watched the balance come in election 
night, realizing that we’d put up a good fight but we were going 
to come short, just seeing all of my colleagues elected in record 
numbers in the province of Saskatchewan. So there was some 
happiness in spite of the personal loss. 
 
Again I made a commitment to stay involved in the political 
arena. 
 
Then came the challenges of 1990 . . . 1998 with a new political 
party, assuming the leadership of that party, and then a very, a 
very stunning result in 1999 where we did extremely well. And 
it was an energizing time in my political career, one of the high 
points. And we enjoyed very much being the leader of the 
opposition through the last session of the legislature, and felt 
that we’d made a positive impact here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
2003 — and I will be quite frank, and I’ve been very open with 
the people of Saskatchewan, friends and foes . . . political foes 
alike — we were very disappointed in coming just short of a 
victory in 2003. It was a different kind of election, different 
than any other election I’d been involved in prior to this past 
one. 
 
I was speaking recently with a very well known but not 
currently elected NDP person. And this fellow came up to me 
and said he was . . . I could tell he was troubled by the election 
results. He was troubled with the NDP win. And we chatted for 
a bit and I told him, quite frankly it was a terrible way to lose an 
election. But I also said to the NDP gentleman, I don’t think it 
was a very good way to win an election either. And quite 
frankly, I don’t think the NDP did win the election. Even 
though we didn’t win, I don’t accept the fact that campaigning 
the way the NDP campaigned is the way that you really win an 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me give . . . They say it’s a . . . (inaudible) . . . 
day so I’ll give them some examples. Mr. Speaker, in the 
Cumberland constituency we had a First Nations candidate 
campaigning for the Saskatchewan Party. And a tragedy 
occurred midway through the campaign — his business 
manager was struck down with a heart attack. 
 
Now I don’t believe that the current member for Cumberland 
had anything to do with that. I don’t think that she knew what 
was going on around her, but the NDP sent some goons into the 
. . . into our candidate’s office and threatened our candidate that 
he had to stop campaigning immediately because his business 
manager was struck down with a heart attack. It’s the truth, Mr. 
Speaker — the Sopranos don’t have anything over on the 
Saskatchewan NDP and their campaign. It’s the truth and it 
needs to be said. It needs to be put on the record so that the 
people of Saskatchewan know exactly what those people did to 
win the 2003 election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when NDP door knockers knocked on the door 
and a pregnant woman answered that door they would tell that 
woman that if the Saskatchewan Party was elected they would 

have to pay $1,500 to have their child. That is not only crude 
and rude, that’s a dangerous thing to do to an expectant mother. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the truth. The truth hurts but the truth must be 
told. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP in the last election ran radio ads in 
northern Saskatchewan in the Cree language saying that the 
Saskatchewan Party would cancel the treaties. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, we . . . first of all we know that we can’t cancel the 
treaties. Even if the Saskatchewan Party wanted to, we cannot. 
We do not have the power. We do not have the authority. Quite 
frankly, we don’t want the power or authority to cancel the 
treaties and we have no plans to cancel the treaties. 
 
But that didn’t matter. The NDP ran false advertising on radio 
stations in northern communities, trying to frighten people that 
quite frankly, many of whom are disadvantaged because they 
don’t have enough education. They were taken advantage of by 
the NDP in a very cruel and unethical way. Mr. Speaker, that 
was the kind of campaign that we were involved in. 
 
There was much more. There was blatant false advertising. 
There were billboards that were not true. There were the 
tasteless and hateful cartoons from the NDP and from some 
labour unions as well. The list is long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of that made me personally sad and 
disappointed. But now in light of this budget that’s come 
forward, that personal disappointment is much eclipsed by the 
disappointment and the betrayal felt by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know it wouldn’t have mattered so much that we lost the 
election if the NDP would rise to the occasion, if they would 
start doing something for the province of Saskatchewan. We 
can accept that. We know that in the political arena, Mr. 
Speaker, you win sometimes and you lose sometimes. I can 
accept that, personally. But I cannot accept the fact that the 
NDP would betray the people of Saskatchewan — that they 
would stand on a platform before the election that promised 
lower taxes, that promised consideration for rural 
Saskatchewan, that promised to care for people that needed our 
health care system to work for them. 
 
When it was critical, they promised to be there and, Mr. 
Speaker, they failed. They failed to live up to those 
commitments and what we sense from the NDP is that they 
never even had any intention of living up to those 
commitments. That’s a tragedy. That’s a betrayal of the people 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it’s wrong and for that reason, 
even though they got more seats, they really did lose the 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed in the 
Premier of Saskatchewan. He wove a tale, a tall tale during the 
election that was so far from the truth, Mr. Speaker, that should 
he have been standing at . . . should he have been Pinnochio and 
standing at centre field in Taylor Field he couldn’t have turned 
without banging his nose against the goalpost. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s how, that’s how bad it was. 
 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

He said that he would continue modest tax cuts. We said, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not possible for up to as long as two years. We 
said that, first of all we have to get our financial house in order. 
We were straightforward. All of my colleagues, all of my 
candidates — urban and rural, north and south — said lookit, 
first of all we’ve got to correct the fiscal problems that this 
province is facing; we cannot continue to run deficit after 
deficit. 
 
The Premier wouldn’t even acknowledge and the NDP 
wouldn’t even acknowledge that there was a deficit. They 
pretended that there wasn’t. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, as 
a result of their denial, or their betrayal, we now are dealing 
with a situation — not, not with a budget that’s balanced, but 
with a budget that has a deficit and with higher taxes to boot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I signed the taxpayers’ pledge promising not 
to raise taxes if we became the Government of Saskatchewan, 
the Premier wasn’t there. He wouldn’t sign his name on a piece 
of paper and I think that tells a lot about what the NDP’s plans 
were, even during the election campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from the interview that the 
Premier did with CBC television, with Costa Maragos, just last 
night. And this has to do with the PST increase. He said the 
provincial sales tax, even with the increase, the average family 
that 50,000 . . . Pardon me. The provincial sales tax, even with 
the increase, the average family at that $50,000 will pay about 
$904 over the course of a year provincial sales tax. And then he 
says something very telling. He says, that same family in 
Alberta will be paying more than $1,000, almost $1,100 for a 
health care premium. 
 
You know, accidentally, the Premier told the truth. He said that 
family will be paying a health care premium in Alberta, and 
we’ve got the evidence. In 24 hours many families are planning 
to leave Saskatchewan because of this budget, move to Alberta, 
and in fact they will be paying a health care premium. But at 
least, Mr. Speaker, they’ll be getting health care. At least, Mr. 
Speaker, if they need an MRI, they won’t die in the interim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a tragedy. Those people should be staying 
in Saskatchewan. They want to live here. I’ve talked to 
thousands of them, people that are planning to leave 
Saskatchewan and move to Alberta. They don’t want to go. 
They want to stay in this province. They love this province. But 
they feel like they’re being pushed out of Saskatchewan by an 
NDP government that’s insensitive and mismanaging the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP said they were committed to balanced 
budgets. On page 78 of the summary of the budget, the budget 
and performance plan summary, is a line that the Finance 
minister’s own officials told us we should watch very carefully. 
He said this is a new system, these summary financial 
statements — something that we agree with by the way — but 
he said there’s one line, there’s a couple of lines that you should 
keep an eye on. You should keep an eye on what the net debt is 
of the province of Saskatchewan. And the minister’s own 
officials said, watch what the decrease or increase in the net 
debt is. 
 
And so I got this copy of the budget and I looked at the line — 

decrease or, brackets, increase in net debt. And unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, the brackets are there. So when the brackets are 
there, that means there’s an increase in the net debt. The 
increase in the net debt for this current budget is $312.1 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP are putting the province of Saskatchewan 
further at risk. They are loading our youth with more debt if 
they stay in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they 
are robbing our children and our grandchildren of their future to 
the tune, according to their own document, of $312.1 million. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is not acceptable; it’s not acceptable to 
the official opposition. According to the election platform of the 
NDP, they said it wasn’t acceptable to them. But of course it 
didn’t mean a lot, as we’re finding out, what the NDP said 
during their campaign. 
 
The NDP said that they would shorten waiting lists and waiting 
times; they failed to do that. They committed to reducing the 
property tax burden on the people of Saskatchewan; they failed 
to do that. I read very closely the budget, Mr. Speaker, and 
there is no plan to reduce property taxes. 
 
(15:45) 
 
During the election campaign they said yes, there is an 
imbalance; we have to deal with that problem. The Boughen 
Commission has reported . . . or when it reports, we will deal 
with that. Mr. Speaker, the Boughen Commission has reported 
since the election and the government has failed to act. 
 
Also there is the problem of no plan for growth which the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party has very capably addressed. 
And then finally, there is the attack on rural Saskatchewan and 
agriculture in particular. 
 
I want to read from the NDP’s own Web site. This is a news 
release on the NDP Web site. It’s still on their Web site. It’s 
dated October 30, and it was in conjunction with the Premier’s 
visit to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool convention, a convention 
that I also outlined the Saskatchewan Party’s position on 
agricultural matters. And this news release, which is still on the 
NDP Web site, says that New Democrats are committed to 
providing rural residents with the lowest cost package of basic 
utilities in Canada. Mr. Speaker, they failed. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan, or anyone in Saskatchewan, does not have 
the lowest cost for utilities in all of Canada. We’re not even that 
close; quite frankly, we’re in about the middle of the pack. 
 
And what’s even worse is that I have a golf course in my 
constituency. They can only get one telephone line, Mr. 
Speaker. Not only don’t they have the lowest basket of utilities 
in all of Canada, it would cost them to get a second line in. 
Even though the lines are ploughed right through the ground, 
right past the club house at the Saskatchewan Landing, it costs 
about $17,000 to get a second line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only don’t we have the lowest basket of utility 
rates, but we don’t have service to boot, Mr. Speaker, from this 
NDP government. 
 
Second point in the NDP news release on agriculture: 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

reducing property tax pressures by increasing provincial 
revenue-sharing grants and infrastructure funding to 
(municipalities) . . . and rebalancing property tax and 
provincial funding of K-12 education. 

 
Another broken promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They go on to say in their news release that they will be 
continuing to provide: 
 

. . . more than $500 million each year in programs and tax 
exemptions for Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry, 
including strong crop insurance and risk-management 
programs. 

 
That’s absolutely false. I heard the Minister of Finance say that 
over five years he’s hoping to get $1 billion into agriculture. 
Well that’s $200 million a year according to my math. But yet 
the NDP Web site said that they were going to put $500 million 
per year into agriculture, and that they were going to have 
strong crop insurance. But we’ve seen crop insurance weakened 
with higher premiums and lower coverage. So they’ve struck 
out twice just on that one bullet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier says, and there’s quotes around this 
statement: 
 

With respect to education funding through property taxes, 
we have said the status quo is not on . . . 
 

Again the NDP misled the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And finally, farther down, 
 

SGI will continue to provide auto insurance rates that are 
among the lowest in Canada. 

 
And in this budget we saw auto insurance increased, and 
particularly for agriculture, for rural residents, some very, very 
traumatic increases on the insurance costs for registering farm 
trucks to haul grain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in their rural policy they talk about building and 
renovating schools, health facilities, training more nurses and 
rural doctors. Mr. Speaker, this budget is a betrayal of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there is one person in Saskatchewan that should 
be resigning for failure to serve the people of Saskatchewan it is 
the new Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks, and he answers his questions in 
question period, talking about a green and prosperous economy 
for Saskatchewan. Well all the facts indicate that we have a red 
and a dying economy — that’s under this NDP government and 
their plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close, I want to close by talking a bit 
about equalization payments. The Premier, the Finance minister 
has talked about the unfairness of the equalization formula. And 
the Saskatchewan Party recognizes that. In fact, the Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party has said that if the official opposition 
can co-operate in putting pressure on Ottawa to fix that 

equalization formula, we’re happy to do that. The Leader of the 
Opposition has spoken out in favour of correcting the 
equalization formula. 
 
Now this all came to light by the way, Mr. Speaker, when 
Professor Courchene did his paper outlining the inequities of 
the system and how it disadvantages the province of 
Saskatchewan. I don’t know why the NDP government, I don’t 
know why the Premier or the Finance Minister weren’t able to 
give us this information and defend the province of 
Saskatchewan. I’m not sure why we had to depend on a 
professor from out of province to do it. But nevertheless it 
didn’t happen until this professor spoke out on the issue. 
 
But there’s a very telling paragraph or two in Professor 
Courchene’s report that I want to read into the record because it 
tells us that even fixing the equalization formula is not the 
entire solution for Saskatchewan’s economic and fiscal 
problems. Professor Courchene says, and I quote from page 
nine of his report: 
 

What is disturbing about these data (at least from 
Saskatchewan’s vantage point) is that the province’s 
non-energy equalization entitlements are rising at a much 
faster pace than . . . those for any other have-not province. 
The increase in non-energy entitlements over the same 
time frame (1995-96 to 2000-01) is 66 per cent for 
Saskatchewan, compared with 22 percent for Manitoba, 
for example, or 15 percent for Newfoundland. While 
Saskatchewan’s non-energy entitlements in 1995-96 were 
about $150 million less than those for New Brunswick, by 
2000-01, they were about the same. There is a more 
straightforward way to make this same point: (Mr. Speaker 
— and I ask every member of the House to please note 
this) Saskatchewan is becoming poorer, relative to the 
other provinces. Indeed, this was the essence of a recent 
paper by Global Insight’s Dale Orr (2003), in which he 
noted that although Saskatchewan ranks somewhere in the 
middle in terms of provincial per capita GDP, it has 
dropped to the bottom rank in terms of per capita personal 
disposable income. 

 
What Mr. Courchene is saying is that even if you forget the 
equalization formula and even if you don’t look at the problems 
that the strong energy sector is imposing on the province’s 
finances, the province of Saskatchewan economically is going 
backwards. It has been going backwards since 1995-96 to the 
point where, if oil and gas revenues diminish we will become 
. . . we will not receive the benefit that we should, and we will 
become a more handicapped province, more dependent on 
equalization payments than we’ve ever been. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no reason why Saskatchewan should be a 
have-not province. There is absolutely no reason, in looking at 
all of the resources that every province in Canada has, that we 
should be anywhere near the bottom half. Whether you have a 
group of five or a group of ten provinces that you base your 
average upon, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan should be a have 
province. 
 
I cannot support this budget because it is not good for the 
people of Rosetown-Elrose. It is not good for agriculture. It is 
not good for those who depend on the health care system. It is 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

not good for those who have to pay a large percentage of their 
income for the necessities of life and now have an extra per cent 
of PST to pay for those necessities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is bad for the people that I represent. 
It’s not just bad; it’s a nightmare for the people that I represent. 
It’s shaken them to the core. They are questioning whether or 
not they should stay in the province of Saskatchewan. I’m not 
taking about a few disgruntled folks, Mr. Speaker. I’m talking 
about vast numbers of good, solid people in this province, 
people who have contributed much to our province and are 
absolutely dismayed at the betrayal that they have been placed 
under by this NDP government and by the Finance minister and 
the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan should do so much better. Saskatchewan should 
be such a strong province rather than a weak province. We 
should be looked up to by the other members of Confederation 
rather than laughed at like we are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I looked at the submissions to the CBC 
yesterday in response to the budget, it broke my heart. It broke 
my heart to say . . . to read about people who had come back to 
Saskatchewan. I guess the one that broke my heart the most was 
the person who said that they came back in 1999 because that’s 
when we had the . . . (inaudible) . . . success in the election and 
almost won. And they said, we thought things were going to be 
different in Saskatchewan. We came back full of hope and 
enthusiasm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the whole province sensed that there was 
change coming. And then to see that person devastated by this 
budget to the point where they said, we made a mistake in 1999 
and we’re going to head back to . . . I don’t know if it was 
British Columbia or Alberta, I don’t have it in front of me. 
That’s a tragedy. It’s not a tragedy because it’s a statistic. It’s a 
tragedy because it’s a human being of Saskatchewan. 
 
Whenever somebody that loves a province feels that the 
government is driving them from the province they love, that’s 
a tragedy. That’s a tragedy that should sink into some of the 
thick heads over on the other side because, Mr. Speaker, they 
have a duty under our democratic system to do better than 
they’ve done. They have a duty to be more honest and more 
diligent. They have a duty. They have a duty to provide good 
government to the people of Saskatchewan, and they have 
failed and failed miserably. 
 
The most dismal example of their failure is the budget that was 
delivered yesterday. And that’s why I support the amendment 
and will not be supporting the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture, the 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

colleagues. Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to have an opportunity 
to get up and speak to this budget. 
 
I did not have an opportunity to speak to the Throne Speech, 
Mr. Speaker, but I would like to make a few comments about 
my constituency which I have had the privilege of serving for 
one full term and was re-elected again to serve: the constituency 
of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this constituency is predominantly urban 
constituency with a portion of it that is rural. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I appreciate the fact that the people put their trust in me. 
 
There’s a part of me, Mr. Speaker, that would like to talk about 
some of the things that went on during the election campaign, 
but I think it’s very important to put that behind us. Mr. 
Speaker, suffice it to say that I think the last speaker gave all 
the examples of why the opposition Sask Party did not get 
elected just by the way he spoke and the way he was acting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, how 
much I appreciate the support of my family as well — my wife 
Gail, my children Alaina and Daniel who have been there 
throughout all of this time, the additional time that it has taken 
in this last few months to get on board as Minister of 
Agriculture. They have been there fully supporting me. And I 
have to say that also extends to my extended family from whom 
I have received many good wishes. I have received prayers on 
my behalf, and I’m thankful to them for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget helps put before the people of this 
province a clear picture of where this government is moving — 
a government that is grounded fully in building a future for this 
province; a green and prosperous economy that will be here, 
that will continue to grow for all the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was appointed Minister of Highways and 
Transportation back in 2001, and I enjoyed the work as Minister 
of Highways and Transportation. And we had a plan there that 
we were putting into effect, and that plan continues. It is to 
make sure that we build the corridors that will provide for 
economic growth in this province. We heard lots of noise from 
around the province, Mr. Speaker, but we focused on those 
areas that would help to build this province, that would help to 
make it strong and give us a good, solid economy. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that is going very well. We continue to provide good 
budgets that will continue to build this province’s infrastructure 
and our highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had intended to be able to carry on in that work, 
but unfortunately my friend and colleague from Yorkton was 
struck with cancer . . . very, very difficult time for he and his 
family, but for all of us as well who know him and love him. 
And he knows that he has been receiving our prayers and our 
best wishes through this time. And I know that’s come from 
members across the way as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as minister of Agriculture, he did yeoman service. 
He worked hard for the people of this province, for the 
producers of this province. He made sure that when there was 
need, that the funding was there. And he was backed by this 
government, Mr. Speaker, by all the members of this 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

government in those actions. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because we 
care about the whole of this province and that includes rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — So, Mr. Speaker, our minister of 
Agriculture did yeoman service through this past year, a year of 
unprecedented difficulty, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
(16:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. I recognize the 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to say at this time that on my behalf I wish 
the member from Yorkton, our Deputy Premier, a speedy 
recovery, all the best, and I want him to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I would 
wish that the members would take a hint. The floor now was 
been given to the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think during the last speech, the speech of the former leader of 
the opposition, members on this side showed a fair bit of 
respect. There were times when there were comments made, but 
the continual harangue from the other side at this point really, 
really is unnecessary. But I guess it’s going to continue on, Mr. 
Speaker, so I’ll just try and speak over top of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province faces a very difficult fiscal 
environment at this time, and there have been many things that 
have contributed to that. We all know that. As we’ve lived in 
this province, we’ve seen what BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) has done. The closure of the borders has had a 
devastating impact. 
 
The Minister of Finance made clear that outside of budget last 
year we added an additional $130 million to the budget to help 
support our farm families and our producers and our rural 
economy, Mr. Speaker. That $130 million carried people 
through a very, very difficult time. Not only did we do that, Mr. 
Speaker, but we worked with the federal government to make 
sure that there was funding on every front to meet those needs. 
We pressured them when they needed pressure. We worked 
with them when they were prepared to work with us. But we 
made sure that the support was there for our rural Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this year, we realize that 
polling has made very clear that for the people of this province 
— whether they be urban, rural; whether they’re farmers, Mr. 
Speaker — the priority is health care. Polling made that very, 
very clear. 
 
And so when we were drafting the budget this year, we made 
sure that the bulk of that funding that we were putting in, Mr. 
Speaker, went towards health care. And that funding for health 
care is going to provide for a new MRI for Regina. That new 
MRI is going to enable us to do much more in terms of 
diagnosing illness and enabling us to deal with the waiting lists 

and move people forward so that they can get the best of 
possible treatment. 
 
We know that health care is essential in this province, that we 
have to put a lot of our effort, a lot of our work into making 
sure that people get the best possible health care they can. 
 
But I also want to talk about some of the other factors that have 
influenced our fiscal environment, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk 
about a federal government that has not come to the table in the 
ways that they should have been at the table — not at all, Mr. 
Speaker. A federal government that . . . while we were building 
the economy in Saskatchewan, while we were building and 
while we were making an environment so that oil and gas 
companies would come in and do the work, Mr. Speaker, what 
was the federal government doing? For every dollar that we 
were taking out, they were taking $1.08, $1.25 and robbing this 
province. 
 
And then their federal minister, their federal minister says, oh 
here’s a one-time $120 million, as if that’s good. He was 
handing back the money they stole from this province. Mr. 
Speaker, this province has been robbed by a federal government 
on this front, and they had better come to the table and do it 
right. This country was built in a way that should have meant 
equity for all the provinces. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. We’ll just provide a 
little time for members to kind of settle down and relax a little 
bit. And I ask the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley to 
resume his remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I find myself very frustrated when I see these actions by the 
federal government. I also find myself very frustrated by the 
federal government when I see what they’ve done to health care 
in this nation. 
 
And I hope they come to the table. All we’ve got so far in 
general has been talk about putting money into sustainable 
program. I am hoping that they will come to the table and that 
they will do what’s right on fiscal . . . on equalization and that 
they will do what is right with regard to health care in this 
nation and move from their 16 cents to the 25 cents that former 
Premier Romanow has recommended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about some of the 
comments that I’ve heard over the last while. I want to say 
clearly, I know that when I was appointed Agriculture minister 
it was probably a shock to a lot of people — I want to say not 
the least of whom was myself. I’m probably the first urban 
Agriculture minister that we’ve had in this province, and I am 
humbled by that reality. But I was also a little shocked, as were 
some of my friends. 
 
The first Sunday in church after the appointment, Mr. Speaker, I 
was sitting in church. One of my friends, one of my friends 
turned around in church, and he said to me, look Mark, I know 
you’re not from the farm; my brother and I are, and if we can 
offer you any help at all, Mr. Speaker . . . He said to me, if we 
can offer you any help at all, Mark, just ask us. 
 
And I said, well you know I’m trying to get an understanding of 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

some of the things that are going on right now, some of the 
crisis issues, and I’m wondering if you could tell me what do 
you know about anaplasmosis. He said, well I think I dated her 
once. I said, thanks for that help, thanks for that help. What 
about blue tongue? Can you tell me about that? And he said, oh 
yeah, that’s when the Tories open their mouth and start talking. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I thought with that kind of help I’m going to 
be in real trouble, but I can tell you this: that the help that I have 
got not only from the folks in the department who are very 
professional and have tremendous knowledge, the help that I 
have got from within the agriculture community and the support 
that I have got from people who have been involved in this 
agriculture community for many years has been invaluable — 
absolutely tremendous — and I thank them for their support. 
They know, they know that I don’t know everything about 
agriculture and so do I. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I want to point this out. That if I 
were, say for example a chicken farmer, I might not know much 
about raising elk or I might not know much about raising cattle 
or I might not be much in terms of farming and growing pulse 
crops. But, Mr. Speaker, I bring to this the gifts that I have been 
given in my life. I use them as fully as I can to support the 
producers of this province and to make sure, to make sure that 
the agricultural economy of this province continues to grow and 
be successful even through the most difficult of times. That’s 
my commitment; that’s what I’m doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Now I know, I know the members of 
the opposition like to give me a rough time, Mr. Speaker, with 
regards to agriculture in particular and I want to, I want to 
address particularly comments by the member from Kindersley 
when he was up speaking not too long ago. He was very clear 
about his position, Mr. Speaker. He said, I have little to zero 
confidence in that new Minister of Agriculture — little to zero 
confidence. 
 
And then he went on to say, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe he 
even knows which end of a cow milk comes from. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, if that member thinks that milk comes from either end 
of the cow, I’m never sharing a glass with him. He must have 
been raised on a grain farm, Mr. Speaker. I went up to my 
office and reported that to my staff. I said, you know, he must 
have been raised on a grain farm. My chief of staff said, yes, he 
must have been because he doesn’t know it comes from the 
udder side. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, enough for . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I am not a farmer — that’s fair enough — but I am a 
child of Saskatchewan. I love this province and I commit to the 
people of this province that I will do my utmost to make sure 
that the agricultural economy continues to grow and be 
successful, again as I said, even through the most difficult of 
times. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in agriculture we have faced many challenges, 
as everyone knows. But we have put our support behind this 
agricultural economy once again. Even in these difficult times, 
we have increased the budget by about 5 per cent, by about $13 
million. And, Mr. Speaker, we are directing that to the areas 

that people have told us they want to make sure are supported 
— that is to the business risk management areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are making sure that we are following our commitment that 
we will have at least $200 million a year over the five years into 
those programs. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because those programs 
are absolutely essential to stability in the agricultural economy. 
Mr. Speaker, we are there for producers. We will continue to be 
there for producers, and this budget shows it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of changes and restructuring that 
we’re doing. Mr. Speaker, we are amalgamating 31 rural 
extension offices. We are putting them into nine business 
development offices in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Why are we doing this, Mr. Speaker? Why are we doing this? 
We are doing this first of all because there’s been a group out 
there that has been, has been analyzing and studying the 
agricultural economy. Most of them, who come from rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they have been analyzing the rural 
economy and they have pointed to how important it is for us to 
support the regions. That’s one aspect of this decision. 
 
A second aspect of this decision is that over 70 per cent of the 
people who have called into our Ag extension offices have 
handled those calls through phone calls, through e-mail, 
through the Internet. Mr. Speaker, they are not asking for 
people to be out on their farms. 
 
Well why is that? Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
for years the opposition harps against this government and says 
we don’t care about private industry, we don’t care about 
private operations. Well one of the other things that most of 
them should know, because many of them are from rural 
Saskatchewan, most of them should know that out in these rural 
areas there are many private consultants, there are industry 
consultants and agronomists who are out there giving industry 
. . . at the farm gate, on farm, they are providing this. As they 
have been moving in and providing that information, there have 
been less and less calls to our department for that kind of 
information. But they still call in because there is other 
information that is important. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, in doing this analysis and in 
knowing that we have to make cuts so that we can put more into 
the producers’ pockets, Mr. Speaker, we made the necessary 
cuts. But we also recognize there needed to be good . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
I recognize the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we believe that in these new agriculture business development 
offices, the nine offices that we’ve got, plus the call-in centre, 
we know the people will be getting the kind . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. I’d 
just ask the members to be patient and wait for their turn. 
Member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, all I can say around these offices is that, with the 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

advice of ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy), 
with the analysis that has been done, it is our hope, it is our 
plan, it is our intention that we will give the very best support 
possible to the development of business in rural Saskatchewan, 
and that these offices will help in rural redevelopment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also, in terms of our budget, we have 
made sure that we are supporting the long-term work that is 
going on in rural Saskatchewan. And a lot of that work has to 
do with the, with the innovation, the development, the research 
that has been happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see the work that has gone on over the years and we are 
allocating more funding in this year’s budget for new initiatives 
in food safety, for new initiatives in the environment. These 
include programs, Mr. Speaker, that will provide for increased 
disease surveillance and food safety training, as well as 
value-chain initiatives. Mr. Speaker, we know that these are 
absolutely essential in these times. We have had good success 
in our work with the United States and with Mexico as we have 
sought to make sure that we have science-based rules for 
opening our borders and therefore we know that disease 
surveillance is absolutely essential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of . . . in terms of some of the other 
funding that we’re putting in for Prairie Agriculture Machinery 
Institute, they will be getting $600,000, Mr. Speaker. Ag-West 
Biotech for the work that they’re doing, their work, we will be 
putting in $900,000; for Prairie Diagnostic Services so that the 
tests can be done, Mr. Speaker, they will be receiving $1.2 
million in base funding. 
 
In addition, through these activities of disease surveillance, 
further payments will be made on a fee-for-service basis. Mr. 
Speaker, we are supporting the development of agriculture in 
rural Saskatchewan, and we are proud to have the opportunity 
to do that. 
 
In terms of agricultural research, in this year’s budget the 
Government of Saskatchewan will commit $10.4 million — 
10.4 million — to the Agriculture Development Fund and the 
strategic research program at the University of Saskatchewan. 
That investment will lead to the introduction of new technology 
and new practices that will keep Saskatchewan on the cutting 
edge. These investments will lead to enhanced competitiveness 
and profitability for our industry in the future. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is building towards a green and 
prosperous future. Some of those investments, Mr. Speaker, 
will look at the new developments in terms of the environment, 
in terms of making sure that there is the research that is 
necessary to make sure that we can be producing power with 
agricultural waste, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are also looking at further developments in the biofuels, Mr. 
Speaker — both ethanol and bio-diesel. The research is there 
and we are moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the members across the way asked how are we making 
out on ethanol. Well I’m happy to say, Mr. Speaker, that when I 
first began the studies on ethanol back in ’99, one of the first 

conversations that I had was with Vince Chin and a couple of 
other folks from Husky Oil. And one of the first things that they 
said to me, Mr. Speaker, was, we are going to build an ethanol 
plant at Lloydminster. Back in ’99, Mr. Speaker, we knew that 
they were going to be building it and we were working with that 
understanding as we were building towards the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were a number of other options that have 
been raised. There are some of those that are still underway in 
this province. And, Mr. Speaker, some of those will be 
successful. Why? Because we know that ethanol will be a fuel 
of the future. It is a fuel that is used now to extend the life of a 
non-renewable resource. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are more ways that it will be used in 
the future. For example in Brazil, Mr. Speaker, it’s used for 
plastics as well. And we will see many, many more 
advancements in the use of biofuels. 
 
When I was travelling on the election trail, I ran into a young 
man in my constituency who is engaged with a company. They 
are going to be using animal waste, animal fats for biofuels as 
well. So there’s a lot of work going on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The investments our government is making in ag-biotech and 
throughout that whole area of research in agricultural products, 
Mr. Speaker, is going to lead us into a green and prosperous 
future. It’s going to lead us into a future where young people 
have jobs not just in the cities but in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I talked about the change in our Ag 
extension offices, the thing that I’ve also encountered in rural 
Saskatchewan is that many of the representatives and private 
consultants that are out there are young people, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re recent grads of our university and they’re out there 
bringing the very best of the knowledge that they’ve gained at 
our universities out there to the farmers in Saskatchewan. And 
we’re glad that they’re employed here. And we will continue to 
support their education and will continue to support their 
opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s so much 
noise coming from the other side once again, Mr. Speaker, one 
can hardly hear themselves think in this Chamber, but we’ll 
keep working through it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, over these past few years we’ve faced, 
we’ve faced many challenges in this province. We’ve faced 
droughts in this province that are unprecedented. And in each 
case, Mr. Speaker, we have been there for the producers of this 
province and we will continue to be. 
 
The Finance minister has said, and he has repeated to me that if 
there is times when we run into further problems, we will be 
there. He will be there, I will be there, my cabinet colleagues, 
my caucus colleagues will be there for the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. Why? Because we know that this is a vital part 
of who we are as people in Saskatchewan. We know that it is 
when we support each other that we have strength. And that’s 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

what we intend to do, Mr. Speaker, because we’re building 
towards a positive future — not a negative kind of future like 
the guys across there keep talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want a future where there is growth that is 
well-grounded. We want a future where there are many, many 
young people finding jobs in this province — successful jobs. 
And we’re building the environment for those jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to just point 
to one of the other investments that we’ve got. And that 
investment, Mr. Speaker, is in the synchrotron. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is going to have some tremendous impacts all across 
the economy. But I can tell you that, Mr. Speaker, that will help 
in all forms of agricultural research as well. And we’re looking 
forward to seeing the kind of business development, the 
entrepreneurial research that comes out of that centre and helps 
to develop a future in this province for the young people and for 
all people in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will build a green and prosperous province together. And 
we will see those major pieces of our economy, health and 
education, supported in the ways that they need to be supported 
in order to build that economy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are many other people that 
want to speak on this budget. I for my part support this budget 
strongly. I believe that this is a budget that will enable us to 
build a successful future for all the people in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to end just with a . . . Mr. Speaker, we’ve had some 
people sing; we’ve had some people do some other things. And 
I won’t put you through my singing; I can promise you that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat a poem that I wrote a number 
of years ago, and I know the members on the opposite side 
absolutely love this poem. So I’d like to read it out to them one 
more time. They enjoy mocking me for my limited rural and 
agricultural experience, but for me, Mr. Speaker, that 
experience — the relationships that I have had with farmers and 
with the agricultural community over the many years that I 
served in rural communities, lived in rural communities — has 
been meaningful and continues to be meaningful to me and so I 
would like to share this poem: 
 

Am I a Farmer? 
 
I have no quota book. 
I have no land. 
But, I have touched the earth, 
and the earth has touched me. 
 
I have scratched the soil and planted the seed. 
I have watched it grow and turn to gold. 
With swather, combine and truck 
I have gathered the grain to bins 
and shoveled and hauled it to elevator. 
 
So am I a farmer? 

I’ve tasted the soil and I’ve fed the soil. 
I’ve branded the calf and wielded the knife. 
I’ve been in 4-H and learned some skills. 
I raised a filly and I trained her well. 
I’ve herded cattle, milked cows, gathered eggs and fed the 
pigs . . . And yes, I’ve 
slaughtered and butchered and thanked God for the food. 
 
I’ve battled barn fires and prairie fires. 
I’ve ached and cried with family and friend 
over losses no one should have to face. 
I’ve written letters and called for help. 
With compassion and pain, I’ve buried farmers: 
men, women and children whom I have loved, whom I 
have cared for. 
I’ve prayed and sang and danced and worked and played 
and lived with farmers for most of my life . . . 
 
Am I a farmer? . . . no . . . 
But yet, I may understand. 
For I have learned, and I have compassion, 
and I’ve always loved the land! 
 
“I touch the earth, and the earth touches me . . . ” 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in favour of this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With everyone 
being rather rambunctious this afternoon, I’m not sure it’s safe 
to enter the debate, but it is the first opportunity that I’ve had to 
enter the debate in this session, so I wish to congratulate you on 
your election as Speaker, and I wish to thank the member from 
Regina Wascana Plains for entering that race, and for the 
professionalism that she adds to this Assembly. I want to 
congratulate all the new members who have been elected to the 
Assembly for this session, and I want to welcome back all the 
incumbents on both sides of the House. 
 
The most important thing, Mr. Speaker, is I want to wish all the 
best to the member from Yorkton for his speedy and complete 
recovery. We are all thinking of him and wishing him the best 
and we would like to see him back in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Humboldt is very, very 
diverse. It has — although it’s quite rural — it does have the 
city of Humboldt which is, I believe, the province’s newest city 
which has all the urban issues involved with that and urban 
concerns, and revenue sharing is a concern of theirs. 
 
It has a number of small manufacturers and small businesses, so 
the availability of skilled labour is extremely important to the 
citizens of the Humboldt constituency. The business climate, in 
general, is very, very important and highways are quite 
important for the transportation of goods and services in and 
throughout the constituency. 
 
There are four potash mines, so labour issues are important to 
the constituency. And there are bedroom communities and 
acreages where many workers commute into Saskatoon or 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

business owners commute into Saskatoon to conduct their 
business, or for their jobs. 
 
Also Humboldt constituency is an agriculture community that 
contains the largest concentration of intensive hog barns. It has 
the largest feedlot and the only ethanol plant that our, that our 
province presently has. 
 
There are two hospitals, Mr. Speaker, in Humboldt. One’s a 
regional hospital in the city of Humboldt, and there’s a smaller 
hospital in the town of Lanigan. And there also is St. Peter’s 
College, which is an affiliate of the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan). 
 
So there are very, very few provincial issues, Mr. Speaker, that 
don’t directly impact some area or some sector of the Humboldt 
constituency. From post-secondary education to K to 12 
education, to health care, to business, to highways, to all of the 
issues that affect the province, definitely affect the constituency 
of Humboldt. 
 
This budget that was introduced by our Premier and his NDP 
government will have a huge negative impact on the Humboldt 
constituency, as well as the province as a whole. It’s a deficit 
budget, Mr. Speaker. It’s the fourth consecutive deficit budget 
that this Premier and his government have delivered, which 
increases the debt load for every single man, woman, and child 
in our entire province. It’s a deficit that Roy Romanow and 
Janice MacKinnon fought so hard to get a handle on and this 
Premier seems so anxious to grow. And they laugh. But since 
this Premier took power, each and every year that he has been 
in power, they have spent more than they have taken in. They 
have created an increasing debt. And we will all pay the price 
for that; our children will pay the price for that; our children’s 
children will pay the price for that. 
 
It’s a budget, Mr. Speaker, that exposes beyond question which 
political party and which leader had a hidden agenda in the last 
election. 
 
Referring to the NDP’s most ridiculous ad — and I have it here, 
this big headline, Tell Us Again — I think our Premier should 
tell us again. I think he should tell us again how he has no 
intentions to raise taxes. I think he should tell us again how he 
will not close any more hospitals. I think he should tell us again 
how he won’t close any more long-term beds. I think he needs 
to tell us again about the schools that he promised to build. I 
think he needs to tell us again about the tax relief that he 
promised for the education portion of property tax. I think he 
needs to tell us again about his contribution to the integrated 
health service centre at the U of S. I think he needs to tell us 
again how we’re going to have the lowest utility package in the 
country. 
 
And I think he needs to go back out to Humboldt. He loved 
going there during the campaign. I believe he visited there three 
times. And I think he should trek out back there and I think he 
should tell them again how he’s totally committed to the new 
hospital in Humboldt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The Premier needs to tell us again how he is 

going to address the issue of training, recruiting, and retaining 
health care professionals. 
 
He needs to tell us again about his commitment to the 
revitalization of rural Saskatchewan. And he needs to tell us 
again — and his Minister of Agriculture mentioned — how 
they’ve been looking at the recommendations given out of the 
ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) report. Well 
they’ve been looking at them for a long time, but they haven’t 
done anything about them. 
 
So the Premier needs to stand up and tell us again. But I don’t 
think he will, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think he will tell us again. I 
don’t think he had any intentions of keeping any of those 
promises, and that’s why he will not tell us again. 
 
He told the people of the Humboldt constituency, he told the 
people of the province all of those things so that he could keep 
his seat in the House. That was his agenda. That was his goal. 
That’s what he set out to do. And I don’t think he’s prepared to 
go out there now and tell them again how he’s committed to all 
of those things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am quite tired, quite frankly, of the NDP 
government portraying themselves as the champions of social 
issues and concerns when they’re doing absolutely nothing to 
ensure that there is a sustainable source of revenue to fund any 
of the programs in a meaningful way. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And I’m tired of the NDP whining and complaining about the 
negative attitude of the Saskatchewan Party, when they can’t 
even recognize the only thing we’re negative about is them. The 
only thing we’re negative about is the NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I’m tired of the NDP denying reality. They 
deny it. They shake their heads; that can’t be true. I don’t know 
where they get their statistics from; I don’t know where they get 
their information from. But they clearly show that our province 
isn’t growing. Our young people are leaving. Our economy is 
struggling. Our tax base is shrinking. Our health care and 
education can’t be sustainable unless we do something about all 
of those things. 
 
And if those statistics . . . If it isn’t true, if those statistics are 
wrong, if we’re using the wrong statistics, then why did the 
Premier need to make promises he knew he couldn’t keep? 
Why couldn’t he make promises he knew he could keep when 
he was on the election campaign? And why, why does he have a 
Finance minister that now is delivering what he says — he 
admits and tells — is going to be a tough budget? 
 
Why is it a tough budget? If those statistics are not true, if our 
province isn’t stagnating, if our young people aren’t leaving — 
if none of that is true — if we’re growing and we’re prosperous, 
why did those things need to be done? Why did it have to be a 
tough budget? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget attacks everyone in Saskatchewan. It 
attacks all families. It attacks rural communities. It attacks our 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

northern communities. It attacks the agricultural producers in a 
huge way. It attacks the municipalities, the elderly, the sick, the 
business owners, the labour force. There is no one that won’t be 
negatively affected by this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget the decreases in services and 
programs and the increases in fees are absolutely astounding. 
And there was a list supplied to us and I would like to read 
some of those into the record, because I don’t think a lot of 
people in Saskatchewan are even aware of the number of things 
that are being taken away in programs and the number of fees 
that are being increased. 
 
But there’s going to be a closure of 22 of the province’s 31 rural 
service centres. There’s going to be a closure of nine 
Saskatchewan Environment offices. There’s going to be an 
undisclosed number of health care facility closures and 
conversions. There’s going to be a reduction in the number of 
long-term care beds. There’s going to be the elimination of the 
farm fuel tax rebate. There’s going to be a 20 per cent reduction 
on the rebate on bulk farm fuel. 
 
There’s going to be a cancellation . . . And the Agriculture 
minister should rethink his commitment to the producers. 
There’s going to be a cancellation of livestock and horticultural 
facilities incentives program. There’s going to be the 
cancellation of the farm family opportunities initiative — an 
initiative that the former Agriculture minister was so proud of. 
And they talk about being green and that being so important. 
Well guess what, Mr. Speaker? They’re cancelling the 
Conservation Cover Program which they championed as their 
green program. 
 
A $700,000 reduction of funding to the Prairie Diagnostic 
Services lab. I don’t know, they mustn’t have told the 
Agriculture minister that this was happening because he talked 
about increasing food safety and food safety testing. Well that’s 
for CWD (chronic wasting disease) testing, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re slashing the funding for that. 
 
There’s elimination of the short-term hog loan program. The 
prices are dropping. That has been a relatively successful 
program. The recuperation of the money that they have spent on 
that program in the past has been close to 100 per cent. The 
former minister led the hog producers to believe that the 
program was going to be extended, but this Agriculture minister 
eliminated it. And elimination of the livestock drought program; 
a closure of the extension services branches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fee increases; there’s four pages of fee 
increases. In the Department of the Environment there’s an 
increase in angling licence fee. There’s a new big game draw 
licence application fee. There’s increases from various Crown 
land disposition fees. In the Department of Health there’s 
increased fees for certificates of various vital events and 
increased fees for certified photocopies of certificates. They’re 
going to increase the fee to photocopy, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
going to introduce new fees for water tests undertaken by the 
municipalities and businesses. 
 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) fines and 
registration fees. There’s a whole entire page of increases that 
SGI plans to make to registration and fees and to fines. Many of 

those will directly impact in the registration fee increases, Mr. 
Speaker, the agriculture producers and the farmers of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s an increase or an . . . They’re going to 
introduce application fee for reopened Crown mineral land in a 
surveyed part of the province. 
 
In the Department of Justice there’s a half a page of increased 
fees in the Department of Justice alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be an increase in the Victims’ 
Fund. There’s going to be . . . They’re going to introduce a fee 
to recover the charge levied by ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), Mr. Speaker — something that’s 
increased phenomenally since they started using the ISC 
system. And they’re going to increase that yet again. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, like I said, the list goes on and on. 
But we’re looking at an increase in the annual provincial park 
entry fees, an increase in the fees to obtain a building permit on 
park land. They’re going to introduce a firewood burning 
permit fee. They’re going to increase the weekly, seasonal, and 
hourly admission fee to park swimming pools by 10 per cent 
and an increase to park swimming lesson fees. 
 
That directly affects the families of Saskatchewan. It affects the 
families that choose to stay in Saskatchewan and have a 
holiday. It’s a holiday tax, Mr. Speaker; it’s a holiday tax for 
those that choose to stay in our province. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, they announced that 12 of our 
provincial parks will not open until mid-June. They talk about 
it, or spent a great deal of money, Mr. Speaker, on our future, or 
you know, campaigning that Our Future is Wide Open. But our 
parks are closed. Sorry about that. The future may be open but 
our parks are closed. 
 
The tourism potential that we have is phenomenal. We haven’t 
even begun to realize our tourism potential here in 
Saskatchewan. And yet we’re going to limit that by keeping our 
parks closed. 
 
It was kind of humorous because it wasn’t all that long ago I 
was reading the Reader’s Digest, the May edition of 2003. And 
there was an article in there; it’s called “Pedalling to Paradise.” 
It was written by Michelle Mulder, and she tells the story how 
she travelled across the country from end to end and how she 
enjoyed the trip. And it says . . . You want to know? I’m sure 
everyone wants to know what it says. It says: 
 

Throughout British Columbia and Alberta, each time I left 
a campground, fellow residents waved goodbye, wishing 
me well. In Saskatchewan, though, the cluster of little 
green tents on my map dwindled to a . . . (splattering). 

 
That means we didn’t have a lot of parks. She had a tough time 
finding parks for her to camp in. But we’re going to close the 
one we got, so we’re going to have to tell cyclists such as this 
gal, you know, start later because we’re not opening our parks 
until the middle of June. The NDP are cancelling summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that there’s a time restriction to 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

the speeches because there’s so many people that want to talk to 
this, or enter this debate on the budget because there’s so much 
that needs to be said. 
 
But I wish to focus on two areas before I close — and first 
being the attack on rural Saskatchewan and the second being 
the attack on the sick and the elderly. The producers of this 
province have faced two, and in some areas, three years of 
consecutive drought and the impact of the discovery of BSE. 
They have not had a crop insurance program that is as broad or 
as effective as the programs that are offered in other provinces, 
and yet in this province, in Saskatchewan, their premiums have 
been increased for three consecutive years while the coverage 
has been significantly reduced. And yet we have a minister that 
says he’s trying to support or he supports the producers of this 
province. I think not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have an NDP government that has refused 
to contribute to the two-year transition funding that the federal 
government made available — funding that other provinces 
have participated in, programs other provinces have participated 
in. But our province told our producers, sorry, we’re not 
participating; we’re not putting in our 40 per cent. 
 
Our producers here in Saskatchewan are now being told by the 
NDP government that they will not be contributing to the final 
payment of the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program). Mr. 
Speaker, these producers are getting desperate. They’ve been hit 
by drought, they’ve been hit by BSE, they don’t have adequate 
crop insurance coverage. They counted on this government to 
be a government of their word. And guess what? Yet again, 
they’re disappointed. 
 
The producers of this province have an NDP government that 
said that they recognize that the amount of education tax levied 
against agriculture property is unfair. And they did, at one point 
in time, introduce the tax rebate program, but they introduced it 
solely for the purpose of stopping a major tax revolt because the 
movement was growing in rural Saskatchewan. And the minute 
that that stopped, they also scrapped the program. 
 
The minister talked about, just previously talked about how he 
was so frustrated with the federal government when they didn’t 
keep their word, when they didn’t meet their obligations, when 
they couldn’t meet or would not meet their responsibilities. 
How frustrated do you think the producers of this province are? 
They’re frustrated, Mr. Speaker, because their own provincial 
government is doing all of those same things to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan the most unlevel playing field is 
not on the global front where foreign countries are subsidizing 
more than our own country. In Saskatchewan the most 
challenging unlevel playing field is right here in our own 
country of Canada, because the Saskatchewan producers have 
to do with far less than their neighbouring provinces for support 
from their government. Other provinces value and support their 
main agriculture industry and their farm families far more than 
this NDP government has ever supported the producers of this 
province since they’ve taken power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also wish to take a few minutes and talk about 
the state of the health care in this province and how I do not feel 
that this budget is going to address any of those issues. 

The NDP government’s intention to close or convert small 
hospitals is an extremely frightening prospect for rural 
Saskatchewan. The Premier went to Humboldt; he promised 
that the Humboldt hospital would be built. Now I wonder if he 
will go out and do that now. Is he going to tell Humboldt now 
that their hospital is still going to be built? 
 
What about the Lanigan Hospital? Is it going to remain open? Is 
the Lanigan Hospital going to remain open or is it one that’s on 
the list to be gone, even though, Mr. Speaker, it’s been proven 
in the past that it does not save money to close all these 
hospitals? 
 
It does not mean that the nurses and doctors are going to stay in 
Saskatchewan and move to the other hospitals. They’re going to 
either retire or they’re going to go on to a different job choice. 
But to assume that they’re going to move to where a hospital is, 
is simply a fallacy because they have established lives and they 
are not going to move, and many of them will not move. So 
we’ll be losing health care workers. We’re going to be losing 
doctors and we’re not going to save a whole heck of a lot of 
money out of the deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to relate a short story to you before I 
close and it’s one that most members on this side of the House 
know. My father, who is 84 years of age, had a heart attack 
within the last year. And an ambulance was called and he was 
taken to the hospital in Lanigan and they were doing everything 
they could for him. And I met him there once the ambulance 
had arrived. 
 
The doctor in Lanigan phoned Saskatoon. He got the ambulance 
to stay so that they could transport my father to Saskatoon. And 
he phoned and said, we’re bringing in this 84-year-old man 
who’s, you know, having a heart attack. Saskatoon said, don’t 
send him. Two reasons: they said because of his age and 
because they didn’t have any room. They did not have any 
room for my father to be transferred. 
 
Now the doctor and the nursing staff did a fabulous job on my 
father and he is fine. But he spent a number of nights in the 
Lanigan Hospital. They couldn’t give him a bed because they 
were too full. They already had an elderly lady on a stretcher 
and they had to put my father for the first two nights on a 
stretcher as well. And they put him in a . . . I’m not sure what 
kind of room but it was a comfortable room. But they didn’t 
have a bed to offer him because the beds were all full. 
 
And I went to see my dad before I left him to go home in the 
wee hours of the morning and I never ever recalled any given 
time when my father had been ill. So I asked him, I said, dad, 
have you ever had to stay in a hospital? And he told me, in quite 
indignantly in fact, that he would have me know that in 1941 he 
had had his appendix out. Mr. Speaker, that’s 42 years — 42 
years this man had never used the system. He had never 
required any medical care in a hospital and we didn’t have a 
bed, and we didn’t have a bed. We didn’t have a bed for him in 
Lanigan, and they didn’t want him brought into Saskatoon. 
 
(16:45) 
 
So if we close these smaller facilities, I would like the NDP 
government, I would like the Premier, to tell me what do we do 



April 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

under these circumstances. What are we going to do? Because I 
am not willing, I simply am not willing to let these people die. I 
will not, will not, stand by and let that happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to use a quote. It’s by Ralph Goodale. And 
it’s fairly recent, on January 14, 2004. And the quote is: 
 

A strong economy and a strong society are mutually 
interdependent. Our ability to sustain highly valued social 
programs depends upon a strong performance 
economically. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a chicken-and-egg scenario. We must 
grow the economy. We must grow the number of taxpayers in 
this province. Even . . . I mean if the members can’t understand 
that, could they understand this? Even co-ops need people. So if 
we want to have more co-ops, we need more people. 
 
Our health system is going to implode, and our social programs 
will become non-existent, and we will have a lot more closing 
in this province than just our parks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier of the province led the people of 
Saskatchewan to believe that he was a man of his word. During 
the 2003 election he said, and I quote: 
 

It is a platform that is financially achievable, financially 
viable. 

 
He also said, and I quote: 
 

It is a platform that provides the room fiscally for the 
ongoing and growing base funding to health and education 
and other valuable public services. 

 
He also said, and I quote: 
 

And it is a platform that provides for the room to receive 
the recommendations of the Boughen Commission on the 
funding of education. 
 

And the fourth quote, Mr. Speaker, is: 
 

It is platform that is realistic, practical, and above all, 
affordable. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there was a hidden agenda, but it wasn’t the 
Saskatchewan Party’s. There was a hidden agenda by the 
Premier to gain power any way that he could. And then his 
agenda was to get the people of this province to bail out his 
miserable government for their mismanaging money for all the 
years that he has been in power. That was his agenda. 
 
So now it’s a survival budget that we’ve heard from the Finance 
minister. It’s a survival budget; it’s not going to grow the 
province. And who’s going to pay the price for the fact that 
we’ve had four consecutive deficit budgets, for the fact that for 
four years this government has spent more than they’ve taken 
in? Who’s going to pay the price for that? The business men 
and women of the province, the labour force, the northern 
communities, the civil servants, the teachers, the health care 
workers, the farm families, those who have met with hardships, 
Mr. Speaker, those with physical challenges, those with 

addictions, those who are in need of medical procedures, and, 
Mr. Speaker, our children. Our children are going to pay the 
price, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will not be supporting the budget and I will support the 
amendment by the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations, the member for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to be able to enter the debate today 
on the budget and the amendment to the budget, the budget 
presented by the Minister of Finance in this Chamber just a 
short time ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I notice the clock and I just wish to serve notice 
that I believe that I will not be able to finish my remarks today, 
and that I will continue my remarks when the debate is next 
called at the next sitting of the House. 
 
But with the amount of time that’s come forward, Mr. Speaker, 
I do want to indicate that I think this debate on the budget of the 
Minister of Finance and of the Government of Saskatchewan is 
a very important debate. This is a critical time in the history of 
the province of Saskatchewan, a critical time that recognizes 
some of the challenges of the past with a vision for the future 
that will take us through these difficult times in a way in which 
the people of Saskatchewan will feel that they are very much a 
part of developing the future of the province for all of our 
children and our grandchildren. 
 
This is a wonderful province, Mr. Speaker. It’s a wonderful 
province that has fallen on difficult times many times in our 
past. And each time we have had those difficulties, Mr. 
Speaker, we have found ways of gathering ourselves together 
and working together, worked ourselves out of the difficulties 
and have had many years of prosperity in between our difficult 
times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of those challenging times whereby 
we’ve had forces beyond our control like drought, disease, 
forest fire conditions — difficult times, Mr. Speaker, with a 
small population, a population that does need to grow but a 
small population nonetheless, struggling to meet some of our 
needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the benefit of serving on the Treasury Board 
of this government during the past three months as this budget 
developed. I had the benefit, Mr. Speaker, of working with the 
Minister of Finance through these very difficult times of 
looking at every single line item in every single department in 
this government. I had the benefit, Mr. Speaker, of being able to 
scrutinize the needs of the people of Saskatchewan against the 
ability of the province to pay for those needs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in my opening remarks here, I 
want to say that it was a pleasure to work with the Minister of 
Finance as he reviewed those budgets and with compassion and 
with caring, recognized the significant challenges faced by the 
people of Saskatchewan, but was not afraid to take the 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2004 

necessary steps to correct some of the problems that existed 
within the system and to move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are difficult and challenging times, and they 
do demand some courage on behalf of those who must make 
decisions. I couldn’t help thinking over the last little while as 
we not only developed the budget but rolled it out over the last 
few hours, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t help thinking about how 
easy it is to be in opposition at this point in time. How easy it is 
to criticize the moves of a government that dares to make 
decisions. Choices, Mr. Speaker, have to be made as we move 
from a difficult time into a more prosperous time — choices, 
Mr. Speaker, that require us to examine all of our . . . the depth 
of our feelings about this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are examining where we want to go based on 
where we’ve been, and we are making choices, Mr. Speaker. 
Difficult as they might be, we are making choices that are going 
to move us forward into the 21st century. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to have been around a table 
with the Minister of Finance as we’ve examined this process 
and dared to take, dared to take the, dared to take the steps 
necessary to see where we’re going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just in terms of some of these difficult choices, 
there’s a few things that I find important as we move forward. 
Mr. Speaker, I take a look at some of the challenges that we 
face. We know that coming into this budget process, Mr. 
Speaker, we had a number of very significant circumstances 
that we had to face. 
 
Number one, we knew, we knew that the province was 
operating from a position of having debt. We had debt that we 
had to repay. We had debt that we wanted to balance out. Mr. 
Speaker, that had to be dealt with. Mr. Speaker, we also knew 
that we had a revenue strain that, if nothing changed, would be 
at approximately 2 per cent a year into the future. We also 
looked at status quo expenditures of the government, and we 
realized that, if we did nothing, those expenditures would 
continue to grow at approximately 3 per cent per year. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a growing gap there that simply meant more 
and more debt — 2 percentage revenues; 3 percentage 
expenditures. We would have no ability whatsoever to grasp . . . 
how do we reduce that debt if we let this go on? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we did was we found a way. We found a 
way, Mr. Speaker, to address that gap. We had to deal with 
debt. We had to deal with growing debt. And in order to have a 
future for this province, we had to close it. We had to shut it 
down. It would take courage. It would take an awful lot of 
expertise to move in that direction. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this budget gives us a fiscal framework now 
to move forward. That fiscal framework, Mr. Speaker . . . very 
easy to grasp by international bankers and lenders who will not 
reduce the province’s credit rating as a result of this budget, 
who will not increase the cost of borrowing which this province 
must do because of our long-term accumulated debt, Mr. 
Speaker. It will not stress the province of Saskatchewan in the 
international marketplace. 
 
There are some things, Mr. Speaker, that are difficult to explain 

on coffee row because they take a certain amount of time to do 
that. But those things, Mr. Speaker, are easily understood in the 
marketplace, the international financial marketplace of this 
world. 
 
And Saskatchewan has addressed that issue. We have reduced 
our long-term costs as a result of putting in a difficult budget. 
And as challenging as this is and as difficult as this is to roll out 
to the people of Saskatchewan, we know it’s the right thing to 
do because next year our interest costs will be lower. Next year 
our ability to borrow money will be good, and our credit rating 
in the world marketplace, Mr. Speaker, will be very, very 
strong. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are so many things that we had to 
address. I think the first has been discussed by other members, 
Mr. Speaker. But most important of all, I want to add my voice 
to the fact that health care is the number one priority of the 
people of this province. Health care is the number one priority 
of this government. Health care, Mr. Speaker, is addressed in 
this budget like it’s never been addressed before in the history 
of this province — record spending on health care to address 
some very critical needs of the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think a lot of people in Saskatchewan — 
and some in this House — don’t fully understand the extent to 
which the people of Saskatchewan cover the costs associated 
with two of our priorities: health care and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m looking at all these numbers, Mr. Speaker, 
and . . . I’m having different people tell me they want me to 
finish on Monday. I think maybe what I would do, Mr. Speaker, 
then at this point in time, seeing that it is almost 5 o’clock . . . is 
to adjourn debate, and we’ll carry on at the next sitting of the 
House. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................281 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................281 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................281 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................281 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................281 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................281 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................282 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................282 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................282 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................282 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................282 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................282 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................283 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................283 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................283 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................283 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................283 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................284 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................284 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................284 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................284 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................284 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................286 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................286 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................286 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................286 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................286 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................287 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................287 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................287 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................287 
  Hagel ..................................................................................................................................................................................294, 302 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Reaction to Budget 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................287 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................288 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................288 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................289 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................289 
 Youth Forum on Sustainability 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................287 
 The Bannock Shack 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................288 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Effect of Budget on Citizens 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................289 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................289 
 Long-Term Plan for Saskatchewan Future 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................292 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................292 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................292 
 



 

 Members’ Support for Budget 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................294 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................294 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 15 — The Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation Act 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................295 
 Bill No. 16 — The Geographic Names Board Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................295 
 Bill No. 17 — The Department of Energy and Mines Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................295 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................295 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................295 
MOTION 
 Deferral of Budget Motion 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................295 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................296 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................302 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................307 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................311 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................315 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


