















































Hansard: May 07, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 34A  FRIDAY, MAY 7, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 955 
 May 7, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens in my 
constituency who are very concerned about the closure and 
possible downsizing of health centres. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Radville Marian Health 
Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Lake Alma, 
Radville, and Rocanville. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again this morning, I 
present a petition on behalf of constituents from Cypress Hills 
concerned with the Crown grazing lease issue. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these particular petitions are signed by citizens 
from the community of Golden Prairie, Sceptre, and Leader. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the possible closure of 
long-term care beds in our constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that long-term care facilities 
in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency are not closed or 
further downsized. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and 
Halbrite. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens in my constituency that are 
extremely concerned about the possibilities of long-term care 
bed closures and health centre closures. And the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Woodrow 
and Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to closure or possible reduction of 
services at Davidson and Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at their current level 
of service at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, 
emergency, and doctor services available, as well as lab, 
public health, home care, long-term care services available 
to users from the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Craik, Bladworth, 
Saskatoon, and Kenaston. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from constituents who are opposed to possible reduction of 
health care services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie health centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie, Rockhaven, and Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Herbert Nursing Home. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Herbert Nursing 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Herbert; Fort St. John, British Columbia; Prince 
Albert, Saskatchewan; Grande Prairie, Alberta; Hodgeville, 
Saskatchewan; and Gouldtown, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A new petition concerning the Foam Lake Health Centre; 
 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 47, 72, 97, 106, 115, 145, 146, 157, 165, and 166. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning, the 
member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
notice in the gallery a lot of students here today, wearing bright 
green shirts. These students are with the provincial school 
safety patrol jamboree, which is in town for the weekend. 
 
In total there are 185 different patrollers here, 30 different 
chaperones. The patrollers are in grades 6 through 8. 
 
What I want to do today is just briefly read off the large number 
of communities that these students come from, and maybe they 
can give a little wave as I name their community. This appears 
to be in alphabetical order, so starting with Creighton. Where 
are the Creighton patrollers? Oh, there we go. Estevan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . excellent. We’ve got Gravelbourg; 
Hudson Bay; Kindersley, lots from Kindersley — that’s good; 
Lanigan; Nokomis; Maidstone, good; Maple Creek; 
Martensville; Moose Jaw; Nipawin; North Battleford; Prince 
Albert. Mr. Speaker, of course, is a representative for P.A. 
(Prince Albert). You’ll notice the enthusiastic response . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Prince Albert. Regina — well that’s pretty good 
too. Rosetown, Rouleau. Is there anybody here from Saskatoon? 

Spiritwood; Strasbourg; Turtleford; Unity — oh, look at 
Turtleford — Unity; Warman; Watrous; and Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the safety patrollers who are here. 
They’re going to take the next couple of days and tour around. 
They’re going to go see the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police). They’re going to take a look at the Science Centre and 
the IMAX. And I understand this morning that they’ll be 
meeting with two of my colleagues, the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, and the member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
And I look forward to having a chance hopefully to drop by and 
have a little bit of a visit with them too. 
 
So if you’d join me in welcoming them to this Assembly, I’d 
appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I 
would like to introduce to you another group of students who 
have joined us in the Speaker’s gallery. These are a group of 
grade 11 students who are participating in a very innovative 
program called the interchange on Canadian studies. 
 
This program is an excellent opportunity for Saskatchewan 
students to be able to deal with counterparts across the country 
to discuss current issues. The students who are here today are 
from a number of communities from across the province, and I 
would ask that you join with me in welcoming them here to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, the opposition critic for Learning. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming all the students, both in the 
Speaker’s gallery and in the east and west gallery. When I look 
around in the galleries, I’m glad I got here early and got a seat 
because the galleries are certainly filling up. But I would like to 
join with the minister and thank the provincial wide 
representation that we have in the gallery. It’s great to see that 
the program is not just centred in any major urban centre; it’s 
centred in . . . it’s also located in many, many rural 
communities where students get back and forth to school and 
home safely. 
 
And so I’d like to thank you for the work that you do. I think 
sometimes with the House this close we could use your 
assistance in some crossing in the House here would be nice, 
some safe crossing. But anyway I’d like to join with the 
minister and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m thinking 
this way. 
 
I’d like to join with the minister in welcoming the school safety 
patrollers here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

introduce to you and through you to the members of this House 
in your gallery, some two dozen CAs (constituency assistant) 
from the people on the right side of the House. They are in 
Regina yesterday and today checking out what’s happening 
here and getting ready to do a good job back home with the 
constituents. It’s a hard job they do for us; we appreciate it very 
much. It’s tough to be down there in the trenches, Mr. Speaker, 
fighting the intransigent NDP (New Democratic Party) on 
behalf of the citizens of this province, so would you join me in 
welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, 
several young people seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
not sure who orchestrated this, but I have a bit of difficulty with 
names at times. So this year the summer students in the 
Department of Highways office and in my own office they have 
the same first name, so I shouldn’t be confused this time. I’d 
like to introduce to all of you as I’ve indicated, Nicole Foraie — 
just give a little wave, Nicole — who is in my office downstairs 
in room 38; and also seated right beside her is Nicole Griggs, 
who is in the Department of Highways office. 
 
So please join me in welcoming them to the Assembly here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Centre. 
 

Regina YWCA Honours Women of Distinction 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You may know that last night . . . The Regina YWCA (Young 
Women’s Christian Association) has been involved for many 
years in honouring the talents, achievements, and creativity of 
the women of southern Saskatchewan since 1981 through their 
Women of Distinction Awards. These awards celebrate and 
recognize those women whose qualities, achievements, and 
commitments are deserving our admiration and respect. It’s 
quite an event, Mr. Speaker. The room was full of very 
accomplished people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s recipients are, for the arts, Ruth 
Smillie; for business and trade, the mother and daughter team of 
Pamela Ait-Allaoua and Gladys Snider of Tot’s Cafe; for 
community leadership and enhancement, Joyce Goodhand. 
 
The recipient of the Cultural Heritage Award is Lydia Chatto; 
for education the recipient, Ida Remenda. The Health and 
Wellness Award went to Elaine McNeil for her international 
work. The Science and Technology and Environment Award 
presented to Dr. Mary Vetter; for sports, recreation and active 
living the recipient is Fiona Vincent. 
 
Ashley Norton is recognized as the Young Woman of 
Distinction, and recognized for lifetime achievement is 

Reverend Ruth Taylor. 
 
And it was especially exciting for me, Mr. Speaker, because last 
night my daughter-in-law, Misty Wensel, was nominated in the 
arts category for her work in dance and arts education. And for 
a woman at her stage of her career, this was a very big 
achievement, and we’re very proud of her, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also like to honour the YWCA and the sponsors of 
these awards for recognizing women’s contributions to our 
communities. I ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 
thanking everyone nominated for their efforts and 
congratulating the Regina YWCA Women of Distinction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly want to join 
with the minister and congratulate all of the women who were 
honoured last night, both as nominees and award winners at the 
YWCA Women of Distinction Awards. They certainly took 
centre stage for our province — and certainly the southern half 
of the province — highlighting Saskatchewan’s most dynamic, 
committed, and effective leaders and women of distinction. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need not go over all the categories again, 
but we certainly want to acknowledge the winners — Ashley 
Norton, Fiona Vincent, Dr. Mary Vetter, Elaine McNeil, Ina 
Remenda, Gladys Snider and Pamela Ait-Allaoua, Ruth Smillie 
as well, and Reverend Ruth Taylor. 
 
And permit me if you will, Mr. Speaker, to provide a little bit 
more detail on the winner of the Community Leadership and 
Enhancement Award last night. The category included 10 very, 
very deserving nominees, the largest number of any category. 
And the winner was a constituent and a friend of mine — Joyce 
Goodhand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Joyce is currently leading the safe shelter team in 
Swift Current and indeed was its first director. She has been 
instrumental in the development of programs like career closet 
program to help women of limited means access appropriate 
clothing for building careers. Her involvement includes the 
Allied Arts Council, the South West Victim Services, literacy 
projects. 
 
(10:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I spoke with my father this morning. He was 
a founding board member for that safe shelter committee, and 
he was very encouraged, excited to hear of her award and 
highlighted the fact that without her the safe shelter may not 
exist as it does and provide such effective services. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate her and all of the 
winners last night, as well as the YWCA for hosting the awards. 
And to Kristin Kutarna Gates and her team, thanks to them for 
putting on last night’s presentation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Recognition of Mother’s Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Sunday is 
Mother’s Day. One day is not enough to properly thank our 
mothers for all they do for us in the course of our lifetime, but 
the day does provide us with an opportunity to reflect on how 
they nurture us and how through that nurturing they create the 
foundation of our society, one individual at a time. 
 
It is a weighty responsibility and one we too often take for 
granted. Mothers are the ones who, when they aren’t at work, 
are driving us to sporting events or ballet lessons. When they 
aren’t paying the bills, they are baking cookies for our school 
class. When they aren’t keeping our homes running efficiently, 
they are helping us with our homework. A mother is the 
ultimate multi-task worker. 
 
It’s worth remembering that for the first years of our lives our 
mothers are the centre of our universe, and — truth be told — 
no matter where we go or who we become, they are never very 
far from the centre of our universe because we always carry 
their lessons with us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mothers are amazing human beings — there for 
you when you laugh, there for you when you cry. And no 
matter how much you take from them, they never stop giving. 
They guide us, nurture us and love us. Sometimes we make 
decisions they don’t agree with, with us, but they still support 
us. They can be our greatest critics and our biggest confidantes. 
They can be our strongest allies, our most formidable adversary, 
and our best friend all at the same time. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, mothers are amazing human beings, 
above all I think because of their capacity for unconditional 
love. And I am pleased to have this opportunity to honour and 
salute them. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

802 Pipestone Air Cadets Celebration 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night it was my pleasure to join the 802 
Pipestone Air Cadets for their 33rd annual final parade, 
banquet, and awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no doubt the air cadet program through . . . across 
this country and certainly in this province has been an excellent 
program, building character and certainly teaching young men 
and women the value of respect and having . . . just recognizing 
the ability of other individuals. And what I’ve seen through the 
program, Mr. Speaker, is just the way young men and women 
take pride in presenting themselves and how they work together 
with others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program certainly wouldn’t go forward if it 
wasn’t for the volunteer efforts of many individuals and in the 

Moosomin . . . or the Pipestone cadet command we have 
Lieutenant Metzger, Second Lieutenant Garrett, Second 
Lieutenant Grassick and Lieutenant Youngblut, and additional 
instructor, Doris Bishop, who we want to say thank you to for 
their hard work, dedication, and commitment to the program, as 
well as the civilian committee: Nick Hudym, Mike Revet, Ruby 
McAuley, and Florence Bowey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a worthwhile program. It was indeed an 
honour to join with the Air Cadets as they celebrated their 33rd 
annual parade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan Job Statistics 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. More good news 
for Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, when I look at the 
Saskatchewan job stats released this morning, I know just how 
James Brown felt when he sang the song, “I Feel Good.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise in the 
House today and report that Saskatchewan is the top job 
performer in Canada, Mr. Speaker, with 6,000 more jobs in 
April than there were in March of this year and 6,200 more jobs 
in April this year than there was in April last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All in all, Mr. Speaker, there were 483,000 people employed in 
the province last month. That’s an all-time record for 
employment for the month of April, Mr. Speaker. What a fitting 
end to Opportunities Week in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I thought I’d better put this good news in the member’s 
statement today, Mr. Speaker, because I know the opposition 
who never like to hear or say anything positive about the 
economic performance of our province won’t be asking any 
questions today about employment numbers in question period, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

School Safety Patrol 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As indicated 
earlier, we have a large group of school safety patrollers present 
in the Assembly today to help us recognize and wind up the 
school safety patrol week in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m sure I can speak for all members of the Assembly when I 
send out our sincere thanks and appreciation to all the safety 
patrollers for their outstanding work all year long. Whether it’s 
in January or in June, whether it’s 30 below or 30 above, they 
help children get to and from school safely — not only their 
peers but our kids, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without their dedicated effort and collective 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

commitment to keeping our streets safe, undoubtedly we would 
see an increase in the number of traffic related accidents. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the one thing about traffic safety is you don’t 
know how good of work they actually do. If over the last four 
or five years, or over the last year they’ve prevented four or five 
injuries or accidents, we don’t know because they’re the ones 
that have prevented it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the program, the school safety patrol program has 
been in place for about 70 years. And it’s only through the 
support of many organizations such as government, motor 
clubs, the CAA (Canadian Automobile Association) — and I 
see Maureen Murray from the CAA is here today — 
parent-teacher associations, service clubs, school boards, 
community businesses, and many other organizations help this 
worthwhile cause continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from all the members in the Assembly, thank you 
for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Anita Clark Wins Sterling Award 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, someone once said that the 
people of Saskatchewan have and I quote, “an overwhelming 
cooperative spirit and sense of service” and that, quote, “these 
(are) values (that) are . . . integral (parts) and the essence of who 
we are.” Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about a 
Saskatoon woman who personifies these attributes. 
 
Anita Clark is a retired nurse and a member of the Royal 
University Hospital’s Ladies’ Auxiliary who for the last number 
of years has been volunteering at the Royal University Hospital. 
She’s worked in the patient library and in the gift shop. She’s 
acted as a tour guide and also assists families whose relatives 
are in the coronary care or intensive care unit. 
 
Since 1998, Ms. Clark has donated 6,300 hours of her time at 
RUH (Royal University Hospital), volunteering a minimum of 4 
days per week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Monday evening at the 14th Annual Silver 
Spoon Dinner, Anita Clark was named the Sterling Award 
winner for 2004. The Sterling Award is presented every year to 
a woman from the Saskatoon area who has enhanced the quality 
of life in the community through her voluntary contributions. 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Clark was nominated for the award by the 
Saskatoon Health Region and is clearly a worthy recipient. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in congratulating Anita Clark 
on being named the 2004 Sterling Award winner and for her 
dedication and service to the community. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Equalization Formula 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Speaker, for almost two months now the NDP has 
been blaming everything but the common cold for equalization 
problems that the province is facing. They blamed equalization 
for breaking a long list of promises they made in the last 
election campaign. And yesterday the NDP told municipalities 
that property tax relief, the property tax relief that the Premier 
promised is going to have to wait until after the equalization 
issue is dealt with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: if the Premier’s 
solemn promise to provide property tax relief can wait until the 
equalization issue is resolved or dealt with, why is he in such a 
hurry to close nursing home and acute care beds in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as predicted, no 
question about the amazing new jobs in Saskatchewan, as 
predicted. 
 
And almost as predicted, we thought we would have, with the 
opposition, a common front on behalf of Saskatchewan people 
as we seek fair and just equalization for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have working with us the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Association of Urban 
Municipalities. We have people from across the province in the 
business community and the labour community joining with us 
in this appropriate battle for fair equalization. 
 
We thought we had the opposition, but now I’m beginning to 
question that, Mr. Speaker. I’m beginning to question that with 
the kind of questions that are now coming from the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on the first day of assuming my new 
duties, I sent a letter to the Premier and indicated that we would 
be supportive on the equalization file, but that the government 
ought not to use it as an excuse. The equalization situation 
ought not to be used as an excuse. 
 
And if anyone would doubt the commitment of this side of the 
House to work with that side of the House on the equalization 
issue, imagine, Mr. Speaker, the fact that our deputy leader and 
the Finance critic would travel for 11 hours on a very small 
plane with the Minister of Finance to make that case in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, here’s the truth of the matter. The 
federal election, the federal election is only perhaps weeks 
away. Both the federal Liberals and the federal Conservatives 
have indicated that should they win the election, they want to 
deal with the equalization issue. So it could be, Mr. Speaker, 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

before the end of the year, the equalization issue will be dealt 
with. 
 
The question then for the Premier is this: if his promise, if his 
solemn promise to reduce the education portion of property 
taxes for ratepayers in Saskatchewan, if that can wait till the 
equalization issue is dealt with, why in the world can’t the 
Premier wait in terms of his plan to close acute care beds and 
nursing home beds in the province of Saskatchewan? Why is he 
in such a hurry to do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the days ahead, the 
opposition and the people of Saskatchewan will see a full 
description of this government’s response to the Boughen 
Commission. In the days ahead, they will see this government’s 
working with the districts and regions of Saskatchewan, a full 
description of where we’re going in health with 160 million 
new dollars in the Health budget. 
 
But now let’s go back to this little attack on equalization or this 
falling off from the opposition today. You know it was right in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, right in this House, the Leader of the 
Opposition stood up on the day that we did the opening . . . just 
the day before we were going to do the grand celebration of the 
Wascana Lake. This Leader of the Opposition said he’d be right 
there with me to speak to Mr. Goodale. Well I was there. I 
spoke to Mr. Goodale. I think he was kind of hiding in the 
crowd. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the Leader of the Opposition, 
has he done anything about talking to the Minister of Finance 
from Regina? Has he spoken to Mr. Goodale, and if he has, 
what has been the response that he has received from Mr. 
Goodale? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Protection of the Environment and Natural Resources 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when the ice on Cowan Lake, which is located 150 miles 
northwest of Prince Albert, began to melt this year, it brought 
people out to the shores of the lake. But something was 
different this spring, Mr. Speaker, something that was very, 
very wrong. Residents of Big River on the south shore of the 
lake were shocked at the disturbing discovery of thousands 
upon thousands of dead fish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of the Environment: does his 
department have any idea as to what caused all of these fish to 
die? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I appreciate the question. And of that particular instance in 
terms of the fish at Big River, we’ll look into it. I want to say 

though our priorities are clear on this side — protection of our 
natural resources — and we will have an answer shortly for the 
member opposite. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I have a little bit of a concern about 
the sincerity about the looking after the environment, but we’ll 
get to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cowan Lake is the pride of the area and home to a 
number of outfitting businesses. People travel from miles 
around and even from other countries to experience the beauty 
of the area — the forests, the fishing, the hunting, and much 
more. The appearance of thousands upon thousands of dead fish 
is definite cause for concern to the local people, to the 
businesses, to outdoor enthusiasts, and many tourists and 
hunters who visit the area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the department is not yet investigating the cause 
of this disturbing discovery, will the minister today commit do 
to a thorough investigation as to the cause of the death of these 
fish? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — For sure. Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
question and I appreciate the matter being raised because it’s 
one that whenever we have instances like this, we don’t want to 
speculate on causes. So for sure I’ll investigate and find out and 
I’ll be back to the . . . report back here to the House. Because 
protecting our natural resources is number one priority here for 
this Government of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s good to hear that 
number one priority is the environment. I would have thought 
maybe health care. Mr. Speaker, I have further questions for the 
minister — equally as fishy but not about fish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, some 
26,000 members strong, has identified a new threat to the 
environment that tops the list of potential threats to 
Saskatchewan’s fish and wildlife resources. That new threat, 
Mr. Speaker, is the NDP government. The federation is in a 
state of disbelief following the drastic cuts the NDP made to the 
environment in its latest budget. 
 
(10:30) 
 
Of particular concern to the federation is the NDP’s decision to 
cut 18 conservation officers. The federation accuses the NDP 
government of decimating conservation officers and I quote: 
“without any foresight or consideration of the disastrous 
implications these cuts will achieve.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how can his NDP government 
claim to be committed to the environment on one hand and 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

threaten wildlife on the other by cutting conservation officers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
find it ironic that the member opposite obviously shows what 
the folks over there are up to — more for this, more for that. 
We have a plan of how to protect this environment. We’ve 
reorganized the department. Our emphasis is on protecting our 
wildlife. We will have over 1,500 people working throughout 
this province in 43 offices. We have 200 fine officers, 
conservation officers who will be doing a great job protecting 
this environment. 
 
We do appreciate the fact that there’s been some losses. It’s 
been across the province, but we realigned our priorities to 
protect those at highest risk. So I think the matter’s in fine 
hands. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order for a moment. 
 
I just want to mention to all the young people that are here 
today. I can see with their enthusiasm that they would like get 
into the action that goes on, on the floor here. But the rules of 
the Assembly are that it’s only the members of the Assembly 
that can actually talk and applaud. So I would ask the young 
people to just refrain from that and continue to observe the 
proceedings. 
 
I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just look at the other 
side of the House. They’re talking about a green and prosperous 
economy. Another broken promise by this Premier and the NDP 
government. Because here they are cutting the very core of the 
people that are protecting it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is renowned for . . . worldwide for 
its lakes and natural resources, yet this NDP government has 
seen fit to threaten all of this by cutting the very people charged 
with protecting these resources. As Darrell Crabbe, executive 
director of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation put it, and I 
quote: 
 

We are the envy of the rest of North America and the 
world . . . and this was primarily due to the excellent work 
done by our conservation officers. 

 
The Sask Wildlife Federation says: 
 

The NDP’s decision to cut conservation officers will 
translate into less patrolling, overfishing and an increase in 
poaching and night hunting. 

 
To the minister, how does the NDP expect to deter such illegal 
activities when it is cutting conservation officers and reducing 
patrolling across this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker. I would find it interesting 
— I appreciate the quotes that the member talks about — but I 
would like him to quote from his own election platform last fall 
when he talks about the environment. I will look at that very 
closely. In fact you have to look at that very closely to find it. 
It’s absolutely zero. There is nothing in the environment from 
the opposite side. 
 
Yes, and so here we’re working hard on the environment. The 
environment’s a key priority for us here and we are working 
hard. The 1,500 men and women who will be working 
throughout this province this year in 43 offices across this 
province are doing a great job to protect this environment. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the members 
opposite continually want to talk about a green and prosperous 
economy and they cut the very people that are protecting the 
environment. Mr. Speaker, one area that was hit particularly 
hard by the NDP’s decision to cut conservation officers, is that 
of Leader in the Southwest of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Leader and surrounding areas, what some might 
call the hotspot for chronic wasting disease in deer. Hunters 
who suspect that they have seen or killed a sick deer or elk are 
encouraged to call their local conservation officer. Well, Leader 
doesn’t have any now. 
 
Hunters are also encouraged to contact fish and wildlife branch, 
but the NDP cut that in their latest budget also. The Sask 
Wildlife Federation has made it clear that for the NDP to and I 
quote, 
 

. . . to even contemplate, let alone implement these staff 
reductions and policy changes, shows their true (colour) 
— and it is not green. 

 
To the minister: how can we continue to monitor CWD (chronic 
wasting disease) effectively by cutting conservation officers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously we’re not 
going to hear about their election platform here because there’s 
nothing here on their commitment to environment, but I can talk 
a little bit about the chronic wasting disease. 
 
We have identified the three areas along the western part of the 
province where we are going to be putting resources in to that 
and that really exemplifies how we’re going to work smarter in 
our department on issues like that. We’ve identified issues like 
chronic wasting disease and we’re going to put resources in 
meeting that issue and this is how we’re going to work better on 
issues like that. And so we’re reorganizing to meet issues that 
are out there in the environment. 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

And I would challenge the members opposite to bring forward 
ideas like . . . well what was it in their election platform . . . 
what was missing in their election platform and to think in the 
big picture. 
 
Here, you know, environment is critical and we’re placing our 
resources where it’s important like the issues around chronic 
wasting disease, and this is an important issue. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Funding for Prairie Diagnostic Services 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, in the latest NDP budget, Prairie 
Diagnostic Services had its budget slashed by $700,000. PDS 
(Prairie Diagnostic Services) has a broad mandate that includes 
disease investigation, research, and surveillance; technology 
development; and teaching student veterinarians. Veterinarians 
across Saskatchewan are concerned the NDP’s cut in funding 
will cause PDS to close one of its labs in Saskatoon or Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when we are faced with more animal 
diseases than one can remember including avian flu, BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy), chronic wasting disease, 
West Nile virus, this NDP government has decided to cut 
funding to PDS. 
 
Can the minister tell the Assembly today, will NDP cutbacks 
force PDS to close one of its labs? And will closing one of the 
labs be enough to allow PDS to continue under its current level 
of funding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, on it goes — the Sask 
Party going after us that we should spend more money and 
more money and more money. Well I think as the Minister of 
the Environment said, we are going to spend money smartly, 
wisely. 
 
And that’s what we’re doing in this case, Mr. Speaker; we’re 
investing in PDS, which we know is a very, very vital service to 
this province. We need to make sure that the diagnostics and the 
diagnostic work happens on the agriculture-related animals. 
That is our obligation. That is our responsibility. And so we’re 
making sure that that work will be done. The investments that 
we’re making will make that happen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we have committed $1.2 
million for core funding to PDS this year, but we also pay for 
analytical testing — $500,000. We also provide for animal 
health programs; $400,000 for lab facilities to PDS. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re there; we’re behind them. We’re investing 
money and we’re doing it wisely to get the work done that we 
need done. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, Bob Bellamy, president of the 
Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association knows the value 
of PDS and says that if PDS is closed . . . forced to close or 
reduce its services, he would find it difficult to practise 
effectively. The SVMA (Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical 
Association) is concerned about these cuts in the light of many 
animal diseases facing our province today. 
 
In a recent letter, Mr. Bellamy points out, and I quote: 
 

The ability of our system to monitor, test for and quickly 
diagnose these and other diseases capable of being 
transmitted from animals to humans will be severely 
compromised if PDS were to restrict or shut down some of 
(its) services. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have already seen the devastating impact BSE 
has had on Saskatchewan. These diseases have the potential to 
depopulate wild species, devastate agriculture, and endanger 
human health and severely impact our economy. And yet the 
NDP sees fit to cut PDS’s funding. 
 
To the minister: what services will be curtailed at PDS as a 
result of this government’s decision to cut funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of Prairie Diagnostics, the key area that we need to 
focus on in this province — and we see this in the diseases that 
have come forward in the last few years — we need to focus on 
the agriculture sector. We need to make sure that the diagnosis 
is being done on large animals, on agricultural-related animals. 
We don’t want Avian flu coming into the province. We need to 
make sure that we’ve got diagnosis for birds. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you about another prairie 
diagnosis and that is, Mr. Speaker, the diagnosis that we are 
seeing when we look across the way there. We’re seeing people 
who are suffering from grief. And the symptoms are all there. 
The diagnosis is that they can’t get over the fact that they lost 
that last election, Mr. Speaker. They can’t get over it. 
 
We see it in the fact . . . We see it in the fact of anger and 
denial. We see it in the fact now that they’re trying to even 
engage in resurrection. They’re taking that platform that wasn’t 
on their Web page and now they’re trying to resurrect it and put 
it back on. Mr. Speaker, they are devoid of good ideas for this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Cute, Mr. Speaker, but not very effective or 
helpful. One of the valuable services the highly qualified staff 
of PDS provide is testing for chronic wasting disease. 
 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

On Tuesday the Minister of Agriculture told the Committee of 
Finance that the department is responsible for testing elk heads 
because they want to be able to provide proof that 
Saskatchewan is CWD free and get the elk market moving 
again. 
 
What the minister did on Tuesday was simply pay lip service to 
the issue. How can testing for CWD be a priority when the NDP 
has chosen to cut funding for Prairie Diagnostic Services? Yet 
another example of the NDP saying one thing and doing the 
opposite. 
 
Can the minister tell this Assembly if these cuts will result in a 
decrease in testing for CWD? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the 
agriculturally related diseases are the ones that we want PDS to 
be testing for. It’s not about testing for small animals. 
 
What I want to say in terms of the investments that we have 
made, because we are partners in PDS as a government and the 
investments that we have made have been significant, we now, 
through those investments, have $1 million in equity, largely in 
equipment purchases. And so we are not at a beginning stage 
here with PDS. This is ongoing funding. We are putting $1.2 
million into core funding and we will be doing the testing that 
needs to be done to keep our agricultural industry safe. That’s 
the fact; that’s where we are investing. Mr. Speaker, we are 
going to make sure that the work is done and done properly. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Education Portion of Property Tax 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the NDP held a news conference to announce their 
latest excuse for breaking all the Premier’s campaign promises. 
This time it’s equalization. And, Mr. Speaker, we agree that the 
equalization formula is unfair. But that same equalization 
formula was unfair last fall. That didn’t stop the Premier from 
promising to cut property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier never had any intentions of keeping 
that promise. And now the election’s over, he has to invent an 
excuse. Mr. Speaker, instead of inventing excuses, why doesn’t 
the Premier just for once keep his word? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I wish for once that the 
members opposite would take a look at what the actual fact is in 
terms of what this government said. We said — and I will quote 
once again from the party’s platform in this last election in 
which the voters of this province elected a New Democratic 

government, a majority government — we said that: 
 

Quality . . . education requires a sound funding base. The 
challenge is to raise those funds in a fair, (and) balanced 
way. We want to ensure we do that while making 
Saskatchewan property taxes as fair as possible. 

 
That is what we committed to do. That is what we are going to 
do. And the member opposite should at least be upfront and 
honest and accurate in his comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s be honest. That 
Premier said the status quo is not on. What happened to that, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday a reporter asked the Minister of 
Government Relations why anyone would believe the NDP on 
property taxes. And he said, and I quote: 
 

There’s got to be some kind of trust that what we say, we 
will eventually do. 

 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, trust us. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, who in this province would even dream of 
trusting that government. What they’re saying is amazing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has systematically broke every 
election commitment he made and now is saying, just trust us; 
we’ll fix it. The Premier promised to cut taxes; he raised taxes. 
The Premier promised to protect seniors; now he’s kicking them 
out of their beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Premier back up his election 
campaign and do at least one thing they said they would do at 
that time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
quite right. The last election was about trust. We asked very 
specifically who Saskatchewan people trusted. And 
Saskatchewan people said they trusted this Premier, this 
government, and this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting. It is 
worth noting that we did not need to boot out our leader after 
the election. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members. The 
Minister of Learning. 
 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting that no 
member on this side needed a do-over to get their nomination. 
It’s worth noting that we did not need to boot our leader out 
after the election. It is worth noting that our platform stands 
public scrutiny and comments on key public issues whether it’s 
environment, whether it is property taxes, whether it is the 
issues of health care. The members opposite cannot speak in 
favour of any of those issues because they did not have public 
trust. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that Premier keeps 
breaking his promises, they might want to consider kicking that 
leader out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I know for one thing the rest of the 
province is ready to put him out of his job. Mr. Speaker, that 
Premier has broken every one of his promises. He’s broken 
about half of Roy Romanow’s promises, and now he’s actually 
even breaking some of Tommy Douglas’s promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Minister of Government Relations has the 
nerve to say, trust us. He’s asking SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipality) and SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) to trust us. After saying in 
the election one thing — they would deal with the education tax 
on property — and then yesterday saying, well trust us. We may 
fix it in 2004, 2005, or we may use it in the next election. Mr. 
Speaker, what is it? Is that Premier going to back up his election 
promise and deal with the education tax on property? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This government will keep its 
commitment dealing with education and property tax reform. 
That is what the minister of Intergovernmental Affairs has said, 
that is what the Premier has said, that is what I have said, and 
no amount of bluster, no amount of bluster and anger by that 
member will change that. 
 
This approach that that member has taken in terms of the 
character assassinations that they’ve attempted on this side is 
really, frankly too low even for them. It is shocking, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. I recognize the 
Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the 
House have presented a platform which met with the support of 
Saskatchewan people. It outlined a comprehensive set of issues 
that we will deal with during this term of government. It is time 
that the members opposite accept that. The Leader of the 
Opposition — the new Leader of the Opposition — claimed 
that he was going to stretch his party so that they could bring in 

new ideas. 
 
Instead, just two days ago, he re-announced their old economic 
plan. Nothing new there. He’s put back up his old platform on 
the Web site. The only difference in that operation is a 
difference in the picture as to who the Leader of the Opposition 
is. That is the only change that we have seen and that is not 
going to be sufficient to either build consensus in this House or 
for them to gain public . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Is the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley up for ministerial statements? Ministerial 
statements. Order, please. Ministerial statements. I recognize 
the Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 

Agricultural Research and Development 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased to share with the House another example of 
the Government of Saskatchewan’s continued commitment to 
agriculture research and development in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — This government annually invests over 
$12 million in various agricultural research and development 
programs. As part of this commitment the Agriculture 
Development Fund, the ADF, has invested 2.64 million in 22 
new agriculture and food research projects. The ADF is one of 
several tools employed by this government to increase the value 
of agriculture and value-added processing in our province. The 
fund includes three programs: the research and development 
projects program, the agri-value program, and the strategic 
research program. 
 
The strategy is based to a large extent on increased use of food 
and food components for health and wellness, demand for 
bio-based feedstock in manufacturing and industrial products, 
maintaining a healthy and sustainable environment, and 
consumer demand for safe food. The specific goals of our 
strategy include increased livestock production and 
diversification to higher value crops, increased value-added 
activities to support our manufacturing strategy, enhanced 
environmental stewardship, and maintaining the highest 
standards in food safety. 
 
Some specific projects funded include the development of 
technology for bio-herbicides, 131,325; the development of 
crop management options . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I recognize the 
Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, some of the specific 
projects funded include the development of technology for 
bio-herbicides, $131,325. The development of crop 
management options to improve and enhance the seed yield and 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

quality of our chickpea crop, $123,050. The Swift Current 
watershed monitoring project which will assess water quality 
for various agricultural issues, $90,000. 
 
Over $660,000 to the Crop Development Centre at the 
University of Saskatchewan; 120,000 to the Vaccine and 
Infectious Disease Organization, and I could go on, Mr. 
Speaker. There are 22 worthy projects in total. 
 
This demonstrated support for research and development 
initiatives to create new scientific knowledge and technologies 
will open doors, Mr. Speaker. It will open doors to new 
opportunities. It will open doors to new jobs, and this support 
will generate new wealth for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to note just a 
slight apology. It is our practice to try and get these ministerial 
statements to the opposition in a timely manner that they can 
have a good chance to look over them. This one was just 
delivered to me and I would like to publicly state my apologies 
to the critic opposite for not getting it into his hands earlier. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek, 
the opposition critic for agriculture. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I accept the 
minister’s apology. Mr. Speaker, we’re always pleased to see 
that this NDP government at times shows any interest at all in 
agriculture — pleased, Mr. Speaker, and generally a little 
surprised. 
 
And to see that the ADF is investing $2.64 million in new 
agricultural and food projects does appear to be good news on 
the surface, and it’ll be interesting when we get the complete 
list, among other things, to see if these are really all new 
initiatives. 
 
It is noted however, that this money is being spread over 22 
projects. As yet we don’t know who and what these projects 
are, and we wonder if this may be spreading the funds a bit thin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has taken $700,000 from Prairie 
Diagnostic Services — one of our most established and 
important ag research institutions — whose mandate includes 
disease investigation, research, and surveillance. This includes 
several livestock diseases that can be spread to humans. 
 
And the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, refuses to properly 
fund the Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization from 
Saskatoon — a world-class institution that develops cures for 
many of these same diseases and others that can affect livestock 
and humans. VIDO (Vaccine and Infectious Disease 
Organization), Mr. Speaker, has the potential to be a $62 
million-plus international vaccine centre that may have to close 
its doors because it has trouble meeting payroll. 
 
It will be interesting to see, Mr. Speaker, who and what will be 
collecting this $2.64 million in research money. And the 

agricultural industry will be watching with interest. They don’t 
trust this government, Mr. Speaker, and neither do I. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Contributory Negligence 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 41, 
The Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
— order, please — that Bill No. 41, The Contributory 
Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Remarks Out of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I would 
just like to bring to the attention of the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats that during his question today he accused 
another member of dishonourable motives. Such statements are 
out of order, and I would ask him not to repeat a statement like 
that again. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table a response to written question no. 271. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 271 has been submitted. 
 
 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Health Care  
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 
to the motion that the Saskatchewan Party is introducing today 
where we are calling on the NDP to heed the words of the 
former premier of this province, Roy Romanow, who admitted 
he made mistakes with the cuts that he made to health care 
when he was the premier of this province during the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Premier Romanow made this speech when he 
spoke to the Western Canadian Nurse Leaders Forum in 
November 2003. And I would just like to quote some of the 
things that Mr. Romanow indicated at that time, so it’s on the 
record for the people of Saskatchewan. And hopefully that the 
NDP under the Premier of the province today will heed the 
words and will listen to them before they go ahead with the 
proposed cuts in long-term care and in hospital beds and 
hospital closures that they are putting forward throughout the 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Premier Romanow said, and I quote, that he 
said that there were mistakes made in the 1990s. And when he 
was questioned further about the mistakes that were made by 
the reporter that was interviewing him at this time, Mr. 
Romanow said that there was a false economy at that time, and 
I quote: 
 

“We pushed the costs out of the government’s pockets and 
right into the pockets of farmers and business people and 
nurses,” . . . 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have witnessed the evidence of what Mr. 
Romanow has indicated here — how the people across this 
province tightened their belts, realized that there were things 
that had to be dealt with in this province, and have paid the 
price. 
 
And today what we see in this province is not a better health 
care system because of the sacrifices that were made and more 
money put into health care. But what we see is a deteriorating 
health system where we have some of the worst records in all of 
Canada for what is provided in Saskatchewan. We have the 
longest surgical waiting lists; we have the longest diagnostic 
waiting lists — two years, up to two years, Mr. Speaker, for an 
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have long waiting lists in emergency rooms, 
many days in Regina that both emergency rooms are on a code 
burgundy. People are turned away from emergency because 
there is no bed for them available in the hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of these issues, we have seen a mass 
exodus of nurses and other health care professionals; we have 
seen a mass exodus of doctors from this province. And as we 
see these things continue, we see nurses under stress; we see 
overtime being paid out; we see nurses that can’t even access 
holidays because they are so dedicated to their profession that 
when they are called on their days off, they will go in, and they 

will help out in whatever way they can. 
 
And because of this we have seen a continual deterioration of 
health care across the province. And at the same time we see the 
NDP government in this province do nothing but throw more 
money at the issue with no solutions, no willingness to talk to 
doctors and nurses and other health care professionals that 
might have and could have solutions for the problems that we 
face in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Roy Romanow went on to indicate that there were 
other things that were of concern to him, things that he was 
involved with when he was the premier of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, he indicates that there was: 
 

Between 1991 and 1994, the provincial government 
decreased the amount it spent on health care, with the 
biggest reduction in 1993 (and ’94) . . . (with) $120 
million or 7.4 per cent was chopped from the Health 
budget. That paved the way for cuts to close 52 rural 
hospitals. They closed the Plains hospital; they axed the 
children’s dental plan; they scaled back on the prescription 
drug plan. 

 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were also cuts to the payment for 
chiropractic treatments; there were increases to nursing home 
fees; there were higher ambulance costs implemented; charges 
for appliances for such things as fibreglass casts; and more cost 
for people that require diabetic supplies. 
 
This from the government that believes in access for everyone 
in this province to universal health care. This from the 
government that indicates that they are going to provide quality 
health care for everyone in our province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to quote another individual that 
is in the government today, the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. And this was back when the member was in opposition 
in the 1980s. And I’d like to quote firstly and . . . from Hansard 
in November 1987 and from the member of Nutana: 
 

The health situation in this province is out of control . . . 
We have a drug plan where people are making decisions 
between (guess what) groceries and prescription drugs. 
Too little too late. 

 
This, Mr. Speaker, in 1987 when the member was in opposition. 
And now we have the premier of the province that was in 
charge of this province in 1990 saying, we made a mistake in 
the 1990s by cutting costs, by not covering prescription drugs, 
and by increasing the deductible. 
 
A further quote from the member from Saskatoon Nutana in 
November 1987, and I quote: 
 

. . . in view of all . . . the evidence and all . . . the concerns 
that have mounted over the last several months, will you, 
as Acting Minister of Health on behalf of your 
government, stop hacking and slashing away at our health 
care system. 

 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

This from the member who now sits in the Legislative 
Assembly and is part of a government that previously has 
slashed and burned health care across this province. In 1993, 52 
hospitals closed in rural Saskatchewan; the Plains hospital 
closed. 
 
We had a meeting in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, at that time, and 
people from all across my riding came and filled McKenna 
Hall. There was one voice — one lone voice in the room that 
agreed with what the government was going to do, which was 
to close rural hospitals, to downsize services, to close the Plains 
hospital. 
 
Did this government listen? No. They went ahead and they 
closed the Plains hospital and all those other hospitals. And 
today we see the same government not heeding the words of the 
former premier of this province who said it is a mistake what 
they did in the 1990s; it was a mistake to close those facilities. 
We have not improved health care in this province because of 
it; in fact it has deteriorated. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we now see the Premier of this province and 
his colleagues that are going to go down the same path as the 
former premier did. Did they learn nothing from what the 
former premier has indicated were the problems in this 
province? 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote again from the minister 
from Saskatoon Nutana, in 1987 from Hansard, and I quote: 
 

. . . in view of the fact that nearly 100,000 Saskatchewan 
citizens have sent you a clear message to reverse your 
harmful and hurtful health care cuts, will you now listen to 
the people of Saskatchewan? 

 
At that time the member was speaking to the Conservatives 
who were in power at that time. And today we have the same 
request from the people of this province, only it is to the NDP 
government of which the member from Saskatoon Nutana is a 
member. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what she was asking for at that time was for 
the government to listen to the people of Saskatchewan before 
they revert . . . they decreased any more health care in the 
province. What we are asking today, Mr. Speaker? And what 
the member from Melville or from . . . what’s our member? The 
critic of Health for the Saskatchewan Party, the member from 
Melfort — sorry, Mr. Speaker — moved a motion last week 
asking for the government to listen to the people of this 
province before they went ahead and made further cuts in health 
services across the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go back further to Mr. 
Romanow’s letter . . . or Mr. Romanow’s speech when he spoke 
to the nurses, and I quote from Mr. Romanow, and he said, and 
I quote: you had a whole variety of little add-on charges here, 
there and everywhere. They started a whole bunch of opt-out 
and basically user charges on a variety of things. 
 
And Mr. Romanow further went on to say that, he told the 
nurses in Saskatchewan that: 
 

. . . (the ) prescription drug . . . has . . . (been) increasingly 

higher deductibles and is no longer “universal”. 
 

And he said: 
 
I . . . (do not) take any pride in this but it’s now reduced to 
basically those at the very bottom end of our scale, the 
very poorest. 
 

And end quote of Mr. Romanow. So, Mr. Speaker, we see that 
Mr. Romanow too late realized the mistakes that he made when 
he was the premier of this province. 
 
And what the people of Saskatchewan are crying out for is, will 
this government listen to them? Will they listen and not close 
more facilities in rural Saskatchewan? Because if they do, Mr. 
Minister . . . Mr. Speaker, it will not only be the people of rural 
Saskatchewan that will pay the price. It will be everyone in 
Saskatchewan because this government has decided that they’re 
going to move all the care into Regina and Saskatoon, and all 
that that has done, Mr. Speaker, is cause more pressure on 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
That is why we have problems in the emergency department, 
why we have people lined up in ambulances waiting to get in 
for care. That is why we have code burgundies going on. And 
yet at the same time we have facilities throughout rural 
Saskatchewan. We have doctors that are willing to provide care, 
and that would gladly provide care for rehab, for palliative care, 
and yet they are not able to do that because we have a 
government that continually is downsizing the facilities in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In my constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, when I was first 
elected we had 100 beds. We now have 30 beds, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s time that the people that are in government today 
started heeding the words of Premier Romanow and stop further 
reduction of health care facilities and beds across the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to quote from Hansard back in 
the year of 2000. And, Mr. Speaker, at that time, sadly, what the 
Saskatchewan Party brought forward in May 2000 was a motion 
that is very similar to what we are talking about today, asking 
for the government to heed the words of the former premier 
which at that time . . . and saying that we do not . . . that we are 
asking the “government to put a moratorium on any further 
hospital or health (care) centre closures at least until the 
government’s promised comprehensive review of health care 
services in Saskatchewan . . . ” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have now had the Fyke report. And when 
the Fyke report was finished, the Fyke report said go ahead; we 
need to close more hospitals. That’s the answer. And what 
happened at that time was that the then . . . the Minister of 
Health indicated that that was not the answer, that this 
government would not go there, they were not willing to close 
more facilities. Now we have two years later, we have the 
Minister of Health with support of the Premier of the province 
supporting this, and his colleagues saying that this is what we 
should do, is we should go ahead and close more facilities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is an article in the paper today which is 
headed, talks shelved as union awaits cuts. And we also see 
where the head of CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

Employees), Stephen Foley, and Rosalee Longmoore, the head 
of the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) or 
of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses . . . I apologize, Rosalee 
Longmoore, are also calling of the government to be careful, to 
take precautions and not to go forward and start closing 
facilities and reducing beds without proper consultation and 
without properly looking at what is going to happen and the 
ramifications of actually closing these facilities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the motion that we want to move today 
reads: That this Assembly urge . . . moved by myself, member 
of Weyburn-Big Muddy, seconded by the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urge the provincial government, now 
contemplating more cutbacks and facility closures in 
Saskatchewan, to heed the words of former Premier Roy 
Romanow who, in November 2003, said similar cuts in the 
early 1990s were a mistake and were based on a “false 
economy” that “pushed the costs out of the government’s 
pockets and right into the pockets of farmers, business 
people, and nurses. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this could not be more true words, and we 
applaud Premier Romanow for admitting that they did make 
mistakes. I guess one of our major questions is when he was 
premier of the province, why did he go forward and do these 
things? Why did he cause this harm to come upon the people of 
this province? 
 
And today, we’re still paying the price. We are still paying the 
price in that we had cuts to nursing programs. Another issue 
that the former Premier Romanow indicated, was that he 
admitted that his government was wrong to slash enrolments in 
nursing programs in 1991 and ’92. More than 500 nurses 
graduated from the program. But 1998-99, the number of 
graduates had fallen to 115. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on the members opposite, many who have 
been ministers of Health or deputy ministers of Health. There is 
the member from Yorkton; the member Saskatoon Nutana; the 
member from Riversdale; the member from Regina Lakeview, 
who is the current Minister of Health; the member from 
Saskatoon Massey Place; the member from Saskatoon Eastview 
— who have all played a part in bringing us to where we are 
today. 
 
I call on them, Mr. Speaker, to listen to the words of Roy 
Romanow, who said we made a mistake, who said that we 
should look at where we’ve come from and not make those 
mistakes in the future, who said that these decisions were made 
“. . . based on a ‘false economy,’” that they “. . . pushed the 
costs out of the government’s pockets and right into the pockets 
of farmers . . . business people and nurses.” 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, if there’s one MLA on the government side 
who can see what is happening, who is willing to look at our 
health care system, who is willing to admit that spending more 
money has not improved health care . . . It has caused it to 
deteriorate. I ask them: do they care about the sick and elderly 
in this province? Do they want people — no matter what age, 
income, or walk of life — to have timely access to adequate 
health care? If they do, Mr. Speaker, then I ask that they adhere 

to the words of Premier Romanow, and at this time I move the 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. It has been moved by 
the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, seconded by the member 
for Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urge the provincial government, now 
contemplating more cutbacks and facility closures in 
Saskatchewan, to heed the words of former premier Roy 
Romanow who, in November 2003, said similar cuts in the 
early 1990s were a big mistake and were based on a false 
economy that pushed the costs out of the government’s 
pockets and right into the pockets of farmers and business 
people and nurses. 

 
I recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure I can take part in the debate today because I think the 
debate today is on such a crucial issue to people from all over 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but especially in rural 
Saskatchewan where health care has been hit hard in the last 10, 
12 years by this NDP government and is about — from what we 
understand — is to take another hit if according to the budget 
and the Health minister has been telling us has any merit to it. 
We will see more closures in the hospital system. We will lose 
long-term care beds out there. And when we have an aging 
population, Mr. Speaker, that’s the last thing we can have 
happen in Saskatchewan, both urban and rural, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and this is not just strictly a rural issue. This is an 
urban-rural issue because every time a health care closure 
happens in rural Saskatchewan, the rural people, my 
constituents included, have to come into the cities like 
Saskatoon and Regina. And the systems in here are already 
overloaded. We have the longest waiting lists in the country. 
And it hurts health care for both the people of 
Regina-Saskatoon and the other cities when the health care in 
rural Saskatchewan is depleted. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP always say how 
they support publicly funded, publicly administered health care 
when the waiting lists are so long in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
that people every day are telling us they have to either go to the 
States or to Alberta for MRIs. And, Mr. Speaker, now it turns 
out it’s the Saskatchewan Party that actually is the one that 
supports the publicly funded, publicly administered health care 
in accordance with the health Act because people across this 
province, Mr. Speaker, are telling us more and more that 
Saskatchewan health right now has more two-tier health in it 
than ever before. And people in rural Saskatchewan can tell you 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you can afford to drive — say, for dialysis treatment, Mr. 
Speaker, is a prime example — if you can afford to drive from 
Kamsack, Saskatchewan to Regina or Saskatoon three times a 
week out of your own pocket, Mr. Speaker, not out of the 
publicly funded health care system, but out of your own pocket, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s your cost. What else is that, Mr. Speaker? It’s 
two-tier health. And the problem being with the dialysis system 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

that we have, it took years to get the government to finally put a 
dialysis unit into the city of Yorkton. And, Mr. Speaker, we still 
have 18, 19 families driving a member of their family — some 
up to three times a week — to the city of Regina because 
Yorkton doesn’t have enough qualified people, I’m told, to run 
the unit for more hours. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how ridiculous this can be? People — say, 
from the Kamsack area or my colleague’s area from 
Canora-Pelly, from Preeceville, out in that area, even from 
Canora, you get Esterhazy, Rocanville, from my colleague from 
Moosomin’s area — these people spending their own money 
two and three times a week to drive for dialysis treatment when 
that treatment could be provided at the same cost, the same cost 
to the publicly funded health care system but a lot less cost and 
a lot less time consuming, Mr. Speaker, for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Weyburn talked about the last 
times we had health care cuts, hospital closures, and downsizing 
in our health care system — 1992. And it was odd, Mr. 
Speaker; I might mention that before that election, the NDP 
never mentioned in their election campaign that there would be 
any health care closures. 
 
Does that ring a bell, Mr. Speaker, with it? You bet it does 
because in the last election in November, there was no word 
from that government that there would be health cuts, that there 
would be hospital closures, that seniors would get kicked out of 
long-term care beds. Mr. Speaker, there was nothing about that. 
 
And now what do we have? As soon as the election is over and 
the smoke clears, the first thing we hear, well we can’t afford to 
do what we said we were going to do, so we’re going to close 
hospitals. We’re going to kick our seniors out of long-term care 
beds. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, people are getting tired of this. Fifty-two 
hospital closed in 1992. And, Mr. Speaker, I was very close to 
one of those hospitals in my constituency. The community of 
Langenburg had raised about $3 million to build a new hospital, 
a new facility in that area, along with the Saskatchewan Health. 
The system, the money was set up. Planning was done. 
Everything was in place. And you know what happened, Mr. 
Speaker? As soon as the election was over, that project went 
down the tubes. It was gone. So the trust that those people have 
in this government in 1992 was weakening. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we come to 1995 — 1995, the government 
saw fit after the election . . . and it’s always after the election 
this happens, Mr. Speaker. They closed another three or four 
hospitals. And one of them, Mr. Speaker, was the Plains 
hospital. And, Mr. Speaker, the load that closing the Plains 
hospital put on the General and the Pasqua here is hurting 
health care in the city of Regina. It has since 1995. It’s added to 
the longest waiting lists in the country. It’s adding to the 
emergency rooms being overloaded. It’s just totally degraded 
the health care that the people in the city of Regina expected 
and should expect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if we’re going to see another round of closures and another 

round of closing long-term care beds, it’s not just hurting the 
people in my constituency of Melville-Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not just hurting the Leader of the Opposition’s constituency 
of Swift Current or the member for Thunder Creek or Cypress 
Hills or Moosomin, Watrous, all over this province, it’s hurting 
every person that expects and deserves adequate publicly 
funded health care by this NDP government in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing too . . . And I have greatest 
respect for the previous premier of this province, Mr. 
Romanow. And even Mr. Romanow is saying now, we have 
made mistakes in the past. So what that says to me, is the 
previous premier had the intestinal fortitude when mistakes 
were made to come forth now. And who would know better 
than him, because he was the premier at the time and now he is 
doing a study on health care in this country and realizes 
mistakes were made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough to make mistakes, but it’s worse if 
you make mistakes and you won’t admit, and try to make those 
same mistakes over again. And this is what we’re going to see 
from this government, Mr. Speaker. This is what we’re going to 
see from this Premier, this Health minister — the same mistake 
made over and over again. And, Mr. Speaker, people of 
Saskatchewan cannot afford this. Our health care system cannot 
afford this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had on many occasions in this session 
already, where people have brought their concerns forward . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. I would ask members 
to find another forum for second debate. 
 
The member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the previous premier goes on in a number of quotes 
that the premier has said, and it goes on to say, even Romanow 
acknowledges that this ND (New Democratic) government 
made huge mistakes with their changes to health care. 
 
Leader-Post: 
 

Romanow . . . has admitted the deep cuts to provincial 
health-care services in the 1990s were a mistake.  

 
They closed 52 hospitals and the premier of the day is saying 
that is a mistake. And yet this government, after hearing those 
comments, are turning around and going to reinvent the wheel 
and do it all over again. 
 
And the scary part, Mr. Speaker, is the people of Saskatchewan 
are helpless in this case. This NDP government has the power 
to make these cuts and are not going out to check with 
communities out there; they’re not checking with the public of 
Saskatchewan. They’re going to go ahead full bore. 
 
And the thing, Mr. Speaker, they cannot tell you, are they going 
to save money by closing these hospitals? They cannot prove 
that it’s going to shorten waiting lists. They cannot prove that 
you’re going to get an MRI in less than two years, as you have 
to wait right now. 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, they can’t actually show anybody on paper or any 
other way that this is going to improve health care in 
Saskatchewan. If they could, Mr. Speaker, I think there would 
be a little sympathy for what they are planning on doing. But 
their record has shown it has not worked in the past. The 
previous premier is saying, it will not work now; it didn’t work 
before. And they’re not listening to anyone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They don’t have a plan for the future of this province. It doesn’t 
matter whether it’s health care, education, agriculture, or the 
economy of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
going from day to day. And the first thing they see, well, maybe 
we can save some money by cutting what, Mr. Speaker — 20, 
30, 40 hospitals in the province of Saskatchewan; maybe we 
could save a few bucks by kicking the seniors out of their 
long-term care beds. And this is a time, Mr. Speaker, when the 
population and the age of seniors is growing in Saskatchewan. 
We don’t need less long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker; we need 
more long-term care beds. 
 
I know at our long-term care facility at home, there’s actually a 
waiting list. And the thing is, Mr. Speaker, I would bet in every 
long-term care facility in the province of Saskatchewan, if you 
check, there’s a waiting list of seniors that need to be in 
long-term care homes. And by cutting beds, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
only adding to the problem. 
 
And by cutting hospitals, closing hospitals, we’re going to see 
longer waiting lists; we’re going to see MRI services probably 
go from two to three years. Mr. Speaker, people are dying in 
Saskatchewan on the waiting lists, waiting for health services. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is why I was seconding this motion and 
support the motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge the provincial government, now 
contemplating more cutbacks and facility closures in 
Saskatchewan, to heed the words of former premier, Roy 
Romanow, who in November 2003 said similar cuts in the 
early ’90s were a big mistake and were based on a “false 
economy” that “pushed the costs out of the government’s 
pockets and right into the pockets of farmers and business 
people and nurses.” 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — I am very happy to stand today and speak to this 
motion. In the interest of clarity, I am going to read the exact 
quote of Mr. Romanow, as I believe the motion as stated 
reflects neither the content nor the intent. 
 

Until the mid-90s, (Mr. Romanow says), some provincial 
governments — charged as they are with the primary 
responsibility for the delivery of health — including my 
own in Saskatchewan, were successful in restraining the 
growth in public health . . . costs (while attempting to 
reform the system). We rationalized our services and 
improved efficiencies, while trying (not always 
successfully) to preserve access to quality services. 
 

Most governments had no choice but to pursue these 
remedies, given the harsh fiscal realities of the day, and I 
still support my government’s approach of the time. 
 

And while we’re quoting Mr. Romanow, since he has said 
many, many things that I think are useful to talk about, I’m 
going to read some more of the things he spoke about. He 
talked about sustainability. And sustainability, he says: 
 

. . . as we defined it, means “ensuring sufficient resources 
are available over the long-term to provide timely access 
to quality services that address our evolving health (care) 
needs.” 

 
He says: 
 

I deliberately used the word resources rather than money. 
In addition to cash, a properly functioning health delivery 
system also depends on the right type of health care 
providers, buildings, equipment and information systems. 

 
He talks about how we have to figure out how those resources 
to . . . how to apply those resources to our evolving health care 
needs as quite a challenge. 
 
Most of us when we talk about change are fairly resistant. And 
when we have seen . . . When the member from Weyburn was 
talking about, do any of us over here know what it’s like to be 
involved in the health system and the decision making, well I 
have come from an unique perspective. I am a health provider. I 
am a registered nurse. I’ve been a registered nurse for over 30 
years. I’ve been a nurse union leader for over five years. I’ve 
been the Minister of Health for two and a half years and an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for six years. 
 
So during that time, I have seen the health system from many, 
many perspectives. And when we talk about some of the things 
that we need to do, our system is not stagnant. Our system 
changes. The needs of our citizens change. And we need to 
keep up with those changes. And we need to change our system 
to meet the needs as those needs are given to us or shown to us. 
 
Governments that are directly involved need to keep those 
needs in balance with the other needs of the province, which are 
education and highways and all the other things we need to do 
that are competing for our public dollars. So when we spend our 
money, we need to spend it in the most efficient and effective 
way. And when we talk about hospitals, which we have in 
Saskatchewan — quite an abundance of hospitals still — and 
we also still use those hospitals quite frequently. 
 
We have hospitals, for example, who have 14 acute care beds 
funded. And their average daily census — that means how 
many people are on average in those facilities a day —are four. 
So when we talk about how we are spending our money, I don’t 
think anybody would think that that’s value for our dollar. 
 
And when we talk about quoting Mr. Romanow, I have his 
report here which is useful for someone to read all of it because 
he’s says many things that are worthwhile talking . . . and in 
particular about change. And he talks about, “health strategies 
should be focused on outcomes.” What we do should make a 
difference. 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

And what we do now doesn’t always make a difference. When 
we keep a hospital open with 14 beds and only use 4, does that 
make a difference? 
 
He talks about: 
 

Policies, (and) strategies and programs should be based on 
evidence . . . 

 
Again we should see what we’re doing, if it makes a difference. 
And just because we’ve always done it, doesn’t mean we should 
still do it. 
 
And when we also talked about health, health care does not 
equal health. What makes us healthy — and I think I’ve stood 
here and said this for six years — what makes us healthy is not 
whether we have access to a doctor, to a bed, to a building. 
What makes us healthy in large part is determined by our 
choices. And when we make those choices we have to talk 
about what we ourselves . . . what our responsibility is as 
citizens. We do have a choice and we do have an impact on how 
our health will go. 
 
And when we talk about primary health care, which is a 
particular interest of mine, we’re talking about reorganizing 
how people access the system. And we don’t talk about the 
building. We talk about the services that people will get. And 
we talk about what do they need? And what they need is what’s 
available right in front . . . close to their home, is basic services. 
 
One of the doctors in the report I saw compared primary health 
services to the corner grocery store where we have bread and 
milk, and he compared the other services in the bigger centres 
to specialty grocery stores. So what you have on every corner or 
a corner very close to you are the basic needs. You need to talk 
to somebody when your child has an earache. You need to talk 
to somebody if you have certain symptoms that are confusing or 
worrisome. 
 
Now we have the 24-hour advice line. That is something that 
everyone can access for those times when you just need to talk 
to somebody. 
 
Traditionally we all went to emergency if we had a problem or 
we all made a doctor’s appointment. That is not the best use of 
our money. We need to talk about making different choices and 
making different things available to us so that we can make 
those choices. 
 
And Mr. Romanow also talks about transformative change. And 
he particularly is interested in primary health care because 
that’s where we will see the savings to the system in the long 
term. When we make an investment in primary health care, 
we’re going to see long-term benefits; long-terms benefits in 
shifting our focus from illness to wellness. 
 
And people have pooh-poohed us on that over the years because 
people have not seen the value of wellness and think it’s fairly 
simplistic. But we do have to talk about the choices that we 
make. Our diet, our exercise, everything we choose to do will 
make an impact on our health. Our high rates of diabetes are 
influenced by our lifestyle to a large part. So we have an impact 
on our own system and our own use of the system. 

And we also need to talk about the plan that we have. And I 
heard the member opposite say we don’t have a plan. Well I 
don’t know where she’s been. 
 
Here’s the plan — 2001, the action plan for health. We had 
Fyke come. We had Ken Fyke come around, and he did a 
commission and a study. From his commission report, we had 
the Standing Committee on Health hold public hearings. 
Following that we developed our action plan for health. And not 
only have we stopped . . . We didn’t stop by just developing the 
action plan; we now have a progress report. So if anybody’s 
interested in finding out what’s ongoing in the health system, 
here it is, the progress report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:30) 
 
Ms. Junor: — So we talk about not having a plan. That’s 
clearly not true. And when we talk about what happens in 
communities, we need to talk about what the communities need, 
not what they traditionally had because if you traditionally had 
a building, a hospital, a doctor, that may not be what you need. 
Or it might be just part of what you need. 
 
When we talk about primary health care, it always depends on 
more basic needs than that. And when we’re talking about how 
people access services, they need them closer to home. But they 
don’t need what we traditionally have had. And, as I said 
before, making change is difficult. I’ve been involved in 
making change. I was the leader of the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses in ’93 when the conversion started, and that was 
difficult. 
 
The Speaker: — I would just . . . Order please, members. 
Order. Order, please. I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So to talk about not 
knowing what this means, or to go blindly forward in making 
decisions, is clearly untrue. Things that are being done by our 
government are being done informed by evidence, informed by 
what we want to see happen in our health system within a 
context of how much money do we have to spend. 
 
And it’s interesting — $160 million in this year’s budget isn’t 
going to buy us the status quo, $160 million isn’t going to buy 
us the status quo. We have got to do some changes. And 
changes are difficult for people unless they are supported in the 
change by good information. And I have not seen any good 
information come from the Sask Party in the six years I’ve been 
here, no information that is useful for people to make decisions. 
 
When you talk about statements out of context, half-truths, 
half-statements, this does not inform a public’s decision. It does 
nothing to move us forward to a system where we could 
actually serve the people well. When we talk about having long 
waiting lists for diagnostics and for surgeries, we obviously 
need money in a different part of the system. 
 
We have to make those choices. And we only have a certain 
amount of money, and it isn’t going to be able to be spent all on 
health all the time, so we do have to make some choices fairly 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

soon. And as a responsible government, we are making those 
choices. Our plans are developed with the districts, and the 
districts represent their communities. The communities have 
input into that. Those decisions are made at the district level 
with the communities that are involved. 
 
We need to support the districts and the communities to see that 
change is positive, that when we switch the money from one 
place to another, it does make a difference in our health 
outcomes which is what we all as citizens would want to see — 
that we all are healthy. Given the money that we spend, we 
deserve that. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be following 
up my remarks for the member from Saskatoon Eastview 
regarding the half-truths and statements out of context, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It appears, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is trying to make some 
political hay here out of a statement attributed in the press to 
former premier, Roy Romanow. The Saskatchewan Party 
motion before us says that Roy Romanow considers his actions 
surrounding health in the early 1990s to be a mistake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the article . . . quote from the article which 
is published in the Volume 67(1) Law Review of Saskatchewan. 
It’s sort of the latest from what Roy Romanow would be saying, 
and in there Mr. Romanow says: 
 

“Most governments had no choice but to pursue these 
remedies, given the harsh fiscal realities of the day, and I 
still support my government’s approach of the time.” 

 
This in the context of what was happening, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as for the accuracy of the Sask Party motion regarding 
Mr. Romanow’s intentions or opinions, I would offer the 
following for the record in terms of newspapers and their 
attempts to do research through the newspapers or perhaps 
newspapers doing research for them. The quote that the Sask 
Party is using is found in the Leader-Post, and it’s in November 
14, 2003. The quote goes: 
 

Earlier this week, Romanow said his government’s 
decisions were based on a “false economy.” (false 
economy, Mr. Speaker) “We pushed the costs . . . of the 
government’s pockets and right into the pockets of farmers 
. . . business people and nurses,” . . . said in a speech to . . . 
300 nurses from across Canada attending . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, in the The StarPhoenix, in the The StarPhoenix on 
November 15, 2003, former Premier Roy Romanow said this. I 
quote: 
 

Former premier Roy Romanow said this week his 
government implemented a “false economy” when it cut 
spending on health care (costs) because (the) costs were 
pushed out of the government’s pockets and into the 
pockets of individual citizens. 

That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from the Prince 
Albert Daily Herald, November 14, 2003, Romanow said he 
realized that when he was still premier that his government had 
implemented a “false economy”. Mr. Speaker: 
 

All you do is transfer on to . . . (a) taxpayer-voter in a 
different way. (Mr. Speaker) They’ve got to pay for it out 
of their own pockets other than through the progressive 
taxation system. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Romanow said. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 
context of which this is being taken and the false economy . . . 
and I think I would like to quote to the members opposite from 
a speech where the former premier was speaking to the 
University of Ottawa. I’ll be submitting these copies of these 
speeches, tabling them in the legislature and perhaps they could 
take the time to read them. And I would, I would like to quote 
from one of those. And this is: 
 

We should (talking about the shifting of costs, Mr. 
Speaker) We should try . . . avoid(ing) shifting costs 
between the publicly and privately funded sectors of the 
health care system. Our concern should be to control . . . 
costs. 
 
Until the mid-1990s, some provincial governments — 
charged as they . . . (were) with the primary responsibility 
for the delivery of health — including my own in 
Saskatchewan, were successful in restraining the growth in 
(the) public health care costs. We rationalized our services 
and improved efficiencies, while trying (not always 
successfully) to preserve access to quality services. 
 
It turned out, however, that we pushed some of these costs 
out of our own budgets and onto individual residents. This 
is (the) false economy (Mr. Speaker). 
 
Because, at the end of the day, the total bill for health care 
is paid by citizens, whether it’s through a progressive 
taxation system, or the personal fees they pay directly . . . 
(to) health services, such as premiums on insurance 
policies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the false economy that the members opposite 
would have read a little on this or did a bit of research referred 
to the trading of costs from the public medical plan to private 
medical insurance, Mr. Speaker. To repeat Mr. Romanow’s key 
statement: 
 

We should try to avoid shifting costs between the publicly 
and privately funded sectors of . . . health care system. Our 
concern should be to control total costs (Mr. Speaker). 

 
I do not believe, Mr. Speaker, that any New Democrat would 
argue with that statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Romanow elaborates on this concept in other 
speeches. And I quote from another speech, Mr. Speaker, the 
Weatherhead Center for International Affairs at Harvard 
University: 
 

We all know that health care costs have been soaring in 
recent years. But here’s an interesting — and little 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

reported — fact: 
 
If we were to compare cost(s) . . . in the publicly funded, 
privately funded, and mixed group of services I described 
earlier, it is the publicly funded group — hospital and 
physician services — that wins, hands down. 
 
Indeed, per-capita spending on these publicly funded 
hospital and physician services is the same today as it was 
in 1991. By comparison, drug costs — which we put in the 
mixed public-private category — doubled in the past 25 
years. 

 
Mr. Romanow says in the same speech, “The total bill should 
matter more than the individual portions.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, when governments are considering health care 
costs, they should always consider the total bill. In the context 
of the total bill for health care, governments may save money 
from their own budgets by pushing some services into the 
private sector, but a total health system becomes a loser because 
of the higher costs of private care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the true false economy being referred to by Mr. 
Romanow is when government pretends to save money by 
pushing health care and health costs into the private sector. The 
total bill for health care will be higher with private care even if 
the government gleans some budgetary savings or economy by 
pushing health care into the private sector, and the bill into the 
pockets of private citizens through the cost of private health 
care premiums for additional care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public health care has been a 60-year project for 
our party and our movement. It is a project which continues. 
From a historic perspective, the Action Plan for Health Care is 
the most important structural advance to health care in our 
province since full medicare was introduced in the 1960s. The 
action plan is aimed at achieving a set of objectives and 
commitments for the health of people of Saskatchewan that 
were first proposed over 60 years ago. 
 
I draw your attention to the historical record of a set of values 
and policies which have evolved and guided our movement. Mr. 
Speaker, in the early days of the party, we find ourselves with 
the following: 
 

With the advance of medical science the maintenance of a 
healthy population has become the function for which 
every (society) . . . should undertake responsibility. Health 
services should be made at least as freely available as . . . 
educational services today . . . . A properly organized 
system of public health services including medical and 
dental care, which would . . . (have stressed) the 
prevention rather than the cure of illness should be 
extended to all . . . people in both rural and urban areas. 

 
As policies and practices have evolved, our ongoing 
commitment to implementing a true health plan rather than a 
sickness plan as outlined to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the early ’90s, this province was on the brink of 
disaster. We were at times a few days away from bankruptcy, 
from federal trusteeship of our province. It should be 

remembered at all times that there were members of the party 
opposite in the Devine government that drove us to the edge of 
bankruptcy. The Leader of the Opposition even ran for the Tory 
nomination in 1999, so he could carry the banner for the Devine 
government. The leader had worked for Mr. Devine in the 
legislature. If the new Leader of the Saskatchewan Party was so 
appalled and disillusioned by the policies of the Devine era, 
why did he fight to carry this banner? 
 
Mr. Speaker, New Democrats were left to clean up the mess, 
the sorry mess left behind by the political formation that is our 
current opposition. We made the hard choices that kept our 
province from insolvency; some of those choices, Mr. Speaker, 
were painful. Mr. Speaker, this government does not back away 
from a challenge. We did not back away when we created 
hospitalization. We did not back away when we created 
medicare. And, Mr. Speaker, we will not back away now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health said just the other day, we 
have 160 million of new money in our budget which will 
expand what we’re doing in health care. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I’ll just ask the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview to continue alone. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — We’ll continue to look at the practical 
solutions to the kind of challenges that we have in 
Saskatchewan. We know that there are challenges, but we know 
that the solutions can be found when we work with people who 
live in various parts of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Health minister has also mentioned that the 
opposition seems to do their research, as I mentioned earlier, 
through the newspapers. Or in fact perhaps the research is done 
by the press. Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat at this time, after 
reviewing all the material here before me, concerned of the 
quality of the research appearing in the motion of the 
opposition. If they were in fact serious, Mr. Speaker, perhaps 
they should have spent some time. 
 
But I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy during an earlier period of her political tenure, outlined 
perhaps a more rigorous approach in researching topics raised 
within the legislature. Mr. Speaker, may I read from the Review 
in Weyburn, October 20, 1999, after the member was appointed 
as Intergovernmental Affairs and deputy critic for that time. 
 
At that time, Mr. Speaker, the rigorous approach was . . . she 
says her preparation for the role include talking with 
experienced fellow party members and doing research. Also in 
there is . . . on the option put forward during the course of the 
campaign was the privatization of health care services, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just simply like to end with one more 
quote from Roy Romanow, and that is: 
 

Friends, (friends), the Report’s agenda is an ambitious 
one, but at a time when one of our most cherished national 
programs is at a crossroads . . . 

 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 
the member for Moosomin. 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a pleasure to enter into this debate today and 
especially since we’re discussing the issue of health care and 
the potential further closure of health care beds in the province 
of Saskatchewan, whether they are acute or heavy care beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting listening to members on the 
government side in the debate we’ve had this afternoon and 
their arguments for or against closures of further beds in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, might I remind this 
Assembly that back in the late ’70s under then Premier Allan 
Blakeney, the NDP actually had a moratorium on acute and 
heavy care term bed . . . long-term care bed construction in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and how well did we do at that time. 
 
And through the ’80s, Mr. Speaker, some 2,400 heavy care beds 
were added to the system, and yet the system continued to find 
that there were not enough beds to meet the need. And then of 
course along came the 1990s and the decision for the Romanow 
government to look at health care and determine that we may as 
well close more beds, we may as well close down more 
hospitals because that will save some money and thereby we’ll 
be able to meet the health care needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(11:45) 
 
And much to their chagrin, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest, as 
Mr. Romanow has already admitted, the closure of these beds, 
closure of 52 hospitals, the closure of the Plains health care 
centre certainly didn’t do anything to meet the long-term health 
needs of Saskatchewan. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the 
government talked about finding . . . through those closures 
saving money so that they could use that money and spread it 
over a broader base to meet the health care needs of the people 
of Saskatchewan. Did they accomplish that? How well are they 
doing today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the health care needs of the 
people of Saskatchewan . . . And I wonder how many members 
over the past few weeks have even taken the time to visit in our 
health care facilities or to visit patients in our health care 
facilities, to talk to caregivers in our health care facilities to see 
how well the system is working today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that even as we are seeing union 
leaders across this province as they begin to acknowledge the 
potential and the impact that health care workers may face, the 
government moves ahead with their intent to close more acute 
and long-term beds in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
look at the Leader-Post article dated today, and it says: 
 

Faced with the prospect of job losses in the health regions 
as a result of budget cuts, the union representing health 
care workers has postponed provincial contract 
negotiations until the fall. 

 
Why is that, Mr. Speaker? Because, Mr. Speaker, they want to 
know what they’re going to be dealing with. They want to know 
exactly what further downsizing and closure in the health care 
beds, in the health care system is going to do, not only to 

meeting the health care needs of the people of Saskatchewan 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order members, please. Seventy-five minute 
debate. Room for six or eight . . . six speakers, and I’d like to 
hear the member for Moosomin, please. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we look 
at the potential for further closures — and, Mr. Speaker, don’t 
kid yourself — there are serious decisions being made in the 
health regions across the province of Saskatchewan as a result 
of the funding that they have been given by this government to 
try and meet the health care needs that they have been asked to 
deal with. And in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region . . . It’s 
in the article I’m quoting from Leader-Post, today’s 
Leader-Post. It says: 
 

. . . there are no empty long-term care beds, according to 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses President Rosalee 
Longmoore. “So the resources to look after these people, if 
beds are closed (where would they be?) . . . 

 
Who would be providing that care to these people? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rosalee goes on to say: 
 

The sense I got was that the Regina General and Pasqua 
wouldn’t be impacted, but it would be more outside the 
city. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if he would say the General and the Pasqua 
are not going to be impacted by closures, I would beg to argue 
with you, yes, they will be impacted by further closure. And 
you say, well closures in the rural communities will not impact 
the large tertiary centres. Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you 
that they will have an impact because it removes those acute 
care beds that are being staffed by qualified professional 
individuals, nurses and nursing assistants and medical 
professionals in the rural communities, that certainly reduce the 
stress and the load on the large tertiary centres. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if you think that people in rural Saskatchewan 
aren’t concerned, I think you need to listen very carefully. They 
are concerned. They are concerned when they hear of cutbacks 
because they ask themselves and they ask governments, they 
ask my colleagues, exactly what have we accomplished through 
the past closures. And when we look at 52 hospitals, we look at 
the Plains health care centre, we ask ourselves what have we 
gained today. 
 
What have we gained today? The longest surgical waiting lists, 
we have in the province of Saskatchewan. The longest 
diagnostic waiting lists especially . . . two years for MRIs in the 
province of Saskatchewan, horrendously long waits in 
emergency rooms. And, Mr. Speaker, I could go on at length to 
speak of the experiences of individuals, even some of my 
constituents, as they’ve been transferred to the city of Regina 
only to wait in emergency rooms on gurneys for up to two and 
three days to even be looked at because of the lack of beds and 
space available in large urban centres. And as a result of this, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a mass exodus of nurses and other 
health care professionals in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

Mr. Speaker, closing more beds is not the answer. One might 
ask how well has the government done to date. The government 
continues to brag about the fact that they are putting $2.7 billion 
into the health care system. That $2.7 billion is somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of 40 per cent of expenditures of the 
Department of Finance to date, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one has to ask how well are we doing and 
how well are we spending those $2.7 billion in providing health 
care. Are we actually spending and utilizing those dollars to the 
. . . in the most efficient manner possible to meet the health care 
needs of the people of Saskatchewan, of the residents of 
Saskatchewan, to address their needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion before us this afternoon is . . . or this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, is talking about the fact that the people 
of Saskatchewan want to have some involvement. And this 
government and this Premier has talked about including people 
in the discussion, including people in debate, going out and 
meeting with the public and asking them for their input, asking 
them for their involvement, asking them for their thoughts and 
their views on how we spend their money. 
 
And that’s what this motion is talking about, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this motion is talking about the fact that we’re asking 
this government to give heed to the needs of the taxpayers of 
the province of Saskatchewan, the residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan, as to how we provide care for them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we wouldn’t be asking 
for this if it wasn’t for the fact that this government has done a 
very poor job in managing health care dollars and providing for 
the health care needs of the people of Saskatchewan to the point 
that even the former premier now acknowledges that some of 
the . . . many of the decisions they made certainly have not been 
a benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as a number of members have already indicated . . . 
certainly in the Leader-Post of November 14, ’03 where Mr. 
Romanow said — who headed the Commission on the Future of 
Health Care in Canada — he has admitted the deep cuts to 
provincial health care services in the 1990s were a mistake. 
 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Romanow looked back at 
the decisions that the NDP government under Allan Blakeney in 
the 1970s, the decisions in regards to the moratorium on health, 
on expenditures of heavy-care beds and what that moratorium 
did to providing health care services in the province of 
Saskatchewan. He looked at the decisions that his government 
had made and their arguments that if we close these facilities 
and these beds, we’ll find more money to provide adequate care 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
He looked back at all of those decisions and as he was doing his 
. . . As he was the head of the Commission on the Future of 
Health Care in Canada, as he was sitting down and meeting 
with people all across this country, I am sure, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he looked back at how well he had managed the health 
care system in the province of Saskatchewan. And he ended up 
having to admit that the decisions they made certainly weren’t 
very positive decisions and it didn’t accomplish the goals that 
his government had desired to meet in endeavouring to reduce 
waiting lists, in endeavouring to give people immediate access 

to the specific health needs and specialists, and access to the 
beds that were necessary in the O.R. (operating room) rooms to 
address people’s health care needs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I am certainly pleased to stand in 
support of this motion today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to enter into this debate and to put a 
little bit of rational talk about the whole issue of fearmongering 
that the opposition continues to put forward in this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition continually talks about what the 
government’s going to do and tries to raise the anxiety of senior 
citizens and raising the anxiety of the people of Saskatchewan 
about what they believe the government’s going to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes to talk 
about the policy in health care, the policies that the 
Saskatchewan Party’s put forward on health care over the years. 
And I’d like to start, Mr. Speaker, with their 1999 election 
platform where they said they would freeze spending on health 
care for five years. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year would 
be the fifth year of that five-year freeze. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they said they’d freeze health care spending 
for five years. Over those same five years, Mr. Speaker, this 
government’s put more than 6 per cent a year into health care 
spending. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they talk about all the 
grandiose things they would do and how they would provide all 
these great services to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And just how would they have done that with a five 
year freeze on health care spending? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they can try to create fear in seniors in the 
province. They can try to create fear in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. But the reality is their own plan calls for a five-year 
freeze on spending in health care. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, in that five years — in that five years, Mr. Speaker — 
this same government’s put forward more than 30 per cent of 
new money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take the opportunity to quote for 
the people of Saskatchewan a number of quotations from 
members from the opposition over the last number of years. 
And I’d like to start with a quote from the member from 
Rosetown, the former leader of the opposition, when he was a 
Member of Parliament, House of Commons, and I quote. This is 
from the Hansard, House of Commons, February 15, 1994, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

I know that most Canadians place a high priority on health 
care. I would just like to relate a little about what is 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

happening in my own province of Saskatchewan. We had 
governments that liked to build monuments, that liked to 
build hospitals. We probably have more hospitals per 
capita in our province than . . . any other part of Canada. 
Unfortunately, we now have no money to operate those 
hospitals. Our priorities were probably wrong. In fact, I am 
sure they . . . (are) wrong. 

 
That is the former leader of the opposition, February 15, 1994 
in Hansard from the House of Commons, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So how can the opposition stand here day after day, 
fearmonger, tell the people of Saskatchewan that the 
government’s going to take their grandmothers and their 
brothers and sisters, and take them out of nursing home beds 
and not provide those services in rural Saskatchewan. It’s 
shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When their own leader, their 
own leader said that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote again from the member from 
Biggar . . . Rosetown, pardon me, when he was the leader of the 
opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, this was March 3, 1999, in the 
Leader-Post. It says: 
 

Saskatchewan Party leader Elwin Hermanson couldn’t 
guarantee his party would keep the doors open at all 36 
hospitals with low average daily bed usage rates. 

 
Mr. Speaker, here they’re criticizing and telling the government 
that they shouldn’t do something — something they proposed to 
do themselves. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know, when you 
have an opposition that wants to go out there and be all things 
to all people but yet when it comes down to being put in a 
position where they have to answer, they won’t guarantee that 
they will keep those same hospitals open, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to quote, according to CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) reporter Art Jones on 
February 3, 2000, Health critic Rod Gantefoer couldn’t 
guarantee that the Saskatchewan Party wouldn’t shut down 
rural hospitals. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s Rod Gantefoer, their 
Health critic saying that — on CBC radio, February 3, 2000, 
saying he wouldn’t guarantee he’d keep those health facilities 
open, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know what the members opposite 
are trying to do. But the members opposite go and they tell 
people in rural Saskatchewan what they want to hear, and they 
come here and say other things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 
very, very unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on February 3, CBC, a quote again from 
the opposition: 
 

All along the opposition has been saying . . . (that) health 
care system . . . (shouldn’t) be studied before there are any 
more hospitals closed. And even though the Saskatchewan 
Party is blasting the government for not guaranteeing the 
future of rural hospitals, it’s not prepared to do so itself. 

 
Again, a quote from CBC, February 3, 2000, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 

And I think this is the absolute best quote, Mr. Speaker. The 
absolute best quote. It is from the Moosomin . . . the 
World-Spectator from Moosomin, November 10, 2003, just 
days, just days after the provincial election, Mr. Speaker. And it 
says this, and this is a direct quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Toth said any voters in Moosomin who were concerned 
about the status of the new health care facility under a 
Sask Party government should be relieved. 

 
They should be relieved, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I guess they 
should be relieved because a New Democratic Party 
government was returned in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is terrific, it is 
exceptional when the opposition will go out there and say — 
and say and put in writing, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that the 
seniors of our province are better off under an NDP government 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a number of other quotes I’d like to 
raise. I’d like to talk about a quote from the Leader-Post, April 
4, 1998, from then Saskatchewan Party leader, Elwin 
Hermanson. And it says: 
 

Saskatchewan should be raising additional revenue by 
removing some procedures for ‘non-life threatening 
illnesses’ from the medicare plan. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this the party that says you . . . (inaudible) 
. . . remove procedures from the medicare plan that 
Saskatchewan citizens need. And they’re out there creating, 
creating fear among Saskatchewan seniors and rural residents 
about the potential of closing health care facilities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to end my remarks by talking 
about the plans of some members of the Saskatchewan Party, 
and I’d like refer to the Weyburn Review, October 20, 1999: 
 

Weyburn-Big Muddy MLA Brenda Bakken has also 
voiced support for private health care. One option put 
forward by Bakken during the course of her campaign was 
the privatization of health services (Mr. Speaker). 

 
We should trust a party who wants to privatize those health 
services, Mr. Speaker. Not in this province. 
 
Then Bakken also stated: 
 

Why are we not looking at having privatized care in 
Saskatchewan and keeping the money here if that’s what 
we’re going to do? 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There will now be a 10-minute 
question and comment period. I recognize the member for 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my question’s for the member from Eastview. 
And I’d like to know what that member thinks Tommy Douglas 
would say about this NDP government cutting long-term care 
beds and chasing our seniors into private care homes and 
creating even a larger two-tier system in this province. What 
does she think Tommy Douglas would have to say about that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, failing having a 
séance, I have really no idea. 
 
But I think that what we need to talk about is what do people in 
Saskatchewan expect of their government? They expect us to 
make choices that will improve their health care. And we can’t 
simply say, we keep what we have and keep adding more 
money. We have to change what we have that isn’t working or 
isn’t serving us well, or has served us well and no longer is 
needed. Those are the choices that we have to make and, as 
governments, that’s what we do. 
 
We have our health plan. We have the progress on our health 
plan and we will continue to work with our districts and our 
communities to make sure that what we put in place serves the 
people of Saskatchewan well so that we are healthy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question’s 
for the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. Could the member 
deny or confirm for me that Sask Party MLAs and/or staff have 
held discussions with representatives of the Alberta government 
concerning amendments to the Canada Health Act and 
privatization of health services? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — As far as I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the member from Saskatoon Eastview. She refers to the 
action plan on health care. I’m looking at the document, and 
does the action plan on health care contain any reference to 
conversions of facilities or closures of beds or closures of entire 
facilities? If so, what page is the reference on? I’m looking at 
the table of contents, and I’m looking at the highlights, and I 
find no reference to closures or conversions in the document. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The action plan for 
health care is a dynamic document. There are things that we 
will see that have to have change as we move along in our 

health system and in our response to the people’s needs in the 
province. 
 
When the member from across the way asked me about Tommy 
Douglas, Tommy Douglas was about change. Tommy Douglas 
talked about change. He’s the one who brought us to the change 
in how we have our health system delivered and who pays for 
it. That’s why we have medicare, because he was interested in 
change. It wasn’t easy to move that change forward, but he did 
it. So we continue to move forward in change that will actually 
respect and respond to the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The document that the member is questioning is, like I said, a 
document that is continually evolving. It will always be 
something that responds to the needs of our province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — The member from Weyburn-Big Muddy 
and her accounts of Mr. Romanow . . . or speaking on behalf of 
Mr. Romanow’s . . . or being an expert on Mr. Romanow’s 
speeches, would the member please comment on what she 
thought of Mr. Romanow’s comments regarding formative 
change and determinants of health? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not believe that Mr. 
Romanow ever indicated in any information that I have that he 
was in favour of closing hospitals, closing beds, or closing 
long-term care beds and throwing our seniors out of their homes 
and with nowhere to go. 
 
I would like to refer to Rosalee Longmoore quote that is in the 
paper today where she indicates that, and I quote: “'So the . . . 
(resource) to look after these people, if beds are closed, would 
be where?'” Because, “there are no empty long-term care beds 
. . . ” in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 
 
So we would like to know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the 
NDP plan to put the seniors of our province when they throw 
them out of their long-term care beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Saskatoon Fairview, who in his 
dissertation spent a lot of time going back to the ’80s, forgot to 
go back to Allan Blakeney’s 6.8 billion which by the way we 
still haven’t paid off. We still haven’t paid that off. 
 
However then he went a little more modern, and he talked . . . 
tried to do a defence of Roy Romanow’s closing of 52 
hospitals. So then he got near the end of his dissertation, and he 
says we have to make decisions or have to make decisions by 
evidence. By evidence — that’s what the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview says. 
 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

So I ask him, how much did the NDP save by Mr. Romanow 
closing 52 hospitals? And for the people watching, if he can’t 
answer that specifically, that means there is no answer which 
means they have no idea how much they are going to save by 
closing the hospitals this time around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the changes outlined in the 
action plan and the changes this government is proposing are 
for the benefits of the people of Saskatchewan. Those changes, 
those changes that we propose and the changes that were done 
were for the benefit of the health care system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the . . . whatever may be said on 
that point, we did those changes because they were the right 
changes. They were the tough decisions we had to make, and 
we were there. And we will continue to be there for the public 
health care system, unlike the members from the other side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is, what is her position on privatized 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan? And what does 
she feel about amendments to the Canada Health Act that would 
allow privatized health care in Canada? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Party supports publicly funded, publicly 
administered health care in accordance with the Canada Health 
Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is to the member from Eastview. Your Premier stated 
that there was no benefit in additional closures to hospitals, that 
the $12 million savings was not significant to offset the 
closures. Do you support that position? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What we’re 
talking about here is a plan for the health of this province of 
Saskatchewan. What we have is not necessarily what we need. 
What we have now is not necessarily what we need tomorrow. 
When we talk about making a plan, we talk about looking 
forward and seeing what we do and that what we will do will 

make a difference in the health of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’re not talking about throwing people out on the street 
out of their long-term care beds. We’re looking at a broader 
vision of what do we need to serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
Where do we need it? And who actually should be providing 
those services? That’s the thing that we do as a government 
when we make a plan. We don’t look at those tiny little 
specifics like the opposition want to make sure that we focused 
in on and fearmonger with people that are going to be put out of 
their beds. That’s not what’s going to be happening. We’re 
looking at a plan in a broader sense, in a long-term sense, of 
what, how, and where we deliver the services that the people of 
Saskatchewan need. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter the comment portion of this. 
 
I really have to smile when I see opposition members quoting 
and talking about how great Roy Romanow is and how great 
Allan Blakeney is, and I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, on 
this side of the House, we think they are great, great Canadians. 
They continue to contribute to the fabric of Saskatchewan and 
Canada particularly as it relates to health. We want to talk about 
our leaders, our politicians. 
 
It’s interesting that today when in the Leader-Post it says, 
“Devine expected to run,” they’re silent about their political 
heritage. I’d be silent too if I was on that side. I wouldn’t want 
to talk about Grant Devine either. I’d want to talk about Roy 
Romanow, Allan Blakeney and the great Canadians that have 
built medicare in this wonderful country of ours. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — My question is for the member from Regina 
Dewdney. He’d mentioned about fearmongering out there. Does 
that mean that . . . with that statement I believe that he means 
that there will be no long-term care bed closures because in my 
constituency, in my health district, the two that come into my 
area, there are no empty long-term care beds. There’s waiting 
lists right now in Imperial of 10. 
 
So that I will ask the member opposite, does he support 
long-term care bed closures in this province, or does he support 
closures of facilities or long-term care beds? And if he does, 
where will these people go because in my health districts there 
is no place for them to go? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thanks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll tell the 
member opposite what I don’t support. I don’t support 
fearmongering. I don’t support getting seniors upset and excited 
about things that aren’t going to happen. I don’t support getting 
people angry, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. That concludes the 75-minute 
debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Motion No. 3 — Government’s Commitment to 
Rural Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise to put forward this motion to the Assembly. 
 
I’d like to start off by indicating, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s 
seeding time in Saskatchewan. And so before I speak directly to 
the motion, I would like to acknowledge and honour the work 
of our farm population past and present and the great challenges 
they have faced — in our grandparents’ day, our parents’ day, 
and today, as I watched my sister and brother and their families 
face many of the same challenges and new ones as well — on 
their Saskatchewan farms. 
 
This is the season of hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Stan Rogers 
wrote a song once which had these lyrics: 
 

Watch the field behind the plow turn to straight dark rows 
Put another season’s promise in the ground 

 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the season of hope. This is 
the season of seeding. And so many farmers today are out in the 
fields, and we wish them well in their work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is also the weekend 
of Mother’s Day and I would . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member 
for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can see 
that the members opposite are in a very good mood as we 
approach the weekend and as attentive as usual. 
 
And so I’d like to acknowledge the farm women who have 
contributed to this province and to this economy and, in 
recognition of that, acknowledge my own mother, Leila 
Borgerson, who usually celebrates Mother’s Day at the same 
time as her birthday. As the member from Saskatoon Eastview 
said, our mothers are never far from the centre of our universe. 
And I certainly feel that at this time as my mother goes through 
a difficult time in her life. 
 
It reminds me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a little bit of a story that 
I might share with the Assembly. After my father passed away, 
when my mother decided to move into a seniors’ apartment 
complex, I spoke to the manager of that complex. And the 
manager indicated that when senior citizens moved in there, 
they usually requested the third floor, which puzzled me greatly 
because that meant dealing with stairs and elevators and that 

sort of a thing. So I asked, well why, why on earth would they 
want to stay on the third floor? And the manager responded, 
they want to be able to look out over the prairie, and they want 
to be able to see the elevators. And the big item there was to be 
able to see the elevators, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(12:15) 
 
And so at this time of the year, I’m thinking about farming and 
thinking about my family and thinking about Mother’s Day and 
thinking about the symbols that represent this province and 
represent rural Saskatchewan. And one of the symbols that has 
always I guess traditionally represented this place are the grain 
elevators that used to, at one time, be right across this province 
and right across Western Canada. 
 
There’s been great changes in the rural landscape over the last 
20, 30, 50 years. At one time in the ’30s, there were 5,700 
elevators across Western Canada, and there are 600 today. So 
we are living in a very different world, and it’s compounded by 
all kinds of problems including BSE, drought. 
 
I was talking to some of the other members in this House 
recently, and we talked about how the snow that we 
accumulated over the winter, which seemed to be a great 
snowfall, snow cover, has in fact disappeared very quickly. And 
there is concern that in fact we will once again have dry 
conditions in this province. And so all of us hope that we’ll 
have the moisture that’s needed to sustain the farm families, the 
family farms in this province. But out of all of this, this has 
always been a province of hope. And it’s always been a next 
year country, that things will be better. We’ll hang in and things 
will get better. 
 
One of the members opposite last week, when we were talking 
about the Canadian Wheat Board, said that this is a different 
world, and I acknowledge that. It is a very different world now. 
The member opposite — the member from Kindersley — 
indicated that 20 per cent of the farmers in this province are 
farming 80 per cent of the land. That has then made a 
significant change to the rural landscape in this province. So 
there has been rural depopulation, smaller towns, and an 
inability to sustain many services — post offices, schools, and 
hospitals. And there are small, tiny little communities in this 
province . . . Well not communities, there are places in this 
province where there are signposts for the little villages and 
hamlets, but there’s no one living there. There’s been a dramatic 
change in the landscape of this province. 
 
And why has this occurred? Well there are many, many 
reasons. The member from Wood River would say it’s years 
and years of socialism, not realizing of course that we haven’t 
had a socialist government in Ottawa ever. 
 
There have been economic forces — globalization and 
deregulation — that have contributed to it in a great, great way. 
And there have been federal policies I think that have . . . 
federal policies that have contributed directly to what, what we 
have experienced in this province. 
 
And when I think of those federal policies, I think of the 
abandonment of the Crow rate, which I think was a signpost, a 
signal from the government that in fact farm families were 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

going to be on their own. The effect of the removal of the Crow 
rate resulted in increased freight rates, leaving farmers wide 
open to the open market in what some people have described as 
in a situation of survival of the biggest. 
 
There have been trade agreements that our federal government 
have signed that I think have put added pressure on the farmers 
of this province — the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade), the general agreement on trades and tariffs; NAFTA 
(North American Free Trade Agreement), a free trade 
agreement — and what some people have described as a 
one-way free trade situation for this province and for the 
farmers here. 
 
There’s been a drastic change in the trade subsidies. In the 
mid-1980s the Canadian government subsidized the farmers of 
this province at an equal level, at an equal level to Europeans 
and Americans. That has changed dramatically. These figures 
are three or four years old, but Europe now subsidizes their 
farmers to the tune of $90 billion — $6 a bushel. Americans 
subsidize their farmers to the tune of $28 billion or 2.75 a 
bushel. Canadian subsidies, 600 million to the tune of 44 cents a 
bushel. 
 
And so we here in Saskatchewan wait for this issue to be 
addressed for the rural people of this province, that trade injury 
be dealt with at the federal level. And in the meantime, and in 
the meantime the farmers of this province carry on. 
 
People in this government wait for fair trade, fair trade for the 
producers of this province. And this government supports the 
Canadian Wheat Board which puts every year $142 million into 
the pockets of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — This is where we stand as a government. 
The National Farmers Union last fall put out a paper that was 
very interesting and persuasive with good research behind it, 
and the title of the paper is The Farm Crisis, Bigger Farms, and 
the Myths of “Competition” and “Efficiency.” 
 
The first two myths are the myths that farmers need to become 
more efficient, and the bigger they are the more efficient they 
will be. Over and over again, that is the same message that we 
have received from the federal government and from other 
interests. 
 
A 1969 federal task force recommended, recommended that 
half to two-thirds of farmers should be moved out of 
agriculture. It went on to say, increased mobility out of farming 
helps to achieve a higher per capita net farm income for those 
left in farming, while at the same time obtaining better paid 
employment for those who leave agriculture. This kind of a 
message was repeated over and over again in reports — federal 
Agriculture reports 1981, 1993 — this idea that the solution lies 
in higher competition and higher efficiency and fewer but larger 
farms. 
 
Well the irony, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this: that over the past 
25 years prices haven’t changed for farmers. Farmers are 
essentially producing their grains, oilseeds, hogs, cattle, and 
other foods at pretty much the same prices as 25 years ago. In 

the meantime, they have tripled yields from 1950 to 1980 — 
tripled yields — and they’ve continued to increase since then. 
 
So it is the pressure of low prices that farmers face. And they’re 
squeezed from the other direction by high inputs — chemicals 
and fertilizers. From 1947 to 1997, in those 50 years, those 
inputs quadrupled. The price of tractors quintupled. It’s 
indicated that if inputs were reduced by 15 per cent — by 15 
per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the net income of farmers 
would double. So there is a myth of efficiency that the National 
Farmers Union raises — this idea that the solution lies in 
farmers becoming more efficient and becoming bigger. 
 
Interestingly though, we are living in a world of corporate 
concentration. When I grew up in the small town of Rockglen, I 
can remember farm equipment dealers all through the town. 
There were, in this country and on this continent, many 
different beef processors. 
 
Things have changed. The five farm equipment companies that 
I remember have been reduced to two. There are two primary 
beef processors, three pasta, and five grain companies from the 
very many that we used to have at one time. And corporations 
have begun a process I think to control the profit from the 
business of food, from the seed to the shelf and from the gate to 
the plate. 
 
In the face of all of this farmers have done everything that 
they’ve been asked to do and more. They have larger farms. A 
large farm when I was . . . Well the farm that I grew up on was 
about, was five quarters and that now would be a small farm. So 
farmers have become larger; they have diversified. And I would 
say farmers have been creative, determined, and courageous in 
the face of many situations that are beyond their control, the 
weather, BSE, and in fact federal policies that have not assisted 
them, and an age of the open market and globalization that I 
think has transformed the rural landscape. 
 
So what to do? In this province, we realize that the family farm 
is the heartbeat of this place that we call home. And so we 
support programs that support farmers — 55 million for BSE 
programs, crop insurance which will again be fully funded, a 
minimum commitment of 99 million for CAIS (Canadian 
Agricultural Income Stabilization program). And remembering 
always the constraints that this province is under, that for every 
amount of money put into the farm situation, we have to 
contribute 40 per cent. So this is the situation that farmers face 
in this province, and I applaud and I think we all applaud the 
strength and determination of farmers in responding to it. 
 
So here is my story. This is what I see as I go around 
Saskatchewan, that this is how difficult and how challenging it 
has been for farm country and for the communities, the towns 
and villages around this province; what’s happening out there. 
 
I have three different routes to take when I come to Regina. 
And every time I drive down here I’m quite amazed — given 
the size of this province and the infrastructure that we have to 
support — I’m amazed at the quality of the roads, the highways 
that I travel. I have miles and miles and miles of grid roads and 
secondary roads in my constituency which I’ve come to know 
very well, and I am amazed and astounded at the maintenance 
and the quality of the roads that I travel there. 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

Of course everyone in their constituencies has that one or two 
little grid roads or little bit of pavement that they’d like patched, 
but for the most part I’m impressed with the transportation 
system that we have in rural Saskatchewan and which I’ve 
come to know very well as I’ve grown up in the South, lived in 
the North, and presently serve an area of central Saskatchewan. 
 
I have visited the schools in my constituency and this is what I 
see there. In little schools like Spruce Home and Red Wing — 
there were students here this week from Red Wing, Christopher 
Lake — I see well-equipped schools and well-built schools. I 
see teacher aides and assistants working with those kids who 
require extra help — the special needs students in our schools. I 
see an amazing degree of computer hardware and software and 
computer support for students. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last fall before the 
election, my job was to supervise intern teachers. And it was 
quite remarkable for, in terms of the interns’ evaluations, that 
their co-operating teachers could go on-line with a password, 
write the evaluations. Using their password with their 
permission, I could go in and read it and make suggestions as to 
the changes that they could make to those evaluations which 
they would work on in the schools. It was a remarkable 
situation. 
 
There is more and more high-speed Internet in the schools. 
CommunityNet has webbed this province together. There have 
been 880 . . . 880 of the 880 Saskatchewan schools, including 
85 First Nation schools have been connected; 30 regional 
colleges facilities have been connected; 310 of 310 health 
facilities have been connected; 256 of 256 government offices 
have been connected; 154 of 162 provincial libraries have been 
connected. CommunityNet is available in 366 communities and 
SaskTel offers high-speed Internet service in 237 communities 
and the number is rising. 
 
Web-based resources have been developed by Saskatchewan 
Learning in partnership with school divisions, and I’ve had the 
opportunity to visit the work of students in my constituency 
who have participated in grassroots projects in the classroom 
and have put them up on the Web. The grassroots project has 
involved 73 school divisions since 1998, 40,000 students, 2,500 
teachers, and 3,300 classrooms, and the numbers rise. 
 
(12:30) 
 
So we have great technical support to the students and parents 
and teachers in rural Saskatchewan. I’m familiar with the 
Evergreen Curriculum, which is accessible to all teachers and 
all schools in the province and rural Saskatchewan, and it has 
provided a valuable resource for those people. 
 
Teachers in schools in rural Saskatchewan have taken the 
adaptive dimension of the curriculum and have done wonderful 
things. A science unit in the North might deal with grain 
harvesting . . . sorry, wild rice harvesting, and in the South, 
grain harvesting, but the students are taught the same skills. 
 
Local history projects in the schools as well. I’ve spoken earlier 
of the local history project in Prince Albert, which I read in the 
paper this week has led to the possibility of that Kestapinanihk 
— and I promise I won’t sing the song — that Kestapinanihk 

may in fact may become the name for the P.A. riverside 
authority. And as has been pointed out earlier today, we have 
school patrollers not only in urban Saskatchewan but right 
across the province in our rural schools as well. 
 
But most important, what I see in our rural schools is an 
incredible presence of volunteers and parents. No matter what 
school I’ve gone in to, sometimes when I walk down the hall I 
just never know whether I’m meeting a teacher or a parent, 
there is such a presence there of the community. And I’m 
thinking of communities like Smeaton` and Christopher Lake. 
 
I have a brother-in-law who lives in the south end of this 
province and he went to a volleyball tournament once. And 
there were some people up from the United States, I believe 
from North Carolina. And they were astounded at the volunteer 
support that this province has. They said, we might have had 
that kind of volunteer involvement 20, 30 years ago, but you’d 
never see it now. But we have that in this province, and you’ll 
see it in rural Saskatchewan, and you’ll see it in the schools. 
 
And so to sum this up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have quality 
education in rural Saskatchewan. We have schools and 
curriculum to be proud of. 
 
Recently I met with the CEO (chief executive officer) and the 
board Chair of the Cumberland Regional College in Nipawin. 
And I was very impressed with the facility and the programs 
that they run there. As with most regional colleges, they run 
basic ed, technical-vocational, university, and non-credit 
business and industry and community education programs. 
Their courses are offered face to face, but also they have 
courses on-line, and they have televised courses as well. In this 
province, there are 125 televised courses in 2003-2004. Our 8 
regional colleges in 40 locations employ approximately 400 
full-time equivalents and have an economic impact of $128.8 
million. 
 
We have an incredible provincial library system in rural 
Saskatchewan. When I was young — many, many years ago — 
even back then we would request books from the provincial 
library, and I can still remember the brown envelopes arriving 
with the orders that we’d made. We still have a wonderful 
provincial library system funded municipally and provincially: 
ten public library systems — seven in the South, as well as 
Regina, Saskatoon, and the North. We have a total of 320 
branch and community libraries in this province. It’s an 
interesting statistic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 
approximately 1 million people in this province, and I read that 
over 50 per cent of those people hold library cards and that 
there’s a circulation of 11 million every year. 
 
And the final area that I’d like to talk about before leaving other 
topics to the Minister of Agriculture, who will second this 
motion, is to talk about the Crowns and their presence in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskPower serves 67,000 farm customers, over 34,000 rural 
residential customers. They employ 550 people. The 2003 
wages amount to $28 million. SaskPower has put 200 million 
into capital projects in rural Saskatchewan in 2003. 
 
SaskEnergy serves 325,000 customers; 826 employees work 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

there in 56 communities. They provide sponsorships — 1,300 
sponsorships to 270 communities in this province. They provide 
scholarships, and they are rated by the Conference Board of 
Canada as one of Canada’s most socially responsible 
companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), Mr. Deputy Speaker, employs over 1,500 
employees in 13 different communities, and they utilize over 
290 independent insurance brokers. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we have difficult challenges in rural Saskatchewan, but as well 
we have a great legacy of services that this province provides 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Sask Housing Corporation supports approximately 4,800 
affordable housing units in 128 rural communities across this 
province. They provide reasonably priced rental 
accommodation for low- and moderate-income families and 
individuals. And many rural communities would not have any 
rental accommodation for low- to moderate-income households 
if this housing was not available to those who need it. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SaskTel — SaskTel employs 
3,700 people in 60 communities with a total salary of $200 
million. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve talked about, particularly about 
the areas of Learning or education and Crowns, and I’ve 
touched on the infrastructure that is provided to the people of 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But I’d like to close with a little story. It’s a little joke actually. 
And the test of the joke is that the members present have to 
provide the punchline. 
 
And the story goes like this. There was once a man who decided 
to write a history of churches in Canada. And he thought the 
best way to do that would be to get right down on the ground 
and travel right across this country and visit churches as he 
went. So he started in Newfoundland. And he went into a 
church, and he saw on the wall the most unusual thing. He saw 
a golden telephone with a sign beside it that said, direct line to 
heaven — $10,000. Now I would warn that members present 
that if you know this story, don’t shout out the punchline before 
I get to it. 
 
Well he thought that was unusual, so he talked to a church 
official and he said, why would you have this, a golden 
telephone and a sign that says — $10,000, direct line to heaven? 
And the church official said this, the church official said, well it 
is exactly as it says. I can tell you that if you submit $10,000, 
you will have a direct line to heaven. 
 
So he carried on. He got to Nova Scotia. And again in a little 
church in Nova Scotia, he found a golden telephone with a sign 
that said, direct line to heaven — $10,000. And he got exactly 
the same response from a church official there. And he went to 
New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island. And he moved 
across the country — Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba. He actually 
jumped over Saskatchewan and visited the territories and BC 
(British Columbia) and Alberta before he got here. But in every 

province and territory of this country, he would find one church 
where there would be a golden telephone with a sign beside it 
that said, direct line to heaven — $10,000. 
 
When he got to Saskatchewan, as he travelled around, he visited 
a small church in a small rural community and — low and 
behold — he found a golden telephone on the wall with a sign 
that said, direct line to heaven — 25 cents. And he was 
astounded by this, so he called over the church official. He said, 
everywhere else I’ve gone it’s been a direct line to heaven — 
$10,000. Why here is a direct line to heaven 25 cents? 
 
An Hon. Member: — SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — And the response was not SaskTel. The 
response was, here it’s a local call, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like 
to move: 
 

That this Assembly commend the government for its 
ongoing commitment to rural Saskatchewan in areas such 
as agricultural support, highways, infrastructure, and 
education. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Moved by the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers, seconded by the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley: 
 

That this Assembly commend the government for its 
ongoing commitment to rural Saskatchewan in areas such 
as agricultural support, highways, infrastructure, and 
education. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very happy to have an opportunity to rise and speak to this 
motion. And I have to say that I feel very honoured to be the 
Agriculture minister in Saskatchewan at this time. And I also 
have to say that I think it is a specific honour to have that 
position as an urban person. And I know that I bring a different 
perspective to the ministry, and I hope that that perspective will 
help and develop the ministry of Agriculture during this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is important that we get the message 
across this province, particularly in urban Saskatchewan, as to 
the significance of rural Saskatchewan to urban Saskatchewan. 
And that includes agriculture. But it also includes the rural 
communities and the contributions that they make to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would like to go just through some of the major elements 
of the contribution that rural Saskatchewan, and particularly 
agriculture, makes to the economy and to the livelihood of 
Saskatchewan. 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

The agriculture sector in Saskatchewan is a very, very 
significant part of our economy. Our farmers purchase more 
than $5.7 billion worth of input goods and services annually — 
more than $5.7 billion worth. In the 1997-2001 period, the 
agricultural sector accounted for 8.7 per cent of the province’s 
gross domestic product, dropping back to 2 billion in 2001; 7.1 
per cent of the provincial GDP (gross domestic product), and 
1.5 billion in 2002, which is 5.5 per cent. The reason, of course, 
for these drops were because of those very, very difficult 
drought years. But imagine, even in those times, the 
significance of rural Saskatchewan’s contribution to the 
economy of Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
Agriculture directly accounts for about 10.5 per cent of the 
employed labour force in Saskatchewan — about 51,000 jobs in 
2002. And indirectly, it is responsible for many, many other 
jobs throughout this province. Approximately 40 per cent — 
approximately 40 per cent of all jobs in this province are either 
directly or indirectly related to agriculture. 
 
The health of the agriculture industry, as we have seen over 
these last few years, does affect everyone in this province. 
Sometimes it takes a little while for that effect to be noticed, but 
it very definitely affects everyone. The link between a thriving 
and prosperous agriculture and food sector and a thriving and 
prosperous urban sector in Saskatchewan cannot be overstated. 
Nineteen per cent of the consumer spending by rural dwellers is 
carried out in Regina and Saskatoon — 19 per cent. 
 
Twenty-eight per cent of rural dwellers’ consumer spending is 
done in the eight next largest cities, communities in 
Saskatchewan; Estevan, Lloydminster, Moose Jaw, North 
Battleford, Prince Albert, Swift Current, Weyburn, Yorkton. So 
you can see how important rural Saskatchewan is to urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(12:45) 
 
In 2002, the value of agriculture and food exports was $4 
billion, representing 35 per cent of Saskatchewan’s exports, and 
we are an exporting province. I want to say that that is primarily 
around processed product, and so we want to take a look at all 
of the other exports that agriculture is related to directly and 
indirectly as well, Mr. Speaker. And I think of the varieties of 
agricultural equipment that have been invented, developed, and 
are manufactured here in this province, and also contribute 
greatly to our balance of trade and to our exports. 
 
Approximately 300 food and beverage processing 
establishments in Saskatchewan since 2002 mean that much of 
this province is dependent on processing of food. An increase of 
over 200 per cent from 1991, there were 143 firms in ’91. Food 
processors today employ over 7,000 people in Saskatchewan 
with an annual payroll of about $227 million. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, it cannot be overstated how important the agriculture 
sector in rural Saskatchewan is to the well-being of the whole 
province. 
 
A major centre of agricultural biotechnology in Canada is at our 
Innovation Place. And that Innovation Place is well known 
throughout the world. The biotechnology sector in the province 
employs 1,500 workers including scientists, technicians, sales, 
and manufacturing personnel — salaries there totalling over 40 

million . . . $43 million. There are at least 30 agri-food 
biotechnology and related companies with more than $400 
million in sales. That’s up from 5.4 million in ’91, and 91 
million in ’98. 
 
In 2001, there were 62 agricultural implement manufacturing 
establishments in Saskatchewan with sales of $425 million. 
That’s up from 130 in 1991. Those manufacturers employ 2,580 
persons with total salaries and wages of over $90 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it cannot — cannot — be overstated how 
important rural Saskatchewan is and the agriculture sector is to 
the well-being of this province as a whole. A major portion of 
the value-added processors, biotechnology institutions, and 
manufacturing establishments are located in Saskatchewan’s 
urban centres. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the kind of supports that 
this government puts into the agriculture sector, there is very, 
very good reason why we do it. There are times when people in 
urban Saskatchewan complain about the vast dollars that are put 
into the agriculture sector. We are far and above any other 
province in Canada in terms of our per capita amount that we 
put into support programs in agriculture and, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that when we talk about how important rural 
Saskatchewan is to urban Saskatchewan, the urban members on 
the other side should listen instead of making a lot of noise. I 
think it would help them to understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to get a clear sense of how to most 
effectively put funding into rural Saskatchewan, this 
government developed a group called the Action Committee on 
the Rural Economy. Many other people got together — ACRE 
(Action Committee on the Rural Economy), chambers of 
commerce, Agrivision — they’ve made a case in this province 
that we can shift to livestock production into a higher value of 
production because there have been so many changes in this 
province. 
 
The member from Saskatchewan Rivers alluded to the change 
in this province when the federal government took away the 
Crow rate. It took $300 million out of our economy annually, 
and the most conservative estimate. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
people in this province have responded. These groups have got 
together. We have worked with them and we realize that it is 
vitally important to this province to begin to develop the beef 
and the pork sectors to a greater extent in this province. And we 
have been working to that end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A livestock-based agriculture sector that produces enough 
animals to attract the state-of-the-art processing plants that will 
be competitive on the world market over the long term will 
dramatically increase the value-added activity in our economy. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that will mean more jobs and more wealth in 
this province for all people, urban Saskatchewan included. 
 
There have been many trends and issues that we have been 
monitoring and that we have been working on over these years. 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry continues to evolve. Our 
farmers and our entrepreneurs have become adept at 
capitalizing on opportunity in spite of successive challenges 
that have become a part of the very nature of agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. The adage that change is constant definitely 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2004 

holds true for agriculture. In fact change and innovation is what 
defines Saskatchewan’s agriculture sector, unlike many other 
agriculture jurisdictions where change is discouraged by 
government policies. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, recognizing that change, we have invested 
over many years in agricultural innovation, in the development 
of new cereals, and we have seen many changes over those 
years. The long-term trend we find is towards lower cereal grain 
prices. The economic impact of increased farm size, there are 
fewer farm families, declining rural population — these have 
created a compelling case for more development of a very 
different agriculture sector in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a growing consensus that a move in 
Saskatchewan towards livestock-based agricultural economy 
would realize opportunities to increase the value of our total 
primary production and to capture more economic development 
in slaughter and secondary manufacturing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our policies are moving us in this direction. The 
investments that we are making in agriculture in this province 
are moving us in this direction. Saskatchewan Agriculture, 
Food and Rural Revitalization has worked very hard with our 
partners, our rural partners, to facilitate change in the industry. 
 
I want to talk briefly about the hog industry. Hog producers are 
having and have had a very difficult situation for several 
reasons now. A 20 per cent increase in the value of the 
Canadian dollar against the US (United States) dollar has 
caused problems for the hog industry. High hog slaughter 
numbers in the US, due to increased US marketings and higher 
Canadian exports, means that packing plants are near maximum 
capacity which always puts downward pressure on the prices. 
 
Lower pork consumption in Canada because of the increased 
support for the beef industry . . . And I think it’s admirable that 
all of our consumers in this province — the urban consumers — 
got there behind the beef producers and bought beef over these 
last few years. It’s been very important but it has had an impact 
on the hog industry. 
 
Well fortunately we’re beginning to see a rise in prices but 
some of our hog producers are struggling. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
we invest in the hog producers and we are extending the 
repayment period for the hog loans to help them through this 
difficult time. 
 
Now BSE has had an incredibly difficult impact on the beef 
industry in this nation and in this province. We are the second 
largest producer of beef in the country and it hit hard. The BSE 
situation was the dominant issue in agriculture in 2003 and it 
nailed people very hard. Mr. Speaker, in the BSE area, as has 
been said many times, we put forward 55 million provincial 
dollars to help meet the need and to meet the problems in this 
crisis. And we have done that, Mr. Speaker. We have been there 
for our agricultural producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are beginning to see a change. The market is 
starting to open up a bit; some of the steers are selling and 
prices are coming up a bit as well. We are very, very hopeful 
that the borders will open soon and that we will see a scientific 
base for border openings. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I see that we’re getting close to the end of the 
day and I just want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, the dollars that 
this province has and is continuing to put into agriculture. We 
would like to be able to put in all of the dollars that are needed, 
Mr. Speaker, but we are dependent on the federal government 
as well. 
 
And when we see the 60/40 programs and we see the amount 
that that has drawn out of our treasury, we know that there can 
be a more equitable division across this country. And we are 
working to that end with the federal government. We will be 
working with the other provincial Agriculture ministers to try 
and make sure that we can get the best, most equitable 
programs so that we can give full support to our producers and 
will not have to pro-rate on the programs to the value of the 
amount of the dollar that we can put together today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say one more time that in this province, 
what we put into the agriculture sector is far, far and above the 
nearest province in terms of what it puts in. It is more, I believe 
more than three times more than what they put in in Prince 
Edward Island, more than three times more per capita . . . And 
on a per capita base, Mr. Speaker, on a per capita base, way 
more — way more — than they put in in the opposition’s 
beloved Alberta. 
 
We are there for our producers, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 
want to, for the edification of the members opposite if they will 
listen for half a second, I will explain to them that Prince 
Edward Island puts the second amount . . . puts the second most 
per capita in the whole of this nation. Why? Because, Mr. 
Speaker, their agriculture sector, their agriculture sector in 
relationship to their population is like ours, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
huge sector with a small population. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we put in more than Alberta. We put in more 
than Ontario. We put in more than British Columbia per capita, 
Mr. Speaker — over $500 per capita. Every man, woman, and 
child in this province — over $500 per capita goes into 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are putting more money in this year. Why? 
We’ve added to the money that is going in because there is 
need, Mr. Speaker. Last year we put $130 million over budget 
— over budget — into agriculture. And Mr. Speaker, if there is 
need, we will put more in this year. Why? Because the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order please, members. 
I recognize the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I see that the members opposite are 
certainly in need of more information and more good news 
about this province. And so I’d like to quote one of their 
favourite sources, Mr. Speaker, Murray Mandryk. And Murray 
is not often the source of good news, and he admits that in this 
column that he wrote in the Herbert Herald. But here, Mr. 
Speaker, looking at the rural Saskatchewan and the rural 
economy, even Murray had to admit that there were a number 



May 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

of very, very positive signs out there. 
 
So he starts off, and he gives the top 10. Mr. Speaker, I’ll start 
with number 10. 
 

Number 10 (good news in rural Saskatchewan): “Culture, 
fitness abound in rural communities” — Signs of vitality 
are sprouting up all through rural Saskatchewan as 
communities like Meacham, Creelman, Lacadena and 
Elrose are turning theatre, art, music and writing to either 
fund-raise or improve the quality of local life. Meanwhile, 
fitness activity also appears to be on the rise in small town 
Saskatchewan as gyms are springing up in Assiniboia, 
Canora, Carnduff, Esterhazy, Martensville, Meadow Lake, 
Moosomin and Unity. 

 
Also, entrepreneurial classes are being held in the school 
curriculum, Mr. Speaker, because there will be new businesses 
developing in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Number 9 (Mr. Mandryk says): “New uses for old crops” 
— Flax as a bio-based source of fibre is now being 
evaluated by processors and the initial assessments are 
showing (incredible) promise. 
 
Number Eight: “New technology harnesses . . . (great) 
power” — From using canola oil as a diesel fuel additive 
to processing (from) methane from manure to generate 
power, people are finding new sources of green power in 
rural Saskatchewan. 

 
I’ll make . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it now being past 
the hour of 1 o’clock . . . And before I adjourn the House, I 
would wish everyone a safe weekend and an opportunity to pay 
a little respect to the mothers in your . . . and the mothers in 
your families and in your lives. 
 
With that the House stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:00. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................955 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................955 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................955 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................955 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................955 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................955 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................956 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................956 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................956 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................956 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................956 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................957 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Regina YWCA Honours Women of Distinction 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................957 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................957 
 Recognition of Mother’s Day 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................958 
 802 Pipestone Air Cadets Celebration 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................958 
 Saskatchewan Job Statistics 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................958 
 School Safety Patrol 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................958 
 Anita Clark Wins Sterling Award 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................959 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Equalization Formula 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................959 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................959 
 Protection of the Environment and Natural Resources 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................960 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................960 
 Funding for Prairie Diagnostic Services 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................962 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................962 
 Education Portion of Property Tax 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................963 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................963 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Agricultural Research and Development 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................964 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................965 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 41 — The Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................965 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Remarks Out of Order 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................965 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................965 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................965 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Health Care  
  Bakken ...............................................................................................................................................................................966, 977 
  Bjornerud ..........................................................................................................................................................................968, 977 
  Junor ..................................................................................................................................................................................970, 977 
  Iwanchuk ...........................................................................................................................................................................972, 977 



 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................974 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................975 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................978 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................978 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................978 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 3 — Government’s Commitment to Rural Saskatchewan 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................979 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................982 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




