















































Hansard: March 26, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 7A  FRIDAY, MARCH 26, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 175 
 March 26, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, to present a 
petition on behalf of restauranteurs and people across this 
province regarding the tax on food: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people from the 
communities of Windthorst, Corning, Kipling, Peebles, 
Glenavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents primarily from the 
community of Maple Creek. And it concerns the proposed or 
worrisome possibility of a tax being added to meals. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the potential for the expansion of the 
PST (provincial sales tax) to restaurant meals in Saskatchewan. 
The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the PST 
to restaurant meals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current, from Saskatoon, Lucky Lake, from Birsay, and even 
from Vancouver, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents of mine, addressed to this Assembly, about 
concerns that there are indications that the Government of 
Saskatchewan is contemplating major changes to its lease 
policy for Crown land. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Eston and Lacadena, and I’m pleased to present 
it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals and 
confectionery foods. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Yorkton, Goodeve, Rokeby, Norquay, Rhein, Theodore, 
Melville. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the PST expansion on food. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Dysart, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Lipton, Regina, and Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned 
about the possible expansion of the PST to include restaurant 
meals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Lipton, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Yorkton, Estevan, Balcarres, and Lebret. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
morning on behalf of citizens concerned about the potential 
expansion of the PST. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of LeRoy, Muenster, Watson, Melfort and, 
incredible as it may seem, even from Flagstaff, Arizona. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand again today to present petitions of citizens concerned 
about the application of PST to restaurant food. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from across the entire 
province, too many communities to list. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens in my constituency that 
are getting quite concerned about the contemplated changes to 
the Crown policy leasing system. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitions will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Bracken, Val 
Marie, Orkney, and Climax. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to 
Davidson and Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps and ensure the Davidson and Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Davidson and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I arise 
again to present petitions on behalf of citizens that are 
concerned about the water level in the Qu’Appelle Valley lakes. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the disputes so that the water level of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Fort Qu’Appelle, Pasqua Lake, and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in the House to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with senior citizens and their bridge in 
living between independent living and long-term care. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by folks from Unity, 
Herbert, Tramping Lake, Wilkie, Kindersley, Saskatoon, Cut 
Knife, Kerrobert, Senlac, Denzil, Luseland, Reward, Scott, 
Lloydminster; and Provost, Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, and 
Calgary, Alberta. 

 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 47 and 49. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 12 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry: how much money was paid to 
Phoenix Advertising for the Future is Wide Open 
campaign, and what was their commission? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 12 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister responsible for SGI: what research was 
done to justify the lower hourly rate SGI is now proposing 
to Saskatchewan autobody shops as compensation for 
paint work? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all the members of this 
Assembly, a Regina resident, Marilyn Mihalicz, who has joined 
us today in the Legislative Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming her to her Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Farmer Receives Malt Barley Award 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to applaud the achievements of 
Ron and Glenda St. John from Kindersley area, upon receiving 
various awards at Agribition in Regina in November 2003. 
These awards were for growing the best malt barley in 
Saskatchewan. Ron farms south and east of Brock, continuing 
in the farming heritage of his father and grandfather. And seven 
of Ron’s brothers also follow in this family tradition. 
 
Upon submitting their barley sample to the annual competition 
staged by the Barley Development Council they won provincial 
two-row barley honours, awarding them several prizes 
including a trip to Vancouver. 
 
The St. John’s barley scored high for plumpness and protein 
which is highly valued. This occurred in a dry year when 
conditions were dry and protein was much higher than usual. 
And in barley, Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure the Minister of 
Agriculture knows, you don’t want too much protein because 
this can spoil your beer. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the outstanding farmers and to 
wish them ever success in their future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Partners in Motion 10th Anniversary 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week one 
of the best known and most successful film and video 
production companies in Saskatchewan celebrated its 10th 
anniversary. I am pleased to say that this company, Partners in 
Motion, is located in the fine constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the film and video industry, like 
other cultural industries, plays a pivotal role in Saskatchewan. 
On a cultural level it inspires, it stirs creativity, and it brings 
people together — perhaps not the opposition and the 
government, Mr. Speaker, but that’s the way it goes. It also 
plays an important role in the economy. This year industry 
production volumes will reach $47 million, and that translates 
into a lot of jobs. 
 
Arts and culture, Mr. Speaker, they’re good for the community 
and good for the economy. Partners in Motion has made huge 
contributions on both counts. 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

In their 10-year history, the management and staff of Partners in 
Motion have demonstrated time and again their commitment to 
their clients and the art of storytelling. Their record for 
excellence is reflected in the numerous awards they have 
received, including best editing, best sound, best director, best 
script, best analysis of a story. Clearly Partners in Motion can 
do it all and do it well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate everyone at Partners in Motion on 
this, their 10th anniversary and I particularly want to 
acknowledge Partners in Motion CEO (chief executive officer), 
Ron Goetz, and president, Chris Triffo, for the work they have 
done in creating this highly successful production company, and 
for their ongoing contributions to the film and video industry 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Estevan Author Launches First Novel 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently 
Estevan writer Katina Chapman saw a dream come true when 
she held the launch of her novel titled Reservations. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I was honoured to attend that launch. 
 
In this, her first novel, the author spins a tale of romance and 
intrigue. Reservations is a contemporary love story set on the 
Canadian Prairies. The author carefully weaves a story pitting 
writer Brian Lonecloud and his Cree upbringing against 
cosmetics heiress, Cynthia Cavanagh. Writing has been a part 
of Katina’s daily life, whether it be journal entries, letters to 
distant family members and friends, or magazine articles. 
Success came in 2002 when Canadian Disabilities magazine 
published an article she had written about her husband Rick, 
granddaughter Amanda, and their annual participation in the 
Terry Fox Run. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Ponder Publishing awarded this novel the grand prize in 2002 
for the Write Your Heart Out Contest. It was chosen the winner 
over 100 entries from around the world. Katina has been a 
member of Romance Writers of America for several years. She 
is currently working on a new romance novel and working on 
her maternal grandmother’s fascinating story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Katina and her husband Rick are the owners and 
operators of Tranquil Moments Custom Framing Gallery and 
Giftware store in Estevan — a store that promotes 
Saskatchewan artists and Saskatchewan products. They are both 
very involved in the Estevan community. Reservations is 
available at Tranquil Moments, as well as the Book and Brier in 
Regina. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Katina Chapman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

Fort a la Corne Diamond Discovery 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 
potential in diamond exploration continues to reach new heights 
with the recent discovery of another significant discovery at 
Fort a la Corne. 
 
On February 2, Kensington Resources in joint venture with De 
Beers and Cameco announced the discovery of a high quality, 
colourless, and clear diamond weighing point seven seven 
carats, Mr. Speaker. This announcement was one of several that 
demonstrates the tremendous diamond potential in our 
province. 
 
According to recently announced preliminary results, nearly 
2,100 micro-diamonds have been recovered from about 740 
kilograms of kimberlite at Fort a la Corne. Mr. Speaker, these 
preliminary results have exceeded Kensington’s expectations 
and could potentially have an enormous economic impact on 
our province. The discovery of kimberlite pipes and diamonds 
in our province has led to extensive exploration and drilling by 
more than 30 companies. Saskatchewan mining productivity is 
ranked among the highest in Canada, and we’re the third 
largest, non-fuel mineral producing province in the nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a thriving mineral industry contributes to the 
growth of our economy and the quality of our life. I would like 
to take this opportunity to thank all those companies involved in 
the diamond explorations in our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

DMB Food Processors 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 7, 
2003, DMB Food Processors of Canada announced that 
construction of a $65 million, privately owned facility near 
Qu’Appelle would be started either last fall or early this spring. 
This facility will generate 350 full-time jobs and significantly 
increase the provincial slaughter capacity for cattle and hogs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the three major investors stated that day: we have 
received no grant aid, nor have we applied for any support from 
agencies such as CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan). Mr. Speaker, the minister of Agriculture, Clay 
Serby, and I’m quoting, who our prayers are with, stated that 
the government . . . no government funds will be going to this 
project directly, though there will be some infrastructure 
spending to ensure the project can proceed as, as duly need be. 
 
Compliments to the government, because I’ve talked to the RM 
(rural municipality) and a few of the people that have been 
developing this, that the government is doing what a 
government should do. They’re regulating. They’re making sure 
the proper studies are done, and they will be supplying 
infrastructure for the facility. That’s what a government should 
do. I can’t help but look at the contrast between this 
announcement and the announcement made at the ethanol site 
where the Premier took his tent, pitched a tent, invited 
thousands of school kids by, and what has happened? 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

Absolutely nothing. The right way to do an announcement, the 
wrong way to do an announcement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Wascana Lake Excavation Celebration 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not quite like 
Genesis. It’s not quite like, bring on the flood. But I do want to 
invite everybody to a bring-on-the-flood party at Wascana Lake 
this Sunday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work started in January of this year and 
finished March 21. We want to celebrate on the south shore of 
Wascana Lake in front of the Legislative Building. The 
celebrations begin at 12 noon. The Wascana Lake revitalization 
project — or the big dig as we Reginans affectionately call it — 
is a partnership between the federal, provincial governments 
and the city of Regina. The lake has been excavated to a depth 
of 5.5 metres between Broad Street and Albert Street bridges. 
There’s improvements like a new pedway alongside the Albert 
Street bridge, an underpass at the Broad Street bridge, a 
creation of Pine Island where the old Broad Street bridge 
abutment is, and a seven-and-a-half metre deep area for fish to 
overwinter. 
 
These enhancements are going to make a fabulous lake even 
more fabulous and more usable. The deepened lake is going to 
be a much improved recreation facility, something that the 
whole province can be proud of when Regina hosts the 2005 
Canada Games. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join our Premier, several ministers, Regina 
MLAs (Member of Legislative Assembly), the federal Minister 
of Finance, the mayor and city councillors, and many more as 
we come to Wascana Lake for the big flood starting Sunday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Recreation and Leisure 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently there was a 
little bit of Hawaii in the middle of Saskatchewan winter at the 
annual Leaps and Bounds of the Biggar Chamber of Commerce: 
 

The Community Hall was transformed into a tropical 
paradise for a Hawaiian luau. The speaker for the evening, 
Ross Milnthorp, Director of Leisure Services for the City 
of Humboldt, challenged the traditional thought on leisure 
services. 

 
Elected officials and governments have considered 
recreation and leisure services as “soft services”, said 
Milnthorp. It is not only that sector but taxpayers have 
long considered leisure services to be a necessary part of 
community but nevertheless were simply a drain on the tax 
dollar. Milnthorp dispelled that myth. 
 

Through charts and statistics, he illustrated that leisure 
services are actually an investment for the community . . . 
(for) providing significant economic returns. 

 
Derrick Smith, recreation director for the town of Biggar, 
gave some statistics on dollars spent in Biggar. Just as one 
example, having a senior hockey team such as the Biggar 
Nationals brought . . . an estimated $43,000 into the 
community during the season. By not having a senior team 
this year that money was lost. 

 
The Lloyd Hock Customer Service Award was presented to 
Sandy Guran of Silhouette Fashions. New businesses, business 
milestones, and expansions were acknowledged. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the organizers and businesses 
for a very enjoyable evening at the annual Leaps and Bounds of 
the Biggar Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Public Disclosure of Location of Violent Offender 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there is 
an extremely disturbing story in today’s paper about a violent 
sexual assault in Regina that might have been prevented. 
 
Three months ago, Randy Scott Burgmann was released from 
the Prince Albert Penitentiary after serving 14 years for sex 
offences. The Edmonton police immediately issued a public 
warning about Burgmann. Mr. Speaker, the Edmonton police 
did this in the interest of public safety. Regina police applied to 
do the same thing here, but they were advised against it by a 
Department of Justice committee. Burgmann has now been 
charged with aggravated sexual assault of a 29-year-old Regina 
woman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, why were Regina residents not 
warned about this violent sexual offender? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, this is a tragic and 
horrific crime, and the sympathy of everybody in this House, 
I’m sure, goes to the victim. The decision as to whether to 
disclose the existence of the individual in question in the 
community is ultimately and solely the decision of the police 
service. And the Regina Police Service sought advice of a 
public disclosure panel, a civilian panel, but ultimately decided 
not to disclose this information. That’s the balance they decided 
to strike in this particular case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Whenever a violent offender is released, 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

women in our community are at risk. But the Department of 
Justice committee says public disclosure could result in serious 
consequences to the offender. Mr. Speaker, what about the 
serious consequences to the rape victim? What about the serious 
consequences to the 29-year-old woman who was violently 
raped, left bleeding, and semi-conscious in a back alley and 
could now be emotionally scarred for life? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this action put all women in our communities at 
risk. This could have been my daughter. This could have been 
someone’s wife. It could have been someone’s mother. Mr. 
Speaker, why is this government more concerned about the 
rights of a rapist than the safety of women in our communities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the information about 
where this individual was residing was properly made to the 
appropriate police service, the Regina Police Service. It was not 
made to the Minister of Justice. That would not be appropriate. 
It wouldn’t be practical. This information was provided to the 
Regina Police Service. 
 
They have a difficult job in these cases. Well they have a 
difficult job in every case, Mr. Speaker, but in this case they 
have a difficult job. The Regina Police Service has to decide in 
each one of these cases to balance public protection against 
instilling fear in the community. They make these calls quite 
often, Mr. Speaker. They made this call in this case. In 
hindsight if they had made the call differently, perhaps this 
wouldn’t have happened. Perhaps it would have happened 
anyways, Mr. Speaker. But it’s a very difficult job the Regina 
Police Service have, and they made it in this case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this decision was made by the 
committee from the Department of Justice. It was not made by 
the police. Mr. Speaker, the actions taken put all women in our 
communities at risk. Is this acceptable? 
 
The Edmonton police warned the public about this violent 
sexual offence, but in Regina the Department of Justice 
committee told police not to warn the public, and as a result a 
29-year-old woman was raped and beaten, and left bleeding in a 
back alley. Which process worked better? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister order a review of its process for 
warning the public about dangerous offenders? Will this 
government do the right thing? And will they put the safety of 
women in our communities a priority? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has 
suggested, I think stated, that the Department of Justice ordered 
the Regina Police Service not to make this disclosure. If she has 
any documents, if she has any evidence of that order, I would 
request that she provide it to me and table it in this House. 
 

There was no such order, Mr. Speaker. The Regina Police 
Service had a decision to make. They had the information. They 
consult, they consult an advisory committee of civilians, Mr. 
Speaker, but they made the decision. And they made a different 
decision than the Edmonton Police Service. And it was a 
judgment call. 
 
And if the hon. member wants to continue to attack the decision 
that was made by the Regina Police Service, I think that is her 
right. But if she wants to suggest that the Justice Department 
instructed them to make that decision, I think that she’d need to 
prove it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Waiting Lists for Radiation Therapy for Cancer 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over the 
last week or so the Saskatchewan Party has asked a number of 
questions about the length of waiting lists in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve raised the case of 57-year-old Dennis 
Scott of Regina, whose prostate cancer spread after waiting six 
months for a biopsy. You’ve heard the tragic story of 
65-year-old Duff MacDonald of Indian Head, who died after 
waiting six months to see a specialist for prostate cancer. 
 
The Minister of Health has told this Assembly that cancer 
patients should not be waiting for specialists and diagnostic 
procedures like biopsy, but what about treatment, Mr. Speaker? 
To the minister: what is the average wait of cancer patients for 
radiation therapy in the province of Saskatchewan, and how do 
we stack up against our neighbour Manitoba? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, our cancer treatment in 
Saskatchewan is something that we can all be proud of. They 
end up doing the work that is required to make sure that we do 
have some of the best cancer care in the country. 
 
I think last week there was a man on the radio talking about 
how he had moved here from New Zealand. His child received 
the bad news that he had leukemia. He checked around with his 
friends around the world, and they identified that the Allan 
Blair Clinic in Regina was in the top areas of treatment for the 
country. 
 
What happens around the radiation treatment times may have 
some fluctuation in that, but at any given time they are working 
to make sure that this care is given at the appropriate times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t answer the 
question. We asked how Saskatchewan is stacking up against 
other provinces, for example our neighbour Manitoba. If you 
contact CancerCare Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, you will learn that 
the average wait time in that province for radiation therapy for 
prostate cancer is 1.7 weeks, Mr. Speaker. That’s 12 days. 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

Manitoba faces the same challenges that this government claims 
to be facing in health care. People in this province are waiting 
more than 16 months, in some cases, for cancer treatment. 
 
To the minister: why should people in Saskatchewan wait 16 
months for cancer treatment? 
 
(10:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the announcement that was 
made on Monday of this week around target time frames had 
very specifically in that announcement the fact that all cancer 
treatments would be category 2 or higher. The optimum 
treatment time that would then be less than three weeks in that 
system. And that’s the goal that we have and I am led to 
understand that we are very close to meeting that in a very high 
percentage of the cases. 
 
The minister, or the member opposite refers to Manitoba. He 
points to one of the challenges we have as part of our Canadian 
confederation. Equalization system is supposed to provide 
fairness and equitableness across the country. We get about 120 
million in Saskatchewan. Manitoba, they get about $1.2 billion. 
That’s money that relates to health care. I think all of us in 
Saskatchewan should be crying and saying let’s fix this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to tell this 
Assembly today about a Regina man named Bob Mihalicz. Mr. 
Mihalicz was diagnosed with elevated PSA (prostate-specific 
antigen) levels in November of 2002. He then waited more than 
seven months for a biopsy to confirm prostate cancer. He was 
forced to wait another three months before treatment was 
scheduled because of a bureaucratic mix-up at Sask Health. 
 
Last month Mr. Mihalicz was finally scheduled for an April 
appointment to go on a simulator machine to prepare for 
radiation therapy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: 16 months have now elapsed since 
blood tests first indicated cancer might be in progress, and yet 
Mr. Mihalicz still waits for treatment. If he lived in Manitoba, 
there’s a chance he would have treatment in 12 days. Does the 
minister find this wait acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, when 
there are individual cases where there are challenges, I end up 
having the concern that I have for every person in 
Saskatchewan as it relates to the health care system. And these 
are things that we need to fix. 
 
But what I would say is, in Saskatchewan we have a very good 
record of treatment and dealing with cancer patients and dealing 
with them on a regular basis right . . . and we . . . I would stack 
up what we’re doing with anything across the country. 
 

But we end up having a lot of frustration in trying to make sure 
we have the resources for the long term for our system. We’re 
going to make sure that the surgeries are done in an appropriate 
time frame. We’re the only part of the country that has so far set 
out target times. They don’t have this in Alberta. They don’t 
have this in Manitoba. They don’t have this in Ontario. We are 
going ahead to make sure that we do this for Saskatchewan 
people because we want good care for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what they have in Manitoba is a 
12-day wait for treatment of prostate cancer; that’s what they 
have in the province of Manitoba next door. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bob Mihalicz’s wife Marilyn has come today on 
his behalf. Every day Bob waits is another day that he is at risk 
that his cancer would spread outside the prostate. He and his 
wife are frightened that the cancer will spread if left untreated. 
He needs radiation therapy now. 
 
I remind the minister that in Manitoba the wait may have been 
as short as 12 days, but today would be a good start for Bob. 
 
Can the minister assure Marilyn and Bob that he won’t have the 
wait any longer for his treatment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people who are involved 
in the health care system need to work with the professionals. If 
there are some challenges there, they need to work with those 
people that we have in the system — the quality care 
coordinators who end up identifying and working with patients. 
We also have others who are all part of making sure people get 
the care at the appropriate time. 
 
It’s always a challenge to try to deal with these kinds of cases 
here in this House. But what I would ask the member opposite 
is: what kinds of solutions do you have as the new leader? You 
have said to us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just remind the member 
that he’s to speak directly to the Speaker. The member may 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think I was asking you that 
question, but I’m sorry. But we’re not allowed to include you in 
the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Leader of the Opposition — he 
has stated, as the new Leader of the Opposition that he doesn’t 
have any policy on anything because they’re going to have 
policy conventions to do this. Let’s get out and hear from them 
what kind of suggestions they have, because we have to work 
together on this and I assume that they’re going to work with 
us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

Health Care Issues Described by Nurses 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again today we hear the absolute lack of any direction and 
policy from the government opposite. The minister . . . The 
minister not only should listen to the desperate cries of people 
in this province that need treatment, he should also listen to the 
desperate stories of nurses who are living through the crisis on 
the front lines of health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a dangerous incident threatens patients’ 
safety in the ER (emergency room), nurses write situation 
reports that are filed with the nurses’ union and with the health 
region. I want the minister to hear in the words of a real ER 
nurse what it’s like to work inside the NDP’s (New Democratic 
Party) failing health care system. And I quote:  
 

inadequate physical space for demands on system . . . 
unable to cope . . . dangerous situation has occurred again 
. . . suicidal patient brought in with city police had 
attempted suicide, left the emergency room without 
treatment. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what specific actions is this NDP government 
taking to address this critical shortage of doctors, nurses, and 
physical space and medical supplies that threaten patients’ 
safety every day? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a plan on this side 
of the House. We’ve been working at it carefully and going 
forward. It includes many things. It includes the health . . . or 
human resource training of new people — that’s the bursary 
programs. It includes the expansion of a number of different 
programs. It includes the recruitment of people. It includes the 
retention of people here in the province. It includes asking hard 
questions about what things we’re not doing right so that we 
can fix them. 
 
We have a quality council and that’s . . . their job is to say . . . 
ask some really hard questions about our system. But that’s the 
only way you can deal with some of the challenges, is to make 
sure that you go and solve those particular problems. 
 
We’re going to continue to work that way. If there are 
challenges in an emergency room, those are going to be 
identified and we’re going to go ahead and work and deal with 
those. But it’s a process where we work together with the 
professionals and we deal with them in a very positive way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, front-line health care 
professionals have been crying out desperately for help from 
this government and the government responds by firing the guy 
who raises the issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister won’t listen to the cries of nurses 

who are calling out for help, perhaps the Premier will listen to 
them. 
 
Here’s some more comments, and I quote:  
 

all beds full . . . poor quality patient care for those in 
hallway beds . . . in a chaos lost a certified psychiatric 
patient . . . three patients in pediatric area unattended for 
seven hours . . . no time to do the checks . . . patient care 
situation unsafe due to lack of space . . . insufficient 
supplies . . . desperate . . . despite all attempts by 
management to help, we were in a desperate situation for 
several hours. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are the cries of nurses asking for help from 
this government. Does this government care, and are they 
listening? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government and the 
members on this side of the House care. And we listen, and 
we’re doing something about it. 
 
What we’ve heard in the House this week from the members 
opposite on a number of different issues is that they want to run 
everything. They don’t trust any of the professionals out there 
to sort out some of these issues and work with them. Our job on 
this side of the House and in this legislature is to work to get the 
resources for the people who are the professionals to do their 
job. And we’re going to continue to do that. 
 
And I encourage the members opposite to think like they’re 
helping solve some of the problems as opposed to providing 
sort of a negative cloud over everything, because that’s not 
what Saskatchewan people want. They want to go forward, they 
want solutions to problems; they don’t want this negative 
atmosphere. There’s no change from ’99, there’s no change 
from ’95. Let’s go ahead with the plans that we have on this 
side of the House. That’s what the people said in November and 
we are going to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Learning. For a third straight day, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
instructors were forced on to the picket lines by an NDP 
government that has refused to come to the table with a fair 
wage offer — the fact that the NDP is refusing to make any 
wage offer at all. 
 
And let’s make no mistake, Mr. Speaker. The strike happened 
because of the NDP’s refusal to give negotiators a mandate to 
bargain on wages. Yesterday the minister told students and their 
instructors to wait. 
 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s timeline is threatening to disrupt or 
nullify an entire year of studies for thousands of students. Will 
the minister agree today to make the future of students priority 
one? Will he direct negotiators to go back to the table with a 
fair wage offer so that instructors can get back to work and 
students can complete their studies? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is naive on the 
part of the member opposite to assume that simply by providing 
a monetary mandate that the strike will be resolved 
immediately. There are a broad range of issues at this table that 
are complex and will require both parties to look for some 
compromise. 
 
This is why we have asked for and brought in a conciliator to 
assist the two parties in moving forward. The member opposite 
either doesn’t understand the collective bargaining process or 
simply attempts to exacerbate the situation and scare students, 
either of which is unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I will let the students 
decide who doesn’t understand. I will let the students decide 
who is arrogant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, that minister seems to 
think that the NDP’s timeline is more important than the 
students’ timeline. The students who are having their studies 
disrupted today at SIAST campuses in Regina include nursing 
students. They include medical . . . emergency medical 
technicians. 
 
Earlier today, we heard the Minister of Health tell families to 
continue waiting for critical surgical procedures and treatments. 
And now, we have the Minister of Learning who is willing to 
gamble the future of nursing students and EMTs (emergency 
medical technician) by playing a waiting game with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister, stop playing games with the 
lives and futures of the students. Will the minister give 
government negotiators a mandate to make a fair wage offer at 
SIAST so that bargaining can begin again, the strike can be 
settled, and students can be assured of the education they paid 
for and the education that they deserve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s question 
opposite is full of nonsense and histrionics. 
 
This is not what I hear from students as they write and talk to 
me about it. They understand the issues are complex. They 
understand that the concerns of the instructors are there. They 

also understand the consequences in terms of coming forward 
with a solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the member opposite will understand 
that a collective agreement will be reached in time and that the 
instructors will, in time, go back to work and we will end up 
with . . . (inaudible) . . . peace. 
 
This approach that the member opposite is using does nothing 
to assist in this process. He comes forward with no options in 
terms of moving forward. He has not . . . has no suggestion in 
terms of how we deal with this. This party opposite opposes our 
plan to try and get a fairer shake from Ottawa that would assist 
in this. And he comes forward with no ideas on where we 
should move with a mandate. If he has an option, if he has an 
idea, I am sure every member in this House would love to hear 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government Handling of Current Issues 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, have you ever seen such a pathetic 
government especially in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We asked them to protect women from sexual 
predators, Mr. Speaker, and they hide behind the police service 
when there are committees of the Department of Justice that 
could make a difference. We asked them to make sure that Bob 
Mihalicz gets treatment for his prostrate cancer. They hide 
behind the quality councils, Mr. Speaker. We asked them to 
make sure SIAST students can get an education, can complete 
their studies, and they hide behind negotiators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we say to them that they are the government. Mr. 
Speaker, we say to them that the member for Riversdale is the 
Premier of the province. 
 
The people of this province want them to stand up. They want 
them to stand up for patients. They want them to stand up for 
taxpayers who need to be protected in their neighbourhoods. 
They want them to stand up for students. 
 
What does this government do, Mr. Speaker? What does this 
Premier do? He ducks. When will he stop ducking and stand up 
for Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, what we have seen today 
and over the course of this week is an insight into both the 
thought and the policy and the politics of this opposition and its 
new leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what would they have us do? Well you see daily 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

in this House they would have this government expend more 
money on health care, on justice, on education. Every day they 
call for more money. Then the leader stands up and criticizes 
the government who is putting new dollars and new resources 
into those very things. 
 
But perhaps even more troublesome, Mr. Speaker, is what we 
have seen here today. What would this party have government 
do in Saskatchewan? Well they’d have us take over decisions 
that are appropriately made by the police. They would have us 
take over decisions that are appropriately made by medical 
professionals and medical people who are administering the 
health care system. They would have us take over decisions 
made by the Legal Aid Commission. Mr. Speaker, this is a very, 
very dangerous, dangerous opposition. It’s not a pathetic 
opposition, Mr. Speaker; it is a dangerous opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you what the 
Saskatchewan Party would have this government do. We would 
have this government stand up for the people of this province 
— rural and urban, north and south. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We would have that Premier put the people of 
this province ahead of process, that’s what we would have this 
government do. Mr. Speaker, throughout just the first few days 
of this session we’ve seen the government duck from its 
responsibility with countless excuses. Since November 5, the 
provincial election, we’ve seen them break promise after 
promise after promise. 
 
So I ask the Premier again, when can the people of this province 
expect him to put them first instead of his interests and his 
processes over on that side? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — When, Mr. Speaker, when will this 
Saskatchewan Party put the interests of the people of the 
province ahead of their own political agenda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That is the question: when will that 
happen? Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have stood on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan when we have invested in health 
care, when we have invested in education, when we have 
invested in supporting farm families. And what have they done? 
They’ve criticized every one of those investments. When this 
government is standing for the people of Saskatchewan in 
battling the national government for a fair and equitable 
equalization, what do we get from members opposite? 
Criticism, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re standing for the people of Saskatchewan — 
you bet. What we need is an opposition who will finally give up 

its hunger quest for power and join with us on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please, members. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for Sask 
Power. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8, 
The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Sask Power that Bill No. 8, The Gas Inspection 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Electrical Inspection 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for Sask 
Power. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 9, 
The Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Sask Power that Bill No. 9, The Electrical 
Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Administration of Estates Amendment 
Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi sur l'administration 

des successions 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 10, The 
Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 10, The Administration of Estates Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 11 — The Department of Post-Secondary Education 

and Skills Training Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, 
the post-secondary education and skills training amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 11, The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Athabasca on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce guests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t have all the names with me here, but I just wanted to 
make a special welcome to folks in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In note is the tribal chief, Richard Gladue, of the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council — but more important also is a friend of mine 
— the chief of Birch Narrows, Robert Sylvester. Mr. Speaker, 
he has travelled a long ways to be here today and I want to 
make sure we welcome him here. 
 
And also to point out that there’s a . . . As we all know in the 
Assembly, I’m a hockey player and he’s a hockey player as 
well. And this weekend’s a big tournament and nobody phoned 
him to play, Mr. Speaker. So I’m not sure why, but I’ll try and 
make room for him in my team if there is room. And I feel bad 
about that. 
 
But I want to ask all members of the Assembly to please 
welcome these very special guests, especially Chief Robert 
Sylvester from Turnor Lake. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions 1 through 4 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has submitted 
responses for questions 1, 2, 3, and 4. 
 
I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand on behalf of the 
government today to convert for debates returnable, questions 5 
through 14, inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 5 through to 14 have been 
converted to motions for return (debatable). 
 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the debate on the address in reply 
which was moved by Ms. Morin, seconded by Mr. Borgerson. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — I can feel the love, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
when I left off, I was talking about some of the challenges that 
face Aboriginal people in our society, particularly in a an 
inner-city community like mine in Regina. 
 
Those challenges must be overcome if Aboriginal people are to 
take their rightful place in our society. Now I don’t mean to 
give the impression that this will somehow be a matter of the 
provincial government doing these things for Aboriginal 
people. Rather, it’s a matter of this provincial government 
working in partnership, strong partnership, respectful 
partnership, in an environment of mutual respect with 
Aboriginal people and governments. That’s what will move the 
situation forward. 
 
The challenges are many but there is a lot to be hopeful about. 
There have been gains in terms of labour market participation, 
in terms of income levels, in terms of education and training 
gains. There is the concrete achievement, quite literally, of the 
opening of the First Nations University of Canada, a 
tremendous achievement and one that will have an exponential 
effect I believe on the standing of Aboriginal people in our 
society. 
 
And I think that there is a change throughout larger society 
towards Aboriginal people, though the recent public opinion 
survey work that was done around the treaties shows just how 
far we need to go. 
 
But there is a change coming, and in this regard I welcome the 
positive remarks made by certain members opposite on this 
issue in various of their first speeches. I hope these words are 
borne out by actions down the line. One can only hope. 
 
Another much more hopeful sign of the advances being made 
by Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan is I think the fact that the 
members from Athabasca and Cumberland are seated at the 
cabinet table of this government. In fact the member for 
Cumberland is at once both the first female Aboriginal member 
of the legislature and the first First Nations member of the 
cabinet. And it’s about time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — This is the kind of progress we need if we are 
going to go forward together in a good way, if we are going to 
build the future for all Saskatchewan families. And to build that 

future we have received a mandate from the Saskatchewan 
people. And our first efforts at delivering on that mandate have 
been laid out in the Throne Speech, preparing Saskatchewan for 
the next generation. 
 
I would remind the opposition that a mandate usually goes for 
four years. So at that time, at the end of those four years, then 
they can feel free to yell and scream and holler about what was 
or was not achieved. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech builds on the solid 
platform on which this government was elected. And I think 
that it is just this kind of action in this . . . entailed in this 
Throne Speech from a government, that the families in Regina 
Elphinstone are looking for. 
 
To start, there are measures to promote opportunity and 
education. We are going to implement the CareerStart program. 
We are going to expand the SchoolPLUS model to more schools 
— a measure that is of particular interest to me because this 
approach builds on the success of the many community schools, 
and many of them are in fact in the fine constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. I myself am a proud graduate of Kitchener 
Community School, one of the first such schools set up by the 
Blakeney government. 
 
We are going to add more child care spaces. We are going to 
establish Green Teams — bringing together young people, jobs, 
and the building of a greener Saskatchewan. Young people are 
concerned about the environment, Mr. Speaker, and the Green 
Teams are going to give young people a chance to translate that 
concern into positive action. 
 
We’re going to expand the youth job recruitment plan to 
include both the broader public service and the private sector. 
And this government is going to enhance the post-secondary 
graduate tax credit program, making it even more attractive for 
post-secondary grads to put their new skills and knowledge to 
work right here in Saskatchewan. Others have spoken at greater 
length on this topic, Mr. Speaker, so I’ll suffice it to say that I 
am very supportive of this government’s plan to build a green 
and prosperous economy. 
 
This government of ours is also going to improve the quality of 
life in Saskatchewan. Health care is central to achieving this 
goal and we’ll be hearing more on this topic from the Health 
minister shortly. But I do want to say that it is our number one 
priority and we’ll putting our money where our mouth is come 
the budget — and if only the feds and the opposition would do 
the same. 
 
There are other measures to improve the quality of life for 
Saskatchewan people and I do want to express particular 
encouragement about the coming plan to introduce a strategy to 
assess and support people with cognitive disabilities which 
includes fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. We are going to put 
forward a comprehensive disability strategy and I’m very 
excited about the plan to introduce a new housing strategy for 
low-income families, something that we will hear more about in 
the budget and a program that I can’t wait to see get underway 
because if we are going to stabilize families and communities at 
risk, then housing is a critical part of that equation. 
 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

And we are going to continue to build independence by 
enhancing the Saskatchewan employment supplement and 
family health benefits programs. 
 
To improve the quality of life in all our neighbourhoods, we 
need to take on crime — and not just by being tough on the 
causes of crime like the measures I’ve just outlined, but being 
tough on crime itself. In Regina there is a comprehensive drug 
strategy underway. We have had some success in reducing car 
thefts by working in partnership with municipal government 
and with law enforcement and we are interested in taking the 
lessons of this strategy and putting them to use and taking on 
the problem of break-ins. Increased revenue sharing will have 
an indirect impact on the ability of municipalities to allocate 
more resources in the fight against crime. And there have been 
good measures enacted over the past few years in response to 
the great work of the special committee to prevent the 
exploitation of children in the sex trade. John schools, car 
seizures, the safe house, and anti-cruising laws are all having a 
very positive impact. 
 
In a similar vein we will be introducing new legislation this 
session to give police new tools to combat the scourge of 
houses used for the sale of drugs and for prostitution. We’re 
going to take these houses on, and we’re going to shut them 
down. And we are going to improve the safety and security of 
our neighbourhoods. And we are going to make these things 
happen in the context of a budgetary process that is tough, but 
fair. And we are going to prepare Saskatchewan for the next 
generation. 
 
And as we set about doing these things, we know we will face 
opposition from the people across the way. Some of them like 
to say a lot of wild things while they’re doing this, such as the 
smears that are often made against Tommy Douglas and Allan 
Blakeney, two individuals who have contributed so much to 
build social and economic progress and prosperity for not just 
Saskatchewan but for the whole of Canada. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Now I do want to say that the member for Silver Springs made 
some comments yesterday that went significantly against this 
small-minded trend, and I commend him for it. But even that 
member couldn’t resist in engaging in one of the favourite 
phoney debates of the opposition by levelling the charge that 
this government is not interested in creating jobs or prosperity, 
or that we think that only government can create jobs. 
 
That is not the case, Mr. Speaker. And I think that our record of 
social and economic progress speaks for itself, despite the 
challenges of drought and low grain prices and BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy). And we are going to make that 
progress in partnership with private sector, with the 
co-operative sector, and with Aboriginal people. 
 
And I think that the member from Silver Springs would do well 
to keep that in mind, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to have a real 
debate in this Chamber about how to build progress in 
Saskatchewan. And given that the member recently came to this 
Assembly from a job with a federal government authority 
devoted to fostering economic development and diversification 
in Western Canada, hopefully he will, Mr. Speaker. 

Something else I find interesting in the actions and the words of 
the members opposite is the fact that many of them just can’t 
seem to accept the fact that they lost the election. In fact they 
blame us for that loss, Mr. Speaker. And isn’t that just like the 
opposition — always blaming someone else for their problems. 
 
The problem wasn’t the fact that people didn’t trust or like their 
platform. And that somehow gets discarded in their haste to 
blame us. The most stunning example of this tendency were the 
remarks of the former leader of the opposition as reported in the 
March 1, 2004 edition of the Leader-Post. And I quote: 
 

. . . the NDP managed to “enslave the minds of . . . people” 
when it came time to vote . . . 

 
This entails a breathtaking amount of arrogance, Mr. Speaker, 
and an astonishing amount of denial. And to cite an old joke, 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem that denial is not just a river in 
Egypt. 
 
Now the opposition has stated their intention to review their 
policies, to bring the new tone, and to stretch their comfort 
zone. And I wish them luck in this. But if the early results 
provide any indication, the new tone seems to be exactly the old 
one, albeit with more pop cultural references. We will be 
hearing . . . We will be watching and listening from this side 
with interest. 
 
To close, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people I work with to 
serve the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, particularly my 
constituency assistant, Colleen Smith. She’s hard-working, 
compassionate, and she makes me look good which takes some 
doing. 
 
I also want to thank my family. My wife, Kelly, does so much 
to challenge me, to inspire me, and to keep me moving forward. 
She is a formidable political activist in her own right, and I 
learn so much from her. She is the love of my life. 
 
And I want to thank my mom and dad. They gave and they give 
us McCall kids so much and they set such fine examples. They 
taught us to respect other people and that to whom much is 
given, much is expected. They taught us to be good neighbours, 
to work hard, and to lead by example. And they keep teaching 
me these lessons and more to this very day. 
 
I also want to thank my siblings and their spouses and their kids 
for the love and joy that they bring to my life. And I want to say 
a special thank you to Carolyn and Madeline, my sister-in-law 
and my niece. They have shown me what grace and faith and 
love in the face of adversity is all about. 
 
Many of you will know that my brother, Neil, Carolyn’s 
husband and Madeline’s father, was diagnosed with cancer in 
October and he died on December 3. He was 30 years old. I 
want to thank many of the people in this place for the kind 
words and thoughts and prayers during this hard time. Neil was 
a beautiful guy and we were a year less two days apart in age 
and we went through so much together, and I can’t believe that 
he has passed on from this world. 
 
Neil was a Baptist youth pastor, and he was ordained as a 
minister just before he died. There is a verse from Scripture that 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

provides a good comment on how Neil lived and died and how 
he lives on in the hearts of many. The verse comes from the 
prophet Micah and it reads as follows: 
 

He has shown you, O man, what is good; 
And what does the LORD require of you 
But to do justly, 
To love mercy, 
And to walk humbly with your God? 

 
In his faith and in his life Neil lived up to these words, and it is 
to him that I dedicate these remarks. It is to all the lessons that 
he taught me and all the gifts he gave me to which I will forever 
turn for comfort and guidance and inspiration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great honour 
to enter into this debate on the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of my constituents, the people of Thunder 
Creek. 
 
I don’t enter into this debate every year because some part of 
me needs to take a good rip at the government, although that 
seems appropriate. Mr. Speaker, I don’t enter into this debate 
because my House Leader orders me to, although I would if he 
insisted. I don’t enter into this debate, Mr. Speaker, because I 
just need to hear my head . . . (inaudible) . . . although that 
seems to be reason enough for some of the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I enter into this debate out of respect for my 
constituents from the constituency of Thunder Creek and the 
people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the people of my 
constituency are hard working and productive, like people I 
have met from all over this province. They work hard on their 
farms and ranches, they run their businesses with all of the skill 
and dedication that they can manage in a very discouraging 
political environment that is so hostile to agriculture and to 
business. 
 
They ponder with their families of the potential for selling their 
farms or ranches or businesses if things continue to deteriorate 
in this wonderful province that has so much potential. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they wonder where they will have to move their 
families and what they will do to look after them if their 
businesses are among those that fail. 
 
Or they go to work every day for the private sector that staggers 
under the weight of oppressive taxes, overregulation, and a 
political atmosphere that is unfriendly to the companies that 
they work for. And they pray with their families that the 
company that they work for will not be among those driven out 
of this province by this oppressive socialist regime. 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, they go to work every day in the public sector 
and they worry about cutbacks and layoffs in their health 
district or their school district or the Crown corporation or 
government department that they work for. And they go 
through the employment opportunities in the province of 

Alberta and other places. 
 
They don’t go through this grim exercise because they want to 
leave this beautiful province that they love so deeply but 
because, Mr. Speaker, they are afraid their jobs will be 
eliminated or centralized by this desperate government that 
clings greedily to power by the narrowest of majorities. 
 
They understand, Mr. Speaker, that health care and education 
and safe highways and social programs that help to get those 
less fortunate or those who may just be temporarily down on 
their luck back on their feet are not the priorities of this 
government. They understand that the priorities of this tired old 
government — this government that is fiscally bankrupt, 
morally bankrupt, and totally bankrupt of any workable ideas or 
solutions of any description — are different than that. 
 
The people of this province know that the main priority of this 
government is to build a socialist Utopia here at their expense 
— an island of socialism, Mr. Speaker, in a sea of private 
enterprise, isolated economically from the rest of the continent 
and most of the world. 
 
They know, Mr. Speaker, that socialism has never been 
successful anywhere on the globe. They know that it has always 
without exception visited suffering and hardship on its people. 
They see that happening here, Mr. Speaker, and they look on in 
disbelief that this bankrupt, tired old government leads them 
down this path to oblivion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province watch as this morally 
bankrupt old government invests hundreds of millions of 
taxpayers’ hard-earned dollars into businesses in this province 
that drive private investment to greener pastures where they will 
not have to compete with a government treasury to survive. And 
they look on in disbelief as those government-owned 
investments invariably go on to lose more millions of dollars 
annually in operations, even though they operate in a monopoly 
or near-monopoly situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they wonder why this government doesn’t just 
allow the private sector to run our businesses, and why this 
government doesn’t put those hundreds of millions of dollars 
into education or into fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they watch this out-of-control, philosophically 
driven government invest hundreds of millions of additional 
taxpayers’ dollars outside of this province in locations all over 
the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every one of those investments has lost money for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers and failed to create any employment in 
this province. Wouldn’t we be better off, people ask, if that 
money were put into health care or highways in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’ll ask members not to be 
conversing in loud voices across the centre here so that we may 
hear the member who is on his feet. And I recognize the 
member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of this province see how economies operate in more 
successful and affluent jurisdictions. And they understand that 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

our economy, or any economy, needs new investment in order 
to prosper. They know that it is not good enough to recycle 
taxpayers’ dollars into crazy, empire-building investment 
schemes and pass that off as a strategy for economic growth. 
The people of this province know that doesn’t work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they wait patiently for this government to launch 
the strategy that will begin to expand the economy of this 
province. More and more of them, Mr. Speaker, are beginning 
to realize that those members opposite are philosophically 
bound to do things just the way they have done them for years; 
bound to socialist doctrine, no matter what the cost to this 
province or the people of this province. 
 
Saskatchewan people know that our province is the second 
largest oil producer in the country. They know that we’re the 
third largest producer of natural gas in the country and that, 
with the right government in place, that we could move up the 
ranks in both categories. 
 
They know that we are the largest producer of potash in the 
world at about one-third of the world’s supply every year and 
with potential to expand, as markets and our own political 
situation align. 
 
They know that Saskatchewan is the largest producer of 
uranium in the world at about one-third of the world’s supply 
every year. In a political climate in this province that is 
anything but friendly to the uranium industry, they know that 
we sit on the richest uranium ore in the world, with almost 
unlimited potential for expansion under the right political 
regime. And they understand that this Premier and other 
members of that NDP government support organizations that 
lobby to shut down our uranium mines and to ensure that 
processing jobs all go to other jurisdictions. 
 
The people of this province know that we possess 47 per cent of 
the farm land in this vast country. They understand that we are 
the second largest beef producer in the country and that we have 
huge potential to expand in both cattle and hog production. 
 
People also know that in spite of our natural advantages in the 
industry, agriculture is not a priority of this government. 
Instead, agriculture is blamed by this government for all of the 
economic woes of the province. 
 
But the people know better. They know that this irresponsible 
government has painted this picture for the people of 
Saskatchewan, or tried to, in order to cultivate a rural-urban 
split among voters that has been somewhat successful for them. 
 
But the people of this province are seeing through this cynical 
strategy of divide and conquer. People wonder why our own 
government seems to be in dispute with our most productive 
industries on an ongoing basis. And they know that that cannot 
be productive for the province and that it must be a deterrent for 
the new investment that we need so badly. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this Speech from the Throne, the government 
speaks in high platitudes about making Saskatchewan ready for 
the next generation. Education and opportunity is the title of 

one page. The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that just weeks before the 
release of this Speech from the Throne, this NDP government 
reneged on an election promise that would have helped 
post-secondary students with the high cost of getting an 
education in this province. Actions speak louder than words to 
the people of this province. 
 
They will say, Mr. Speaker, that they are just putting that 
program off until they can get their fiscal house in order. But 
people see a pattern developing, a pattern of deceit and broken 
promises because they remember that the NDP government 
promised a similar program in the 1999 election campaign, a 
program that was at first postponed and then quickly abandoned 
altogether, just as this one will be. 
 
The NDP rely on the people of this province to have short 
memories, Mr. Speaker, but they are wrong. Saskatchewan 
watched as they won the last election — albeit by the slimmest 
of majorities — on a campaign of fear, deceit, and lavish 
promises that they had no intention of keeping. The people of 
this province will be watching as they break their promises and 
they will remember. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne also speaks in high 
platitudes and vague generalities about creating a brighter future 
for our Aboriginal youth. Our Aboriginal youth are the hope for 
the future of this province. They want to stay in the province. 
They are more and more interested in becoming well-educated, 
contributing citizens, and they give Saskatchewan a population 
bubble in the age group where the rest of North America is at a 
shortage. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, these young people need two things. They 
need to be provided with opportunity and encouragement to 
become well-educated and they need opportunities after they 
are educated. The philosophical leanings of this NDP 
government drive the investment out of this province that is 
necessary to provide that opportunity. And this Speech from the 
Throne is silent on the topic of providing opportunities for 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this Speech from the Throne promises the 
Aboriginal community is the status quo and that simply falls far 
short of the mark. Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne 
makes much of creating a green and prosperous economy. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, prosperous economies don’t just 
happen because a government says in its Speech from the 
Throne that it would like to have one. 
 
Prosperous economies begin to happen when governments put 
the conditions in place that will attract investment — 
something, Mr. Speaker, that this government has never been 
committed to. In fact, that is the very thing they are most 
ideologically opposed to. 
 
Agriculture is more important in Saskatchewan than in any 
other part of this country, Mr. Speaker. And it only receives the 
lightest brush of recognition in this Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture in this province is in a tailspin, the 
likes of which we have rarely if ever seen. The NDP answer to 
this crisis is to raise crop insurance premiums three times in the 
last three years, with combined increases over those three years 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

that add up to more than 120 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, each time an increase has been suffered, this 
government has imposed an accompanying reduction in 
coverage as well. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether or not 
anyone over there on that side of the floor understands how 
things happen on a modern farm. 
 
Today most farms operate on borrowed money, and producers 
must have bankable programs that they can rely on and that 
their bankers can rely on to get them through the tough spots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has recently let agricultural 
producers down by refusing to match the last $65 million that 
the federal government has committed in order to top up the 
CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) program so that it will 
be fully funded. 
 
This week, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture stood in 
this House and told Saskatchewan farm families and their 
bankers that they should be happy they will receive up to about 
88 per cent of the money that the CFIP promised . . . program 
promised. 
 
2003 was a disaster in Saskatchewan agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 
with drought, grasshoppers, very low commodity prices, and 
BSE that has devastated our usually profitable cattle industry. 
These things all hit simultaneously and through no fault of our 
producers. 
 
But instead of reacting to this crisis in agriculture, this Minister 
of Agriculture seems proud that they might put up the money 
that they budgeted for CFIP before there was a crisis, even 
though, by the minister’s own admission, that will leave CFIP 
underfunded and unable to meet its commitment to farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government mentions the oil and gas industry 
in its Speech from the Throne. Revenue from oil and gas is up 
from the very conservative forecast that was made in last year’s 
budget. But revenues are up mainly because the price of oil and 
gas are at or near record highs, not because of substantially 
increased activity, Mr. Speaker, as this government would have 
us believe. 
 
In fact drilling in Saskatchewan this year will be substantially 
less than what the industry had intended prior to last fall’s 
election. Is that any surprise, Mr. Speaker? On top of the 
ongoing challenges that the industry has with this government, 
in the very next paragraph of the Throne Speech the 
government speaks with giddy enthusiasm of its intent to 
replace conventional energy as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost every economic reference in this Speech 
from the Throne is related back to the public, to public 
involvement in the economy. And Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t 
work. 
 
Ethanol is a perfect example of that, Mr. Speaker. About a year 
and a half ago this NDP government announced a deal with 
Broe industries from Denver to build an ethanol plant at Belle 
Plaine, with 40 per cent of the investment capital to come from 
the taxpayers of this province. But we needed far more than one 
plant to build an ethanol industry and we warned them, Mr. 

Speaker, that the private sector would not come to compete with 
the treasury of the province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the announced deal with Broe industries 
was bogus. There never was a deal, Mr. Speaker. Recently this 
NDP government admitted there was no deal with Broe 
Industries to build anything. 
 
They made that admission on a Friday, Mr. Speaker. And on the 
following Monday the private sector through Husky energy 
stepped up to announce that they would build an ethanol 
industry without any Saskatchewan government involvement. 
When will they ever learn that government involvement in the 
economy drives away investment and stifles economic growth 
in the province? 
 
This Speech from the Throne deals also with enshrining public 
utilities in legislation. Mr. Speaker, the four Crown utilities are 
not under any threat, at least not from those of us on this side of 
the House. There’s never been any discussion among our 
caucus of privatizing the four major Crowns, which I presume 
are the Crown utilities that are referred to in the Speech from 
the Throne. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one could be forgiven for thinking otherwise, 
after hearing what those members opposite said about our 
intentions during the recent election campaign. Mr. Speaker, 
those members opposite also told the people of this province 
some other things that weren’t true. 
 
They told the people of Saskatchewan that we would throw 
seniors and others out of care homes and on to the street, and 
Mr. Speaker, that kind of fearmongering is apprehensible, 
immoral, and they knew it wasn’t true. 
 
They said we would lower the minimum wage if we became the 
government. Nothing could be further from the truth. Virtually 
no one in this province would support such a thing and rest 
assured, Mr. Speaker, that we wouldn’t either. Mr. Speaker, 
during that election campaign, those members opposite told the 
people of the province that if we were elected, we would, and 
get this, Mr. Speaker, they said that we would destroy health 
care in this province — that government, Mr. Speaker, that 
government that has created the longest waiting lists in the 
country, that government that allows our people to die of cancer 
while waiting on lists for treatments, that government that 
allows emergency patients to lie in linen closets for a day at a 
time before receiving treatment, that government that allows a 
situation where hospitals are on a code burgundy, or in other 
words full, Mr. Speaker, for a week at a time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these misrepresentations of the truth are not the 
sort of thing that one would expect from an hon. government or 
from hon. members. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, those tactics 
did work to some extent. But by using those tactics, they proved 
far more about themselves than they ever did about us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apparently fear really is a much stronger emotion 
than hope. But the people of this province know that they were 
misled by those NDP members. The people of this province are 
watching the performance of those members, and they will hold 
them accountable for their election promises. 
 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

Mr. Speaker, many of those promises have already been broken 
and the rest soon will be. They won’t keep their promises, Mr. 
Speaker, because they never intended to. They have no new 
ideas for this province, no plan for economic development, no 
interest in making the lot of our people better, no desire to help 
our Aboriginal youth take their rightful place in society, no idea 
how to create the opportunities that will keep our young people 
in this province. And no will to break away from their socialist 
dogma to enable these things to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is devoid of any 
vision of the future of this province and only serves to 
underscore the many shortcomings of this failing government. 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will not support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly a 
pleasure to be in this Assembly and to participate in this Throne 
Speech. It’s a real pleasure to be back in the Assembly here, 
Mr. Speaker, after our recent election. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite an honour for me and quite a 
privilege for me and a unique situation. This is my first 
experience at being re-elected. And I must share with you, Mr. 
Speaker, being re-elected certainly beats the alternative. I can 
assure you that. 
 
But I want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate 
you on being re-elected as a Speaker of the Assembly. I think 
that the statement of . . . the fact that you are the first Speaker to 
be re-elected in this Assembly sort of is a strong indication of 
the high esteem that all the members of this Assembly hold you 
in. And I want to congratulate you for that, sir. And I want to 
assure you that, as in the past, I will co-operate with you fully in 
maintaining the decorum of this Assembly. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, want to take this opportunity to thank my 
seatmate and former seatmate, the member from Wascana 
Plains for letting her name stand in the election of the Speaker. 
Whenever we make a commitment to take on the role of an 
official position in the Assembly here, it’s done with great 
commitment. And I want to thank her for making that 
commitment and making that decision. And I want to thank her 
for allowing the democratic process to work. So thank you very 
much. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to thank my colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland, for being elected as the 
Deputy Speaker once again. I think that we . . . he has served us 
very well in the past and I know will serve us very well in the 
future. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview for being appointed to the Deputy 
Chair of Committees, a role that I have played in the past. And I 
know that our member from Saskatoon Fairview will do an 

excellent, excellent job in the Deputy Chair’s position. And I’m 
sure that all the Clerks at the Table are much relieved to know 
that he will be there and I won’t be. It will lighten their 
workload because they won’t be chairing me through the 
session as they have in the past. So I think they will appreciate 
that. 
 
I also want to congratulate all the members of the Legislative 
Assembly who have been re-elected. It is an honour, I think — 
and I can say this I think upon behalf of everyone — it’s quite 
an honour to be elected to this place to represent the people of 
Saskatchewan. It is an honour that is bestowed upon, overall, 
very few people in Saskatchewan, and I think we all appreciate 
that recognition by our constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:30) 
 
Mr. Harper: — I want to say a very special welcome to all of 
the members of the House who have been elected the first time. 
I think that they will all add their contribution to this Assembly. 
Their comments I think will be welcomed by all of us. Many of 
them, being elected for the first time, will bring a fresh and new 
perspective to it, and I think we’re all waiting to hear from them 
in turn and to hear what their ideas and their thoughts are. 
 
But most important, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 
opportunity to thank the fine people of Regina Northeast for 
allowing me the privilege, the honour, and the humbling 
experience to represent them in this legislature. There are no 
finer people in Saskatchewan than the people in Regina 
Northeast. 
 
And recent redistribution caused the boundary lines to move in 
my constituency and caused my constituency presently to be 55 
per cent new area to me. So as a result of redistribution, we lost 
some old friends that we had gotten to know and built 
relationships with, but it also gave us an opportunity to meet 
new ones and to build some new relations, and I can assure you, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to expanding upon those 
relations. 
 
The boundaries of Regina Northeast, as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, 
have changed to some degree. I retain the area of Uplands 
which is an area that is solely in Regina Northeast. The 
boundary line then follows Ring Road down to Winnipeg 
Street, and then goes down Winnipeg Street to Dewdney 
Avenue, encompassing all of Eastview community. In the past I 
represented part of Eastview, but now the entire community is 
in one constituency, and I think this is well received because 
now we have the entire constituency in one constituency, and 
there’s certainly a relationship there that we can build on. 
 
The boundary lines then follow Dewdney Avenue out to Prince 
of Wales, and it encompasses the communities of Rothwell 
Place, the north half of Glen Elm, the north half of Glencairn, 
the north half of Glencairn Village, Parkridge, and the very new 
area of Creekside which is a growing area with a lot of new 
homes coming up. And that’s a real pleasure to go out and door 
knock in, Mr. Speaker, because it’s an area that’s filled with 
young people with families, salt-of-the-earth people, people 
who are excited about being in Saskatchewan, excited about 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

being in Regina, and they’re raising their families here, and 
they’re really the engines of our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the last summer and during the election 
campaign, I had the opportunity to do a fair amount of door 
knocking and visiting with people in my constituents . . . my 
constituency, I should say. And I would like to take the 
opportunity to share with you a few stories that I came away 
with. 
 
One was a gentleman who I’d had the opportunity to speak to 
on his doorstep, who lived on Fleet Street. What I found 
interesting about our conversation was the fact that he was born 
and raised in Halifax. He was employed as a IT (information 
technology), a civilian IT man with the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police). And with the RCMP he’d worked in the 
communities of Toronto, Ottawa, Vancouver, and now Regina. 
 
And he shared with me that as a federal employee, he was paid 
for the responsibilities that he carried out despite the 
community he lived in. He and his wife had just finished a 
six-year stint in Vancouver when an opening came in the 
RCMP detachment or depot at Edmonton and Regina for his 
services. He said that he and his wife did a fair amount of 
research on the Internet to determine which community they 
wanted to move to. They quickly decided on Regina. And I 
asked him why. And he said well to be honest with you I could 
never hope to live in and own a home like I live in today, in 
Edmonton or Vancouver. He said in Vancouver I drove an hour 
and a half to work in the morning and likely two hours to get 
back in the evening. He said here in Regina I can drive to work 
in 15 minutes. He said your winters suck, but he said I like the 
rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
The same experience on Dewdney Avenue; I run into a young 
couple who was originally from Manitoba. She was born and 
raised in Thompson, and he was born and raised in Brandon. 
They met while going to university in Winnipeg. They married, 
worked in Winnipeg for a brief time after they graduated from 
university, and then went to Calgary where they lived for six 
years and moved to Regina. 
 
They like Regina. They like the city. What they like about 
Saskatchewan is the atmosphere here. What they like about 
Regina is the fact that it’s a community in which they can move 
around in, go anyplace they want in 20 minutes and receive all 
the services that they ever require. 
 
During the campaign I was door knocking on nagy street, nagy 
crescent actually, and I run into a young university couple who 
had just moved into the house there a few weeks earlier. They 
were both going to university. When I introduced myself and 
give them my candidate’s card, I was pleased to see a smile 
come to their face. And they said well isn’t this a coincidence, 
we were just talking about the election here this morning and 
we’ve decided we’re voting New Democrat. I said well I’m 
pleased to hear that of course, but would you mind sharing what 
your reasoning was? They said well we believe that the New 
Democrats have the history, but they also have the future to 
build Saskatchewan into the kind of Saskatchewan that we want 
to be a part of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Harper: — Just down the street — in fact it was a block or 
two over and I can’t remember the street for sure, Mr. Speaker 
— but I had the opportunity to knock on a door and a lady 
answered and she . . . I introduced myself, as I would, and I 
gave her my card. And she looked at me kind of puzzled and 
she said are you the party that wants to make Saskatchewan like 
Alberta? And I said no, no, we’re the party that wants to make 
Saskatchewan like Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — She said to me, well then I am voting for you 
because I have lived in Alberta. She said I paid $89 a month for 
free medicare. My brother still lives in Red Deer, Alberta, 
drives exactly the same make and model and year of car as I do, 
only he pays $4,000 insurance while I pay 800. She said I lived 
in Alberta but I moved back to Saskatchewan because I 
couldn’t afford to live in Alberta any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why Saskatchewan has, year over year in 
most recent times, led the nation in economic growth. Mr. 
Speaker, are there challenges facing our government? Yes, there 
is. But challenges are good. Challenges are good, Mr. Speaker, 
because I remember a saying that my grandfather used to use; 
he used to say if you don’t want to be challenged, then don’t do 
anything. 
 
So I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, that we have challenges before our 
government because we are doing things. We are moving 
forward. Despite the fact that the opposition wants to hold us 
back and slow us down, we’re not going to do that. We’re 
moving this province forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — The challenge, Mr. Speaker, when you have a 
record year after year of leading the nation in growth is to 
maintain that, is to maintain that growth. The challenge is to 
continue to grow and develop a strong and prosperous 
economy. And, Mr. Speaker, we cannot have a strong and 
prosperous economy with poor people. 
 
This is why part of the plan to grow that economy is also to 
grow the union sector within Saskatchewan. When we look 
around Canada, this great nation of ours, we quickly recognize 
many communities that are prosperous, that have a strong 
economy. And when we look closely at that makeup of that 
community, we quickly recognize that it has a strong union 
base, a strong union payroll. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t even have to look beyond the borders of 
Saskatchewan to recognize that. Those communities exist here 
in Saskatchewan. One that comes to mind quite quickly is the 
community of Esterhazy. It’s a farming community plunked in 
the middle of a farming area. But it is a prosperous community, 
a vibrant community, and it is also a community that enjoys a 
strong, union-based payroll. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the opinions of the members opposite, 
unions are not job killers. Unions are engines that grow the 
economy. In fact union members invest in Saskatchewan. They 
invest in Saskatchewan companies. And through the Labour 
Venture Capital Fund, Mr. Speaker, they invest in companies 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — The most recent numbers that I have seen 
suggest that including with this year’s investment, the Labour 
Venture Capital Fund has invested over $32 million in 
Saskatchewan in the last four years. That investment, that 
investment is in 13 different companies right here in 
Saskatchewan, and they have created over 375 jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Is there a challenge facing us as a government 
in growing the union sector as a part of the pillars of our 
economy? Yes there is. When we look at the fact that in the 
union halls of the construction industry unions, unemployment 
runs at about 80 per cent, while at the same time over this last 
number of years, unionized contractors only get about 17 per 
cent of all government construction work. 
 
The challenge here, Mr. Speaker, is to develop a tendering 
process that will insure that unionized and non-unionized 
contractors all have a fair and level playing field on which to 
bid. I know, Mr. Speaker, that our government will develop that 
fair policy and soon all citizens of Saskatchewan will enjoy 
equal access to Saskatchewan government work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech recognizes the need to address 
the minimum wage issue. Now I want to make some personal 
comments here and I want to make it absolutely clear these are 
my personal opinions. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
minimum wage issue has been a political football for far too 
long. It is my opinion, and my personal opinion, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Minimum Wage Board should be done away with. And 
it should be replaced with a system that would increase the 
minimum wage of Saskatchewan over the next four years to 
bring it up to 70 per cent of the average industrial wage of our 
province. And then that minimum wage should be tied to the 
industrial wage through legislation, so that any changes to the 
average industrial wage of this province would be reflected in 
the minimum wage each and every year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot have a strong and prosperous economy 
with poor people in it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are challenges facing our government. And 
our government is going to meet those challenges head-on by 
working with the various stakeholders and finding resolve to 
those challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is a government to build a strong 
and prosperous Saskatchewan. Our government has the 
commitment and the desire to build that strong and prosperous 
economy. But most importantly of all, Mr. Speaker, our 
government has the vision and the support of the majority of 
Saskatchewan people to make this province all that it can be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that on behalf of 
the people of Regina Northeast I will be supporting this very 

progressive and forward-looking Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to congratulate you 
on your election and the Speaker to his election. 
 
It’s interesting to be back here again like the member just 
opposite just said in his speech. It’s nice to be elected, but it’s 
always better to be re-elected back to the House. And it’s 
interesting. 
 
I want to offer my congratulations to new members opposite 
and on this side. I know they will find their time here enjoyable 
and fun most of the time as I have. I would also like to thank 
my family for their support, especially my mom and dad who 
are probably watching today — with their support of looking 
after things back home while I’m up here; with my dad and 
mom for helping to run the farm while I’m up here; my 
brother-in-law and my rest of the family for their support. 
 
I’d like to thank the voters who put their faith in me again to 
send me here the second time along. I’d also like to extend my 
wishes to the member from Yorkton on a speedy recovery on 
back to the House, as all members do. I know that when I talk 
about agriculture in the upcoming Throne Speech, I’m going to 
miss some of his witty remarks. I know that the present 
Agriculture minister, his remarks I don’t think are going to be 
quite as funny or as witty. And if the member from Yorkton is 
watching today on TV, if it makes him feel better, he can 
always throw something at the TV when I start talking about 
agriculture. 
 
(11:45) 
 
I also want to give my thanks and appreciation to my CAs 
(constituency assistant) — Clark Puckett, Donna Petit — who 
basically while I’m up here keep the office running, do a very 
excellent job, and probably one of the main reasons that I got 
re-elected. They do a very good job of responding to 
constituents back home and doing a very excellent job there. 
 
I want to talk a bit in this Throne Speech about my new 
constituency before I get into the Throne Speech. Mine changed 
quite dramatically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, basically thanks to the 
NDP taking out another rural voice in rural Saskatchewan when 
they amalgamated a rural constituency out there. And that 
basically makes us all, all our constituencies larger. My 
constituency right now consists of roughly 4,500 square miles. 
To the members opposite who mostly have cities, there are two 
northern MLAs who have bigger ones, so they know the 
challenges that we face out there in rural Saskatchewan as you 
try to talk to your constituents out there. 
 
Making it 4,500 square miles makes it very, very difficult to be 
in constant contact with your constituents. I have one that just 
phoned me and wanted to have a meeting in Wynyard this 
Friday. That’s a two-hour drive. Not that I’m complaining but 
that’s just the time it takes to get there or to get back and that’s 
not even from my edge of my constituency. It’s a three-hour 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

drive from one edge to the other. Most of the members opposite 
that the constituencies in the cities, basically when they take 
their dog out for a walk that evening can walk through most of 
their constituency, so I would hope that they appreciate the 
challenges we have out there in rural Saskatchewan as we meet 
with our constituents out there. And I hope that in the future 
they take that into consideration, that they don’t try to take out 
more rural voices out there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When I talk a bit about my new constituency, it stretches out to 
Wynyard. I wasn’t that happy with the commission boundary. 
When they first started they basically wanted to take the name 
Arm River right out. That was one of the first names that was in 
this province. Arm River was since 1908. And Arm River has a 
very, very long and proud tradition of the way they vote. There 
was only one brief little incident in the 1970s — and it was very 
brief — one little term when they actually voted in a socialist 
member here. And even that I think he got in by three votes, if I 
remember right. I could be wrong; it could be four, it could be 
five. But it was very, very tight. And since then, they’ve been 
voting the right way since then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Think of that. Almost 100 years, almost 100 years of not 
sending a socialist member to this legislature. 
 
So the name Arm River has a very long and proud tradition of 
that. And we went to the Boundary Commission and I thank 
them for the submissions that they let us submit and the 
hundreds of letters that we submitted and thousands of people 
around the constituency wanted to keep the name Arm River. 
And that end of it, I do thank the Boundary Commission for 
finally reinstating the name Arm River on there, calling it Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
But another thing with the Boundary Commission. I still have a 
few questions . . . (inaudible) . . . Basically they look like they 
drew me a square box in the middle of Saskatchewan. My old 
constituency had natural borders where it was. It was along the 
lakes, which to me made sense. Now I basically split two lakes. 
I split RMs. I almost split farmyards. 
 
They basically just drew a line — if you look in my 
constituency — from the edge of Dundurn all the way to 
Wynyard. I mean there’s even an odd house, I’m pretty sure, 
that they went right through, that depending on which day that 
the enumerator was there, which constituency they would vote 
in. 
 
I think if there . . . if they still had a family member that was 
voting and still living there, if he was on one side of the house 
in his bed and he called that his home, he’d vote another 
constituency. I basically, I don’t even know what the thinking 
of that was. And I had a lot of calls over that. 
 
When I’m going out meeting with my new RMs, and like I say, 
RMs that are split on that, lakes that were split instead of . . . I 
split Quill Lake and I split Long Lake. I don’t know why they 
couldn’t have used some of them as natural boundaries. I still 
don’t know why, what the thinking was behind that. But it’s a 
challenge that I will accept and that I am getting around my 
constituency very well. 
 
Also I’d like to talk a little bit about my new constituency since 

this is the first Throne Speech that will be dealing with my new 
area, so I would like to make a few comments on that. 
 
I did pick up some larger areas. I picked up towns. I picked up 
Wynyard, which I’m getting to know quite well. It has Lilydale 
poultry products there, employs a lot of people there. They also 
have the Big Quill Resources and Cargill Grain company or 
plant there, water bottling and plastic plant. 
 
My next constituency deals . . . is Watrous that I’ve gained. 
And everybody knows there about the mineral waters, Manitou 
Beach, Danceland, which is known throughout the province, so 
it’s picked up some nice areas. 
 
But basically my constituency hasn’t changed at . . . much in 
the idea of the people I represent. Grain farming, cattle ranching 
are still two of the primary industries in that province. Even in 
the towns like Wynyard, Watrous, Davidson — my three 
biggest centres — the people are still tied to the rural, 
agricultural-based farming in the province at that end. 
 
So in that respect, nothing has changed. The view hasn’t 
changed and obviously it didn’t; in the new area I did very well. 
So they still represent . . . or I represent the free-thinking people 
of Arm River-Watrous, which is very good. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — One other that I like to mention, I’ve picked up 
two Aboriginal reserves — Kawacatoose and Day Star. And 
I’m looking forward to working with the chiefs there. I’ve had 
meetings with . . . I’ve stopped there a few times, and it’s been 
very good. 
 
I used to have the reserve just outside of Dundurn — Dakota 
Whitecap. And Chief Darcy Bear and me got along very well. 
We used to meet at least two or three times a year, and I’m 
looking forward to having the same kind of open response with 
my new Aboriginal bands. And I know that . . . I’ve been there; 
they’re very good communities. I was very impressed with the 
way they, with the band councils and also with the offices there. 
And then I know that they’re looking to grow with 
Saskatchewan in the future, at that end. 
 
I also want to talk a little bit about Drake. It’s a meat-packing 
plant that is quite well known throughout the province, 
surviving very well despite the BSE out there. 
 
But a lot of the businesses are all struggling out there, but 
they’re all, they all know that this province has huge potential 
— huge potential to grow if only this government would make 
some, even some minor changes to allow that out there. 
 
On Blackstrap this year there was . . . taken over by two young 
entrepreneurs. Sean Dunn was one of them. Blackstrap the last 
few years was run, but it ran into trouble, I believe, last year. 
They took over a huge challenge to get that mountain up and 
running again. They have a lot of long-range plans. They want 
to do a lot of summer events there. In fact this weekend there’s 
an event coming up with some bands coming out. 
 
But the original start-up, they did have problems with the 
government; there was some red tape, there was some problems 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

with leasing equipment from the government. And I can 
remember meeting with them in November and December and 
they were quite concerned that the government, I won’t say put 
up roadblocks, but yet weren’t really bending over backwards 
to try to get this mountain up and running, especially when 
they’re working on such a short time frame to get it up and 
running. You don’t have a lot of time between . . . Their season 
is very short at that end and they, they with . . . I worked with 
them and we managed to get it up and running. I’m looking 
forward to that. But they’d also, they’d mentioned a few 
problems with the government I’m hoping can be corrected 
throughout this summer on some of the leasing equipment that 
the government still owns there. 
 
Also, talking a bit about agriculture in this Throne Speech. I 
really don’t see a lot that is going to encourage agricultural 
producers out there. I had a lot of calls when this government, 
lot of e-mails when this government decided not to throw in 
their share of the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program), of 
only paying out . . . They’re only going to get 88 per cent of 
that, Mr. Speaker. Basically, that’s a broken promise. 
 
I can remember the member from Yorkton when he made that 
commitment. He had said, when they . . . The government said 
they were throwing in their 40 per cent, that the farmers will be 
receiving 100 per cent of the money promised to them. He 
made that promise in this House, Mr. Speaker. And I just wish 
the ongoing Agriculture minister would follow up with that 
promise of filling, of fulfilling that promise. 
 
There was many people out there that had that money coming in 
and went to the banks making payment arrangements on that, 
and now they’re going to be getting at least 12 per cent less 
money coming in. That’s a substantial cut to the people out 
there on top of the crop insurance rates which are going 
anywhere from, up from anywhere from 10 to 30 per cent, and 
basically with less coverage, Mr. Speaker. How is that helping 
the agriculture communities out there? They know that there is 
tough times out there. 
 
You’d think that they could, they could hold the line on that, or 
try to change the coverage to try to help more people out there 
in the agriculture end. But they seem to be forgetting about 
agriculture. They make a lot of words about it, but yet they 
seem to blame the province when it doesn’t, why it doesn’t 
grow when agriculture suffers. Well, you have to make a 
vibrant agriculture community out there if you want that, your 
province to grow. 
 
At the agriculture end, I want to make a couple of comments 
on. Now myself, I’m not an organic farmer but I’ve had a lot of 
people tell me that that it is an industry that could grow — 
could grow, Mr. Speaker, but one of the main stumbling blocks 
of that is that they have to pay basically double freight rates, 
Mr. Speaker, on account of the Wheat Board. And I’m not 
totally against the Wheat Board but I think that there are some 
changes that have to be made. They have to be totally . . . they 
should be flexible, and that’s something when you talk to the 
Wheat Board about the members opposite, they just clam right 
up. They think it’s, that basically that the sun sets on them. 
 
And I think there has to be some, some changes to the Wheat 
Board, Mr. Speaker, if you want this province to grow. One of 

this is the organic industry. It’s not going to grow, it’s never 
going to grow unless there is some minor changes made to the 
Wheat Board. Why, they pay double freight right now. If they 
go to ship their wheat they pay roughly — depends where they 
are at — $1.10 a bushel freight. The wheat hasn’t left their yard, 
it’s still sitting in the bin, and they’re paying $1.10 freight. It 
hasn’t left their yard. That’s $1.10 they’re paying already 
expense. 
 
On top of that, when they do the buy back program usually the 
government or the Wheat Board will, anywhere from 60 cents 
to $1 higher than the initial payment’s going to be when the 
crop year is done. So it’s almost like a tax. That’s an added 
burden. So looking at almost $2 higher than normally they 
could get for that wheat. 
 
And then when they do sell it, they have to pay the freight to 
wherever they are shipping at. So that’s usually another 50 
cents or $1. So till there’s some minor changes made to the 
Wheat Board at that, that industry will never grow. On 
value-added, that’s why there’s no pasta plant. Same thing — 
they face the same kinds of problems that the organic people 
do. 
 
If you want to set up a flour mill, a pasta plant, anything to do 
with cereal grains, you’re paying that extra $2 a bushel. And the 
wheat hasn’t, or your product hasn’t left the yard. It’s just a 
surcharge that they take on the side. Until that there’s some 
changes on that, we will never have value added here in the 
cereal grains industry. It hasn’t happened and it’s not going to 
happen, so that basically the argument talks for itself. It hasn’t 
grown and it’s not going to grow till there’s some changes 
there, till this government is willing at least to talk about things 
like that. 
 
I hear lots of things about on the other side, how we’re not 
flexible on this side, or, come over and talk to us. Well I’ve 
talked to some members over there and I’ve listened to the 
speeches over there. And boy, when it comes to their way of 
thinking, she’s like their way or the highway. 
 
There is no change, there is no . . . that they can’t get away from 
that total socialist or co-operative. If it deals with them two 
issues, it has to be 100 per cent perfect. They can’t even, even 
consider the idea that maybe there could be some changes in 
that, that maybe them ideas aren’t 100 per cent right. And that 
is until that attitude changes over there, this province and the 
agriculture and the value-added is never going to grow at that 
end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Talk a bit about the Crowns and why a lot of people are, some 
people are dissatisfied with them. I will talk about . . . I have 
two communities, Craik and Imperial, that have their own cable 
companies. They entered an agreement with SaskTel, I think it 
was . . . I have the paperwork down in my office. I may be 
wrong on the date, but it was roughly around the 2000 to 2006, 
for a certain amount to pay for pole use. 
 
In 2002, SaskPower comes in, takes the contract away from 
SaskTel, rips it up. Doesn’t inform the towns that had the 
contracts except to send them a bill saying that they’re going to 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

increase the rates over the next two years. The first year is a 67 
per cent increase, the third year a 73 per cent increase, and the 
next year is an 80 per cent increase. Didn’t even consult with 
the towns, basically just tore it up. 
 
With that extra money, it’s not like they’re providing more 
service, more infrastructure. All it is, is . . . The agreement that 
was made on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was poles. The towns are 
using SaskPower poles to run the line of their own cable 
company on this pole. A little tiny, little thin line — it’s already 
there. Using that, SaskPower has decided to basically gouge 
these towns throughout the province. 
 
You have to ask yourself why. I don’t think it’s a big demand 
on the power poles. I don’t think that little line has tore down 
many power poles. And besides, you have a contract up to 
2006. 
 
The town says, hey we’re willing to renegotiate at the end of the 
contract. We signed a valid, legal contract. We’re willing to 
negotiate. If the price wants to go up afterwards, hey that’s what 
we face. We designed our cable companies with the price in this 
contract. When we set out our services, we sent out a rate for 
the . . . yearly, to our customers to get them signed up. That’s 
what we used. 
 
So now we’ve got this added increase. So we have to go back, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, go back to the people and say, we have to 
charge you more to use this cable, to use this cable. 
 
How is that helping small rural towns who are basically trying 
to get their own cable companies, own little things? That’s just 
one instance of the Crowns always trying to compete with the 
local businesses instead of working with them. Over the number 
of years, the Crowns want to run things of every little business. 
 
And at the utility end, they’re very good at it. Do their job. Stay 
in the utility end. But why do they want to get into businesses? 
 
Outlook was another one. The IRON Solutions magazine, they 
had to go buy one in Ontario to compete with the one in 
Outlook, employs 20 people. I mean, right now he’s struggling. 
That’s 20 less people that could be out of a job because a 
Crown had to buy another dealership magazine, and keep it in 
Ontario, that services Western Canada. Now how is that helping 
rural Saskatchewan? How is that helping it grow? 
 
They had made . . . Another agency, Rural Revitalization. That 
was supposed to work with that and help problems with that. 
And there has not been one instance where they’ve actually 
helped the businesses out in rural Saskatchewan, worked with 
it. You want to really grow the businesses, get the Crowns 
trying not to drive the small businesses out of town, out of 
business out there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Health care, on the Throne Speech . . . you know, no vision out 
there and that scares a lot of people. Over the years, I’ve read a 
lot of petitions on people that are scared about losing their 
services in Imperial and Craik and Davidson. Right now there’s 
rumours that some of the little hospitals are in trouble. There’s a 
rumour . . . I’ve even had calls from Moose Jaw about a rumour 
about a seniors’ complex that may be closed. You know, people 
are very worried out there. 

The beds . . . right now Davidson, a long-term care and Imperial 
. . . I’m not sure about Davidson. Now Imperial is five. There’s 
five on the waiting list. You close some more beds out there; 
where are these people going to go? They’re going to overload 
the system somewhere else, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You’re going to have to look at trying to expand the services 
and work with the people. I mean we can talk about the waiting 
lists going down the line. When I look at the response from the 
Health minister out there and the Finance minister, I get very 
worried that they’re going to be cutting some more hospitals out 
there and some more long-term care beds out in rural 
Saskatchewan. And there’s nothing left to cut. They’re cut 
basically right to the bone. You cut any more out there and this 
system is getting ready to explode out there. 
 
You want to . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at a 
government, you should be looking at their legacy. And you 
look at the Chrétien government, it’s going to be remembered 
for the scholarship scandal, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You look at 
the Devine government. It did a lot of good things, but when 
you mention its name, debt always seems to be associated with 
that particular government. 
 
But what is this legacy of this particular government going to 
be? If it continues down the same path that it is going, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, its legacy was going to be having the most 
longest waiting lists. It’s going to have the poorest health care, 
having people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people die unnecessarily 
under its watch. That’s what this government, if it continues 
down this path, that’s what it will be remembered for. 
 
And then we can talk about the debt that this Premier is starting 
to incur. The previous premier had left a little surplus there. 
Now this Premier is running close to $1 million-a-day deficit. 
What do you think he’s going to be remembered for 20 years 
down the road? He’s going to be remembered, I think, with 
disgust and contempt, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s what he’s 
going to be . . . what this government is going to be 
remembered by, if it continues down the path of the way it is 
serving rural Saskatchewan with health care throughout the 
province. That’s how it’s going to be remembered. 
 
It’s going to be remembered, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 19 
quarters — 19 quarters of continuous population loss, the only 
province in all of Canada that that is happening in. That’s what 
people are going to be remembering this government — the 
depopulation of rural Saskatchewan. The gutting of rural 
Saskatchewan — that’s what this government is going to be 
remembered for. And it’s going to be remembered by disgust 
and contempt over . . . many years from now. And that 
contempt and disgust is out there in rural Saskatchewan. All 
you have to do is look around the members here they’ve 
elected, over the number of years. And that disgust and 
contempt is there. And it’s going to be there for a long time. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s creeping into the 
cities, the disgust and contempt for that Premier and that 
government with the three new members that we have here. 
And it’s going to keep growing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
eventually we will be getting rid of that government. We came 
that close to it. When we get rid of that socialist government, it 
will be the best times for Saskatchewan. And that’s what we 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

need, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Finally maybe we can get this 
province on the right track and get it growing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, at that end. 
 
With that Mr. Deputy, I think you probably get the idea I’m not 
going to support this Throne Speech. I’ve listened to four 
Throne Speeches that made the same promises. And what did 
we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What did we have after each 
Throne Speech through that year? We had population loss. We 
didn’t have any growth in rural Saskatchewan. We had the 
waiting lists get longer after each and every Throne Speech, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I can’t see one bit of difference with this Throne Speech. 
It’s about time this government actually did some action, maybe 
thought outside the box, forgot about their socialist ideological 
ideas that just has to be basically just straight socialist. If 
they’re not running it, if the government can’t run it, than 
nobody else can run it. They can’t work. Well till this 
government starts thinking outside the box, this province will 
keep going backwards, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It is indeed an honour for me to enter into this Throne Speech 
which is taking place in what I would describe, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as historic times. 
 
First of all I want to say congratulations to you on your 
acclamation as Deputy Speaker, and I look forward to your 
continued good service to us here in the Assembly. I want to 
join others in complimenting the honourable member for 
Wascana Plains in her contest for the Speaker’s Chair. It is a 
noble position indeed and requires dedication of good people, 
and I want to compliment her. 
 
I want to say congratulations as well, Mr. Speaker, to some 
others who are here. I’ve listened to many of the speeches that 
we’ve had over the course of the past few days, and I want to 
especially say congratulations and welcome to those members 
on both sides of the House who are here for the first time. 
 
As I’ve listened, one of the things that constantly impresses me, 
Mr. Speaker, is how people come to this place motivated to do 
well, to serve their province well, not with the . . . all with the 
same ideology or the same political philosophy or biases, but 
every single one of us who is here will never ever forget that 
first day that we walked into these chambers, took our place, 
saw our name on the plate on the desk, and felt just humbled 
and overwhelmed by the obligations. 
 
And what I want to say is I appreciated very much the idealism 
and the honour that has been reflected in the speeches by 
first-time members and to say to all of the first-time members, 
keep that idealism. It is what makes you strong, no matter 
which side of the House you’re on, and will enable you to serve 
the people of Saskatchewan well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join the others as well in 

saying congratulations to the hon. member for Walsh Acres and 
to Saskatchewan Rivers. It is a special honour that many of us 
have never ever known, and they have both carried out the 
duties of being the mover and the seconder of the response to 
the Speech from the Throne with excellence, both of them, and 
many others, Mr. Speaker. But I want to say particularly to both 
the members from Walsh Acres and Saskatchewan Rivers: great 
speeches that they can proudly give to their children and their 
grandchildren and their great-grandchildren as the first 
statement that they made when they came to this honourable 
institution. And I say congratulations to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my 
thanks to the good people of Moose Jaw North who saw it fit to 
have me return as their representative for the fifth time. And it 
is with great humility that I accept that responsibility and 
pledge to the people of Moose Jaw North that I will do my best 
in the years ahead and the . . . that make up this term, the next 
four or five years that serve out this term of office, to serve both 
them and the people of Saskatchewan well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened carefully to the 
Throne Speech debate, and now if you’ve ever wanted to hear a 
debate which is an expression of contrasts, you’ve been hearing 
it here. We’ve been hearing two very, very different 
perspectives on each side of the House, Mr. Speaker, two very 
different perspectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we stand at this point in time on the cusp of 
history as we are readying to enter into our second century as a 
province in this great nation. And as we do this, Mr. Speaker, 
we simultaneously do two things. We look back in history with 
a sense of pride and accomplishment and confidence about what 
has happened in this province over the course of the past 10 
decades. And at the same time, based on the accomplishments 
that have occurred in this province in which many pioneers of 
our first century came to build a future, a future filled with hope 
and promise and prosperity to those who will take their place as 
citizens, we look back with a sense of confidence and, Mr. 
Speaker, we also look forward as a result of our view of our 
past with a sense of optimism and confidence once again. That 
is the nature . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — That is the nature of the view that we take as we 
enter our second century. And it is a time, Mr. Speaker, when 
the people of Saskatchewan expect of us in this House to serve 
with the same dedication and vision, long-term vision for the 
future of the province of Saskatchewan this day as they did 100 
years ago. And, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen in this debate 
and the Speech from the Throne is a statement of vision from 
one side of the House, and whining and complaining and 
making of excuses and criticism about our province. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a contrast of visions that we are seeing here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the vision is 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

very simple. The vision is very simple. I told the media when 
they asked me, my home media asked me, on the day of the 
Speech from the Throne, what do you think of the Speech from 
the Throne? I said two things. Point number one, it was one of 
the shortest speeches that I’ve ever heard — the Speech from 
the Throne — in the years I’ve been in the House. And 
secondly, it was one of the most inspirational. 
 
And it was one of the most inspirational, Mr. Speaker, because I 
believe it was appropriate for the time in which we are. As we 
prepare ourselves to move into the second century as a province 
in this great nation, it is a statement of vision which is tied to 
the hopes and the dreams and the aspirations of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
The vision, Mr. Speaker, is stated very simply. The vision in 
this Throne Speech is one that the future in Saskatchewan, our 
second century in Saskatchewan, will make this a place where 
there is a future for young people to make their futures for 
themselves and their families in a green and prosperous and 
sustainable economy here in the home of Canada’s home of 
medicare and, Mr. Speaker, where the utilities that they have 
are the most affordable in the nation. 
 
That’s the vision, Mr. Speaker, that will take us not only into 
the next year and the next decade but into the next century here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make some 
comments specifically about that vision, that positive vision 
with which I stand firmly, and I want to contrast to the failing 
vision of the Saskatchewan Party opposite. 
 
Let me start first of all with the positive. And I know when I 
speak about positive things, it irritates the hon. members 
opposite because they are troubled by people who will think 
positively, which is a Saskatchewan tradition for the last 
century and for the next century. It is builders who think 
positively. It is those who are wanting to criticize and tear down 
who will be rejected over and over and over again as having the 
right to lead the province into a prosperous and secure future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve talked about the future of the 
province of Saskatchewan in this Throne Speech, we’ve 
touched on a number of things that appeal to the very important 
practical concerns of those who are young in our province 
today. And we have talked here, Mr. Speaker, in the Throne 
Speech about the importance of the SchoolPLUS system, about 
CareerStart program, expanding the youth recruitment for 
employment well beyond just participation in the Crowns, but 
for all of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have talked, Mr. Speaker, in this Throne Speech about 
expanding Canada’s first post-secondary graduate tax credit. 
And the Minister of Finance will have more to say about that 
next week, I suspect, in the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have talked about building a prosperous and 
green, sustainable economy. We’ve talked about, Mr. Speaker, 

in this Speech from the Throne about summits that’ll bring 
peoples together in Saskatchewan to reflect and to offer positive 
suggestions and ideas for continuing to build a sustainable 
green economy here in our Saskatchewan, which is sensitive to 
the social needs of people. Mr. Speaker, we have talked in the 
Throne Speech about the importance of the natural resources in 
our province — whether they be under the land or in fact on top 
of the land, whether we’re talking about agricultural or mineral 
resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have talked about building an economy that is 
based on the strength that we have as a province, focussing on 
our strengths and energy and making the Saskatchewan of the 
second century a province which is rich in energy and uses that 
to build the economy and provide the needs not only of our 
province but of the nation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — We talked in the Speech from the Throne about 
the expansion of carbon dioxide injection projects and enhanced 
oil recoveries and the wind production of energy, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s taking place over on the west side. 
 
All of those things that are part, Mr. Speaker, recognizing . . . 
On this side of the House, we recognize that you can be green 
and you can be profitable at the same time — at the same time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And, Mr. Speaker, here we are. Here we are in 
the homeland, in the homeland right here in Saskatchewan, the 
home of medicare here in our nation. One of the greatest 
contributions of our first century of the province of 
Saskatchewan, one of the greatest gifts of the people of 
Saskatchewan to the people of Canada has been medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, born in this province without the support of the 
federal government, born in this province without the support of 
the federal government which has now become an identifying 
characteristic that causes Canadians to say, we’re Canadian. 
You ask 99 out of 100 Canadians, what’s the difference 
between a Canadian and American, and many of them will say, 
a Canadian is an American with medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, born here in Saskatchewan . . . Mr. Speaker, we 
are concerned today about the continuity of the ability to 
provide the kind of health care people in Saskatchewan deserve, 
and we are going to continue to stand firm for the people of 
Saskatchewan as we take on the federal government and their 
responsibility to provide health care, the security of health care 
not only for the people of Saskatchewan but for people across 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — We’ve heard the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker, talking about changes that are being made and time 
targets for surgeries. The first again here in Saskatchewan; first 
in Canada. Is it any surprise that once again — once again as 
we work to improve this health care system of the nation — that 
the nation looks to Saskatchewan to take the lead? And we’re 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

doing it again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re in this . . . In this Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re talking also about building securities for those 
who are vulnerable in our society, the employment supplement, 
Mr. Speaker, and support for housing to those who are 
lower-income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will never forget the first campaign I was in and 
going door to door in Moose Jaw and coming across the door of 
a woman who had been living in a Moose Jaw Housing 
Authority home for some 15, 16 years. And, Mr. Speaker, I will 
never forget the conversation of that. 
 
You know how many of us will have in the course of our 
campaigns conversations that stick with us forever. I will never, 
ever forget the conversation with this woman who had raised 
her children — and she’d done it well. And now she was, Mr. 
Speaker, she was feeling very, very vulnerable because her 
youngest child was in grade 12 and about to leave home. 
 
And this mother who had lived with minimum kinds of income, 
but who had served both her family and I would suggest her 
community well, was feeling particularly vulnerable because 
her child was going to leave home. She had stayed at home to 
take care of her children all these years and now she was going 
to have years of time out of the workforce and no place to live. 
 
And I said then, Mr. Speaker, I made a commitment to that 
woman that this will change. This will change. There will 
become a day in our province in which people who are 
vulnerable and have low income will authentically have the 
right to believe and to aspire to own their home, to bring to their 
families the security and the assurance and the confidence for it 
to be a place to build a future. And, Mr. Speaker, I am very, 
very proud that in this Throne Speech, and to be announced 
later, there is a long-term strategy for home ownership that will 
bring homes to the people of Saskatchewan who have not been 
able afford them, and I stand very firmly in support of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also said, we’ve also 
said as a commitment to the people of Saskatchewan out of the 
campaign that we held last fall, that there is a commitment of 
this government to the people of Saskatchewan to stand firm in 
terms of their right to expect the lowest cost utilities bundle in 
all of Canada. Mr. Speaker, that was a promise made to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and that was a promise made in the 
Throne Speech that was read by the Lieutenant-Governor. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this government will deliver to the people of 
Saskatchewan, as has been our tradition over the course of our 
first century, and we’re going to do it again. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also recognized . . . I’ve heard over on 
the other side, they have been, they have been extolling the 
great fears of socialism, the great fears of socialism, they say. 
Ho, it is a frightening thing indeed. They, Mr. Speaker, if you 
listen to them, if you’ve listened, and particular if you’ve 
listened to the veterans, they’ll tell you there is nothing more 
scary to the people of Saskatchewan than socialism. This 
socialism, Mr. Speaker, that introduced the first medicare 
program in Canada. Mr. Speaker, this socialism that introduced 

affordable power, affordable telephones, affordable electricity, 
the most affordable auto insurance in the nation that has been a 
part of the tradition of the New Democratic Party in the first 
century, Mr. Speaker, it will be part of the legacy of the second 
century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Because you see, Mr. Speaker, what you do, is if 
you want to build a second century with legacy, then what you 
do is you build on the strengths of the first. And it will be part 
of the intention of this government, Mr. Speaker, in this sitting 
of the House, to introduce legislation that will forever make it a 
guarantee to the people of Saskatchewan that they will be able 
to expect their Crown corporations to deliver for them as they 
have come to see them in the past, and that will continue into 
the second century. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, now we have to find 
ourselves just taking a look at the other side, at the other side. 
Because you kind of have to wonder if there is something 
different going on over there. And what’s going on over there? 
We have a group of men and women over there, Mr. Speaker, 
that tell us they are the new and improved Saskatchewan Party. 
New and improved, they say. New blue dots. 
 
They are the party that’s on the move. They are simply 
salivating, Mr. Speaker. If you are listening to them, they are 
simply salivating at the prospects of bringing down the 
government and moving to the other side. Well if you listen to 
their story, that’s their story. They’re a party on the move. 
 
So what are the signs? What are the signs of a party on the 
move? As we look through history, they’re not hard to figure 
out. I mean what you do is you look at what the people think. 
And, Mr. Speaker, on that side of the House we have a political 
party that in 1999, they were kind of the new kids on the block 
and they got themselves in 1999 election some 42 per cent of 
the popular vote in the province of Saskatchewan. Pretty 
impressive for a new group. 
 
Well they’re a party on the move. They’re a party on the move. 
And just to prove that, Mr. Speaker, they went out to the 
campaign in 2003 and what did they come home with? 
Thirty-eight per cent of support. A party on the move. 
 
Whoa. Just a second. Just a second. Mr. Speaker, somebody’s 
got, somebody’s got the graph upside down, it would seem to 
me. The graph is upside down. 
 
So you want to know a party on the move, you listen to the best 
poll of all. You listen to the people at election time who make 
the decision. Because there’s no guesswork. They’re not telling 
you what they think they might want to do; they’re telling what 
you did. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re saying in ’03 compared to 
’99, you’re four points less popular than you were before. 
That’s what the people said. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, maybe that’s just an aberration. Maybe it’s 
just an aberration. Because, Mr. Speaker, I listened very 
carefully. I listened to the speeches, and they tell us over and 
over, they have got it figured out. They are right and the people 
of Saskatchewan are wrong. That’s what they’re saying. Poor 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

old people of Saskatchewan just couldn’t quite figure out how 
bright the Saskatchewan Party is. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they decided after the election it was a time 
for a new leader. Well I’ll tell you another way that you can 
figure out a party on the move. If you’re a party on move and 
you’re destined to be, you’re the government-in-waiting, then 
people from all over are clambering to be at the lead of this 
thing. They want to be leading this thing. 
 
And right after the election we heard many . . . Yes, we heard, I 
think, the member from Cannington; I think he wanted, I think 
he might have said somewhere along the line he wanted to be 
the leader. I think one of the new members from Saskatoon. The 
member from Wood River, he tried it once before. He thought 
about it again, although it would cut into his time as the 
honorary president of the Joe McCarthy fan club, Mr. Speaker. 
Cut into that. So that kind of dissuaded him. 
 
Member from Weyburn, member from Melfort, the member 
from Cannington . . . or from Canora, the member from Canora, 
they all said that they kind of thought they might like to be the 
leader of this party on the move. Well, Mr. Speaker, they all 
thought about it. And we’ve heard some people, Mr. Speaker, in 
this Throne Speech refer to songs as part of a theme, to capture 
in song the movement that was going on, that express their 
heart. 
 
And you know what I think was going on, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Saskatchewan Party leadership? There was a little theme that I 
refer to, the Saskatchewan Party leadership polka; it was the 
polka. And many of us will recognize it was to the tune of . . . 
and many people recognized the “Too Fat Polka.” And they 
started jumping up and down and singing this one: I don’t want 
it, you can have it, it’s too bad for me; it’s too bad for me, way 
too bad for me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The Sask Party too bad polka, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, not long ago the New Democratic Party had 
a leadership convention. They said, we’re going to change the 
leader. How many people stood for the leadership of the New 
Democratic Party when it came to cutting bait? How many 
stood, Mr. Speaker? Count them — seven; seven; seven. Mr. 
Speaker, seven in the New Democratic Party. 
 
When it came to the Saskatchewan Party and it came to cutting 
the chase, how many people out of 1 million people in 
Saskatchewan, how many people said, I think I’d like to be the 
leader of the Saskatchewan Party? How many? One — one. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can understand; they’re feeling a tad 
discouraged. But you know there is a way, there is a way of 
getting your message out to the people of Saskatchewan. It was 
used by political parties for centuries, Mr. Speaker. It’s called 
the leadership convention. What you do is you hold a leadership 
. . . In fact one of the ways to let the public know how your 
party is on the move and it’s captured the ideas and the 
inspiration of people in Saskatchewan, you hold a leadership 
convention. And you say, how many came to our leadership 
convention? You ask them. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party had a leadership 
convention. Some 20,000 New Democrats voted, Mr. Speaker, 
in a preferred ballot. And there were actually some 2,000 people 
who were voting there that day. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how many people came to the leadership 
convention of the Saskatchewan Party? How many were there? 
None — none. Nobody came. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — None. Nobody. A leadership convention with 
nobody. Nobody, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well then you have to ask yourself, surely this is the party . . . 
Well okay, you know, not going to mess around with those 
messy little leadership conventions. Things might come out that 
you don’t want to have said. And, Mr. Speaker, so then they 
said, well okay, we’re just going to name our guy; we’re just 
going to name our guy. Why in the world if you’ve only got one 
person who cares to lead the operation do you tell the world 
who he is on the ides of March? Why do you do it on the ides of 
March? Along came March 15 . . . 
 
(12:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know I’m reminded of that old Wayne and 
Shuster skit that we’ll all remember when Julius Caesar’s wife 
kept saying, I kept telling him: Julie don’t go, don’t go, she 
said. 
 
Well but on the ides of March, on the ides of March, they 
marched out the member from Swift Current and what did they 
say to him? They said you get out there, you get out there; we’ll 
be back here, we’ll be back here right behind your back. That’s 
what they said; that’s what they said. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, so maybe they’ve made an odd mistake or 
two. Who knows; who knows. But surely, surely then, then we 
have the opportunity to come to the debate on the Speech from 
the Throne in which it is the time-honoured, noble tradition in 
which the political parties who make up the Assembly will 
stand and will state their vision for the future. And at this 
historic time, for the second century of the province of 
Saskatchewan, why is it, Mr. Speaker, that you have on one side 
of the House member after member after member standing and 
supporting the statements of the future that were in the 
Legislative Assembly . . . in the Speech from the Throne, and 
on the other side you get not one new idea. Not one. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I tried to enter this Throne Speech debate as 
objectively as I could. Now I got to admit I was a little biased 
when I started, a little biased when I started. But, Mr. Speaker, 
when I listen to the voices coming from both sides of the House 
there’s no question in my mind — there’s no question in my 
mind — there is one side of the House that stands for the 
principle of entering boldly into our second century as a 
province, willing to make the tough decisions that the people of 
Saskatchewan expect of those that they declare to be their 
leaders, willing to make those decisions that will enable us to 
move forward with a sense of confidence and optimism and 
assurance of this being a good place to build a future, a good 
future for young people in a green and prosperous economy 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

here in the home of medicare in our great nation, Mr. Speaker, 
in a place in which utilities are the most affordable in the 
nation. 
 
For all of those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will be standing in 
favour of the Speech from the Throne and I will be standing 
opposed to the negativity and the negativism coming from the 
opposite side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be voting in favour of the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have certainly seen some impressive speeches being delivered 
in this House this week and late last week. And I don’t really 
know how that you follow an act like the one that the member 
from Moose Jaw North has just put on. 
 
I can understand, Mr. Speaker, why perhaps that Broe deal out 
at Belle Plaine failed back in September 2002. This NDP 
government, they had the big revival tent, they bused in the 
children and the supporters, Mr. Speaker. But you know what 
they forgot to do, Mr. Speaker? They forgot to get the revival 
preacher from Moose Jaw North to rev up the crowd and deliver 
the message, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m tempted with . . . after listening to the 
member from Moose Jaw North to simply adjourn debate but I 
think perhaps I will make a few comments before we do that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would at this time like to congratulate you 
on your re-election to the Speaker’s Chair. As a number of 
members have said, it is the first time that anyone in this 
province, and perhaps in Canada, has been re-elected to the 
Speaker’s Chair, and my congratulations to you. 
 
I could perhaps recall or explain our little discussion that 
yourself and myself had in Southey when we talked about the 
Speaker’s position and so on. And I had indicated to you that 
I’d received your letter and said . . . and told you that ordinarily, 
under normal circumstances, that I would support you. But I 
then with a very straight face said to you, Mr. Speaker, that I, in 
this case, I couldn’t because I was thinking of running for the 
position and you . . . your reply to me was that I probably would 
win. And then of course I chuckled and we . . . and I said also 
that I think I would have to leave my community and perhaps 
the province if I would make that kind of a move. And so I, 
once again, I would like to congratulate you. 
 
And I’d also like to welcome the new members, the newly 
elected members on both sides of the House, to the legislature. 
It is, can be, a very daunting place when you get up to make 
your first speech. And I know back after the ’99 election when I 
first rose to deliver my maiden speech it was unnerving, Mr. 
Speaker. And I have to congratulate all the new members for 
the quality of the speech and the content that they delivered. It 
was very impressive and they raised the bar very high, and it 

really makes those of us who have been before really dig in a 
little deeper and try to maintain that level of debate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time too I would like to pass on my well 
wishes to the member from Yorkton. While in this House we 
differ politically and have our debates and so on. But there are 
things that transcend politics, Mr. Speaker, and health is one of 
those things. And I would like to say, and particularly if the 
member is watching, that I wish him all the best in his battle 
with cancer, and I hope to see him take his place in the near 
future in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t welcome our 
new face at the Clerk’s table, Iris Lang. Iris’s parents live in 
Southey, which is in my constituency, in fact it’s a 
neighbouring town. And Iris grew up in Southey and I would 
like to welcome her. And I’m sure she will serve all the 
members of the Assembly very well. 
 
I have known Iris’s parents for quite some time, particularly her 
father. He is an avid hockey fan and has refereed hockey, minor 
hockey games for many, many years. He hasn’t done that in the 
past while; his age has kind of caught up to him. But he 
refereed when my sons were playing hockey, and Jack didn’t 
have anybody involved in hockey at that time but he loved the 
game and he’d come out and ref minor hockey games. In fact 
we would quite often tease him that he’s getting up in age and 
that we were wondering if he was reffing by ear. And he said 
sometimes he was, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to at this time also thank the voters from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood for once again re-electing me. We 
underwent significant changes in the electoral boundaries and I 
would . . . I’m very pleased that the voters of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood have once again placed their confidence 
in me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t, at this time, thank the 
members of my family for their loyal support that they have 
given me over the years, and particularly my wife Marlene. 
 
Our family has undergone a few challenges, I guess, in the last 
year or so. We have a couple of our granddaughters living with 
us. My in-laws, Marlene’s parents . . . Her mother passed away 
last April here in, well actually in the home in Cupar. And her 
father is living in the home in Cupar and he’s elderly and failing 
health and he certainly requires Marlene’s attention. And I help 
out whenever I can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But Marlene, my wife, certainly has a number of added 
responsibilities and she is certainly coping with them very well. 
And as I said, as all members will know, this public life is 
demanding; you’re away from home quite a bit and you’re not 
able to be there for your family members. So I really appreciate 
the support that my family and my wife have given me over the 
last few years of elected life. 
 
I’d like to just at this time, Mr. Speaker, just briefly outline and 
say a few things about the constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. As I had said it has, prior to the last 
election, underwent some fairly significant boundary changes. 
In fact I have been told that 42 per cent of the constituency is 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2004 

new to the constituency. We inherited most of the rural portion 
of the old Melville constituency. 
 
So we have lost towns like Raymore and Wynyard which 
Wynyard was the largest town in the old constituency. But as 
the member from Arm River-Watrous has said, and I’m sure he 
will, he’ll do an excellent job of looking after the residents of 
Wynyard and I have every confidence in his ability, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The constituency now has towns like Balcarres and Ituna and 
Lemberg, Abernethy and Neudorf, and a couple of other smaller 
communities of Duff, Fenwood, and Goodeve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we were a rural constituency prior to the boundary changes 
but we like to boast that we had at least one community over 
1,000 people. Wynyard was over 2,000 people. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, we are truly a rural community. Our largest town is 
under 900 people so if you want to look at a typical rural 
constituency, Last Mountain-Touchwood would be such a 
constituency. 
 
The issues of the residents of Last Mountain-Touchwood are 
the same pretty well as the issues of the people across this 
province. Being a rural constituency, of course agriculture is 
prominent, the challenges in agriculture — BSE, cost of 
production, the CFIP program. 
 
And I have had a number of constituents call and tell me how 
disappointed they are with the Minister of Agriculture’s refusal 
to fully fund the 2002 CFIP program. In fact many of the 
farmers in our constituency, probably 2002 was the only year 
that they ever qualified, Mr. Speaker, and now they’re being 
told that they will only receive 88 per cent of their entitlement, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I should probably just explain a wee bit for those people 
who don’t understand how the program works. In order to 
qualify for a claim under that CFIP program that this 
government really didn’t have any input into — they just 
accepted whatever Ottawa designed, Mr. Speaker, and said, 
well okay I guess we’re going to have to go along with it — in 
order, as I said, in order to qualify for a payout under that 
program, farmers would have to have their income drop by 
some 30 per cent down to at least 70 per cent or lower than their 
long-term average income. And now what we’re hearing from 
this NDP government, the federal government has put up the 
additional funds to pay out their portion of the claims at 100 per 
cent. 
 
But these folks across the way here are saying, well these NDP, 
this NDP government has said, well those rural people, they 
probably won’t ever vote for us again and so, you know, 
money’s a little tight. And we said we put . . . that we’re going 
to put up 70 per cent . . . $70 million to the program. We will or 
are in fact going to spend that, that’s what the minister told us. 
To this point in time the facts haven’t really borne that out, but I 
would hope that they would at least put in their 70 million and 
the rest of it they’re just going to have to do without, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I should tell you at this time that the farmers of this 
province have noticed what this government has done — or 

failed to do, Mr. Speaker. And they will certainly be . . . will 
not forget that, Mr. Speaker. And this government can use all 
the scare tactics they want. The rural people of this province 
know what’s going on and so do the urban people, Mr. Speaker, 
and they won’t be fooled again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Highways, property taxes, and health, of course are major 
concerns of our constituency, Mr. Speaker. And I must say that 
if . . . in the last few months, if I would judge by the number of 
phone calls and inquiries that we’ve had at our constituency 
office, health would top the list of the concerns of the people of 
Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think what I’d like to do is tell you what 
the NDP’s candidate that they had in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood had to say after the November 5 election, 
and I’m quoting from an article in the Fort Qu’Appelle Times. 
The candidate, Mr. Hillier said, Last Mountain’s rural nature is 
going to mean a tough next four years. 
 
And that’s coming from their candidate, Mr. Speaker, after the 
election of an NDP government. I think that, I think that sort of 
a comment, Mr. Speaker, certainly speaks volumes. Even their 
own people don’t have any trust in their ability to deliver on 
their own . . . on their promises and to solve the major problems 
that are facing our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, the agricultural issues are certainly 
prominent issues in my constituency, and I’d already mentioned 
the CFIP problems. 
 
(12:45) 
 
The BSE, it goes without saying. We have a large beef sector in 
the constituency and the impact of the mad cow, the BSE has 
certainly been devastating to some of our farm families, Mr. 
Speaker. And with the recent announcement by the federal 
government, there is a bit of support there. This government 
claims to make . . . that they had some support for ranchers and 
farmers of our province. 
 
They talk about the $55 million that they’ve put into the BSE 
programs in support. All we need to do is look at, at what other 
provinces have done — Alberta. I hate to use the comparison of 
Alberta, but there are times when we just must, Mr. Speaker. 
Alberta’s beef industry is perhaps two or maybe three times, 
two and a half times larger than ours. The Alberta government’s 
support to their industry is in the neighbourhood of 4 and $500 
million. And these people are very proud, Mr. Speaker, that 
they have put 50, a measly $55 million into that industry. 
 
And the reason that they haven’t put any more money into it is 
because they probably don’t have it. And why don’t they have 
it, Mr. Speaker? Because we don’t have a growing economy in 
this province. We don’t have the ability to respond to these 
crisis that come up from time to time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking at the clock and I have quite a 
number of other comments that I’d like to make and I don’t 
think the time would allow me to conclude. So, Mr. Speaker, at 
this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the Deputy 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that the 
House adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. I ask everybody to drive 
safely and to have a good weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:47. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................176 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................176 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................176 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................176 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................176 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................176 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................177 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................177 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................177 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................177 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................177 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................185 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Farmer Receives Malt Barley Award 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................177 
 Partners in Motion 10th Anniversary 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................177 
 Estevan Author Launches First Novel 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................178 
 Fort a la Corne Diamond Discovery 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................178 
 DMB Food Processors 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................178 
 Wascana Lake Excavation Celebration 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................179 
 Recreation and Leisure 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................179 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Public Disclosure of Location of Violent Offender 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................179 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................179 
 Waiting Lists for Radiation Therapy for Cancer 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................180 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................180 
 Health Care Issues Described by Nurses 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................182 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................182 
 Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................182 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................183 
 Government Handling of Current Issues 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................183 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 8 — The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................184 
 Bill No. 9 — The Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................184 
 Bill No. 10 — The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2004/ 

Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi sur l'administration des successions 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................185 
 



 

 Bill No. 11 — The Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training Amendment Act, 2004 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................185 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................185 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................185 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................186 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................188 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................191 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................193 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................197 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................201 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


