















































Hansard: November 26, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 69A  FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2004, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1913 
 November 26, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition this morning regarding SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency), and how the assessment 
management agency funds itself. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to reverse changes 
recently made that require the education sector to 
contribute to the cost of SAMA, as this added burden for 
school boards will ultimately lead to higher property taxes 
for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I present this petition signed by the good folk of 
Moosomin and Wapella. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a similar 
petition signed by residents from the community of Frontier. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to reverse charges 
recently made that require the education sector to 
contribute to the cost of SAMA, as this added burden for 
school boards will ultimately lead to higher property taxes 
for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to reverse changes 
recently made that required the education sector to 
contribute to the cost of SAMA, as this added burden for 
school boards will ultimately lead to higher property taxes 
for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the Stoughton area. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents of Saskatchewan concerned about the SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) scandal, 
and who could blame them, Mr. Speaker. The prayer of their 
petition reads as follows. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to hold an independent judicial 
inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Emerald Park, Warman, Saskatoon, Eston. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to reverse changes 
recently made that require the education sector to 
contribute to the costs of SAMA as this added burden for 
school boards will ultimately lead to higher property taxes 
for Saskatchewan residents. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Hendon, and Clair. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of Saskatchewan who are concerned that, 
with regards to the Boughen Commission, the provincial 
government has chosen to ignore the report and are picking at 
pieces of the recommendations to the detriment of the entire 
report. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of signatures on this petition 
from a number of communities including Zealandia, Rosetown, 
Herschel, Wiseton, and Fiske. And I’m pleased to present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

today to deal with the underfunding of the CAIS (Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization) program by the provincial 
government. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contribute funds to the 
latest BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Dysart, Cupar, Punnichy, and Leross. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today regarding funding 
for the CAIS program. I will read from the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contribute funds to the 
latest BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens of Cupar, 
Southey, and Lipton, and Edenwold. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, have a 
petition regarding the forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people from 
Montmartre, Candiac, and Kendal. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the centralization of 
laundry services in the Sun Country Health District, and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary action to ensure that public consultations are 
done prior to changes to the health care services in Sun 
Country. 
 

And this is signed by citizens of Estevan and Bienfait. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition with citizens concerned about the SAMA requisitions 
for school divisions, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to reverse charges 
recently made that require the education sector to 
contribute to the cost of SAMA as this added burden for 
school boards will ultimately lead to higher property taxes 
for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Humboldt 
and the towns of Muenster, Carmel, and Fulda. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens of the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who are very concerned about the 
deplorable state of Highway 35 south of Weyburn, and the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 

 
And these petitions . . . there’s hundreds of names on these 
petitions from citizens of Saskatchewan, all across Canada and 
the United States. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition to oppose SAMA requisitions for 
school divisions, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government take all necessary action to reverse changes 
recently made that require the education sector to 
contribute to the cost of SAMA as this added burden for 
school boards will ultimately lead to higher property taxes 
for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Admiral, 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

Cadillac, and Shaunavon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
here with citizens that are opposed to forced amalgamation of 
school divisions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan, 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntarily basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston, Hanley, and 
Hawarden. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition from constituents opposed to reduction of health care 
services in the town of Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie health centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
who are opposed to forced amalgamation. And the petitioner 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the good citizens of Holdfast. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present a 
petition regarding the gross underfunding of the CAIS program. 
And it reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the fine folks from 
Maidstone, Lloydminster, Waseca, and Lashburn areas. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
concerned with the forced amalgamation of school divisions 
and the loss of autonomy and deterioration of Saskatchewan 
education for students. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of petitions here. They’re signed 
by citizens from Kerrobert, Kindersley, La Ronge, Saskatoon, 
Luseland, Dodsland, Major, and Coleville, Saskatchewan. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with this government’s 
lack of funding to the CAIS program. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contribute funds to the 
latest BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Kelliher, Leross, and Lemberg. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition calling for public consultations with respect to 
health care services in Sun Country, that’s sessional paper 
667. 

 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 106, 637, 638, 647, and 666. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill 31, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 31 be referred to the 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in the Committee of the Whole of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 31. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 62, The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? 
 
(10:15) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 62 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 
Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 63, The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill 63. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
(No. 2)/Loi de modification législative de 2004 (no 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 63 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure to report that it has considered certain 
estimates and to present its report. I move, seconded by the 
member from Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure now be 
concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Infrastructure and Intergovernmental 
Affairs, the member for Regina Northeast, seconded by the 
member for Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure be now 
concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 74 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: did the Deputy Premier request legal 
advice from the Department of Justice regarding 
documents filed on October 17, 2003 in the SPUDCO 
lawsuit alleging that the Saskatchewan Party committed to 
settle the SPUDCO lawsuit if it became government, by 
lawyers with the firm Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller? If 
so, what was the monetary cost to the Department of 
Justice and how many hours were billed for this legal 
advice? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to members of the House, visitors that we have 
in the west gallery. Mr. Speaker, there’s 18 grade 12 students. 
It’s their social studies class that is here from Riverview 
Collegiate in Moose Jaw. The students are accompanied by 
their teachers, Ms. Delisle Fathers and Mark Pitman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the high school I attended, my daughters 
attended, and it’s also the high school that the Premier of the 
province attended, so it’s a good high school. You can’t find 
better. It’s so, gee . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Anyway, the 
quality of the students at Riverview is extremely high, so I’m 
very pleased that they’re here today to visit. I hope they enjoy 
the proceedings of the House and we’ll get together after for a 
bit of a discussion. I’d like all members to please welcome 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to all my colleagues 
in the Assembly six people who are seated in your gallery. 
These are people who are working hard on a daily basis to 
improve lives and to build a caring and sharing spirit in our 
community. They’re from the United Way of Regina and I’d 
ask that they stand when I introduce them so that members can 
recognize them. 
 
First we have Shelley Smidt, United Way of Regina’s 2004 
cabinet Chair; Sheri Rowley, 2004 loaned representative, who 
comes from SaskTel and is assigned to the provincial account; 
Devin Cherneski, 2004 loaned rep from Sask Crop Insurance; 
we have Joseph Dojack, he’s the labour staff representative to 
Regina United Way; Gail Quinney is the 2004 loaned rep from 
Sask Labour, the Status of Women; and also Deanna Schmidt 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

from cabinet secretariat, on the executive council of the United 
Way committee. I’d ask all members to give them a warm 
welcome to their Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to this Assembly Gordon and 
Gill Churn, who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. Gordon and 
Gill farm in the Lilydale district south of Maidstone. As our 
province prepares to celebrate 100 years, so also in 2005 Churn 
farms will celebrate its 100th year as a third-generation family 
farm. I would ask that we all welcome Gord and Gill Churn to 
their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a guest in your gallery who has travelled the furthest 
distance to observe our proceedings today. She’s literally come 
from the other side of the world. 
 
Her name is Chlorie Bottrell and she is a Rotary exchange 
student who comes from a small community near Melbourne, 
Australia. If she’d stand we’d recognize that she is also near the 
end of her stay in Canada, judging by the number of buttons and 
pins that she’s collected here. 
 
Chlorie will be staying here in Saskatchewan — she’s hosted by 
the Moose Jaw Rotary Club — until she returns in January to 
her home community where she’ll finish her grade 12 and make 
her future back home. 
 
While here, she’s acquired a number of characteristics 
consistent with Saskatchewan citizenship. She’s attended the 
annual classic between the Huskies and the Rams at Taylor 
Field here, and so she thinks she knows who the good guys are 
in the national final tomorrow. 
 
And she also tells me that she’s a Saskatchewan girl now 
because she was at Agribition earlier this week and she got 
herself one of those good, solid belt buckles. So she’s taking 
that home with her. 
 
I ask all hon. members to join in expressing a warm welcome to 
Chlorie Bottrell who is here visiting from Melbourne, Australia. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce through you to all members of the House someone 
who is no stranger to this House, the former member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood who is seated behind the bar on the 
government side, Mr. Dale Flavel. It’s certainly nice to see him 

here visiting and I certainly hope he is enjoying his retirement. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, to you, through you and to all 
members of the Assembly I’m going to take this proud moment 
as a mother to introduce to you two very special constituents of 
the constituency of Regina Walsh Acres. Perhaps they can stand 
up so we can actually see them over the railing. We have 
seven-year-old Sheridan Morin — and no, we’re not related but 
isn’t that a coincidence — and my daughter, Morgan Morin. 
And I’d like to welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of this Hon. 
Assembly, a gentleman seated in the east gallery, Mr. Rod 
Haugerud, mayor of Craik. Mr. Haugerud is a very good mayor 
and an innovative mayor and he’s doing great things in the 
community of Craik. 
 
And Mr. Haugerud was a Liberal candidate in the last election, 
and I see he’s sitting with another notable Liberal candidate. I 
hope that all members of the Assembly will welcome Mr. 
Haugerud today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
just want to, for the public record, recognize Jeanette Shanks in 
your gallery. Jeanette is actually related to a large family in my 
constituency, the Norton family, and they’re a very gifted, 
athletic family. They’re well known for their hockey prowess 
and certainly some of the many, many accomplishments they’ve 
also made in other sectors. 
 
But I want it on the public record that she challenged me to a 
walleyball game several days ago, Mr. Speaker, and not that I 
was afraid of her, but I had a hockey game to play, because I 
want to keep up with the Nortons in the North. So I want it on 
the public record to recognize her for her walleyball skills and 
to say that I’ll be accepting her challenge next week. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of government members in the House, I too 
want to extend a very warm welcome to Rod Haugerud, who 
has really provided outstanding leadership in the community of 
Craik. I know that many members on this side of the House 
have had an opportunity to visit the multi-purpose facility that 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

he has built there. And under his leadership and the leadership 
of the citizens of Craik, Mr. Speaker, I think today we’ve got 
one of the most innovative buildings anywhere in 
Saskatchewan, and one of the greenest buildings in the province 
and I would say in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I know members will want to add their voice to those of the 
official opposition in welcoming Rod here and thanking him for 
the excellent leadership that he has provided. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Suellen Beatty Presented with Meritorious Service Medal 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to recognize the achievements of a Saskatoon Silver 
Springs constituent, Suellen Beatty. Today Governor General 
Adrienne Clarkson is presenting Suellen Beatty with the 
Meritorious Service Medal. 
 
As the CEO (chief executive officer) of Sherbrooke Community 
Centre in Saskatoon, Ms. Beatty has made a significant 
contribution to the development of innovative long-term care. 
The award was created in 1991 and recognizes a deed or 
activity performed in an outstanding and professional manner or 
of an uncommonly high standard that brings considerable 
benefit or great honour to Canada. 
 
Suellen was instrumental in developing the Sherbrooke village 
model. The village arrangement allows 10 residents to live 
together in houses which are attached to the rest of the facility 
by an internal street. The houses take on the personalities of 
those who live there and honour their different cultures and 
traditions. 
 
The village concept was born out of answers to the question: if 
you had to live in long-term care, what would you want it to be 
like? The village model allows the person the comforts of home 
with the benefits of community and compassionate long-term 
care. Families, residents, and staff are very happy with the new 
method of providing care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues in the Assembly to join me 
in congratulating Suellen Beatty on receiving the Meritorious 
Service Medal at Rideau Hall in Ottawa today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

2004 United Way Campaign 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since 1935, the 
United Way in one form or another has been a concerned, active 
participant in the growth and development of the city of Regina. 
The goal of the United Way is clearly stated — to improve lives 
and build community by engaging individuals and mobilizing 

collective action. Mr. Speaker, most of us know the United Way 
best through the annual fundraising campaign. In their 65-year 
history in Regina, the United Way has raised over $45 million 
to help improve the quality of life for the people of this city. 
 
But the United Way is much more than a fundraising 
organization, Mr. Speaker. As a trusted member of the Regina 
community, one that is tightly woven into the very fabric of our 
city, the United Way is able to bring diverse individuals and 
organizations to the community table providing an opportunity 
to build consensus on social issues and helping to influence the 
shape of our community, it will take into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, United Way can build community because it’s 
very much of the community. It is run by a volunteer board of 
directors assisted by a small staff and accomplishes all that it 
does thanks to the generous efforts of literally thousands of 
volunteers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
acknowledging United Way CEO Vic Huard; Chair of this 
year’s campaign, Shelley Smidt; Dan McMurty, Chair of the 
United Way Board of Directors; and all the volunteers, 
individuals, and organizations that make up the United Way, 
who work together to make Regina a healthier and stronger 
community. We thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Health Care 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Health 
minister stood in this Assembly with wild accusations against 
the Saskatchewan Party. I can’t believe that the minister 
accused us of wanting to privatize health care services because 
we’ve been pointing out the problems in our health care system 
and asking him to fix them. 
 
We have stated publicly that we support publicly funded, 
publicly administered health care. And I will say it again for the 
record of this Assembly. The Saskatchewan Party supports 
publicly funded, publicly administered health care. 
 
(10:30) 
 
The real issue here is that this minister does not have the 
political will to address the problems in health care. And the 
people are suffering on waiting lists and some even dying 
because of the long waits. As Yvette Switzer said yesterday, 
Saskatchewan is the birthplace of medicare — shame on this 
government for letting the system erode so badly over the last 
decade. In order to fix a problem, you have to admit that there is 
one and you have to listen to what people who are users of the 
system are telling you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time that this Health minister gets his head out 
of the sand, starts listening to the concerns of Saskatchewan 
people. And if he’s not prepared to do that, then he should 
resign and let someone else take over that portfolio that actually 
cares about the people it serves. 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Souls Harbour Mission 15th Anniversary 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, last Sunday I had the pleasure of 
attending and participating in the 15th anniversary celebrations 
for Souls Harbour Mission here in Regina. Souls Harbour is 
aptly named because staff and volunteers of the mission work 
with many partners and volunteers to provide safe haven for the 
members of our community in need. Not a day goes by, Mr. 
Speaker, where Souls Harbour doesn’t reach out to someone 
with kindness, with a good, nutritious meal, with warm clothes, 
or with a little help for finding their way in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as recounted at the celebration by her 
daughter-in-law, Bonnie, Gerri Carroll opened the Souls 
Harbour Mission in 1990 with a prayer, a coffee pot, and a few 
wooden milk crates for chairs. What started out with Gerri 
Carroll’s desire just to feed the people, 15 years later, along 
with its kids’ programs, employment programs, and other 
services, the mission serves 70,000 meals a year, and 
sandwiches on Sunday. 
 
In his remarks at the event, Donovan Carroll, Gerri’s son, cited 
the inspiration that the mission draws, from the challenge of St. 
Francis of Assisi — preach the gospel always, and when 
necessary, use words . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I 
thank the members opposite for their approval. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the actions of the Carrolls and the volunteers of 
Souls Harbour have told a powerful story and make a powerful 
challenge to anyone who believes that one person can’t make a 
difference. 
 
I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking Gerri Carroll and 
everyone involved in the Souls Harbour Mission for 15 years of 
exemplary and inspirational service on behalf of the people of 
Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Highway 35 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Highway 35 is what greets visitors from the United States as 
they cross the border at the Port of Oungre, south of Weyburn. 
Highway 35 used to be a highly used route for tourists. That is 
before the NDP (New Democratic Party) government allowed it 
to deteriorate into an unsafe condition. The once vital tourist 
route is no more. The customs officer at the Port of Oungre told 
me this summer that people actually ventured down the road 
only to turn back. Many state that they will never travel this 
highway again. 
 
The United States is a dominant market for Saskatchewan 
exports — 57 per cent of Saskatchewan exports flow to the 
United States and 47 per cent of these exports are by truck. Mr. 

Speaker, Highway 35 is a vital link to this flow of goods. But, 
Mr. Speaker, business and local people have been forced to use 
alternate routes because they refuse to subject their vehicles to 
the pounding they take from this highway. And even more 
serious, is the danger this road poses. Sadly the people who live 
adjacent to Highway 35 have no choice but to use this unsafe 
highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the NDP’s answer to this unsafe, 
deplorable highway? They turned it back to gravel. From the 
southern part of the province, where millions of dollars in oil 
revenue flow into the government coffers, we now have a 
gravel road as the entrance point into the United States. This is 
not acceptable. 
 
Citizens in the area have given me petitions signed by hundreds 
of people from Canada and the United States expressing their 
disgust with the state of Highway 35. Highway 35, Mr. 
Speaker, is a major north-south route. The NDP government 
should treat it accordingly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Saskatoon Youth Action Now Holds Youth Forum 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Youth Action Now is a multicultural project unique to 
Saskatchewan. It’s a youth-driven project aimed at the 
province’s young people in multicultural activities. Sponsored 
by the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, Saskatchewan Provincial 
Council, and the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan, Youth 
Action Now provides opportunities for Saskatchewan’s young 
people to gain valuable skills and experience. And most of all, 
Mr. Speaker, it fosters cross-cultural understanding and helps 
promote a greater sense of community. 
 
Last weekend Youth Action Now held a Saskatoon youth forum 
at Bedford Road Collegiate in my constituency of Saskatoon 
Centre. Participants from Bedford Road, Walter Murray 
Collegiate, Joe Duquette High School, Mount Royal Collegiate, 
L’École canadienne-française, and St. Joseph High School 
attended three workshops designed to meet specific program 
objectives. These objectives are focused on increasing 
multicultural awareness on a local as well as a global level, and 
highlighting opportunities that are open to young people 
through involvement in cultural activities. 
 
Participants also took part in a multicultural showcase featuring 
First Nation dancer, Lorin Gardypie, the Saskatoon Celtic 
Dance Association, the Afro-Caribbean Cultural Association, 
and the Saskatoon Fencing Club. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Youth Action Now project is an important 
initiative, both in terms of building healthy individuals and 
healthy communities. I ask my colleagues to join me in wishing 
the Youth Action Now project every success in promoting 
multicultural awareness and understanding. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1921 

Saskatchewan Party Dinner in Calgary 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night in 
Calgary, the Saskatchewan Party held its leadership dinner, the 
largest ever leadership dinner that the Saskatchewan Party has 
ever held outside of Saskatchewan — largest and growing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This dinner was organized by expats of Saskatchewan and was 
supported by many of the 280,000 Saskatchewanians in Calgary 
and, Mr. Speaker, the wannabe Saskatchewanians. Our leader, 
the member from Swift Current, gave an excellent speech 
which generated enthusiasm and a desire, Mr. Speaker, to return 
to Saskatchewan and continue to build the dream that was 
started 100 years ago but which has been put into abeyance by 
the government opposite for the last 60 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are looking forward to an opportunity 
to return to Saskatchewan when the environment here is 
welcoming of people who have the dreams and aspirations to 
build this province. Many of the people in attendance, Mr. 
Speaker, last night were former and current political people, 
many from both provincial politics in Saskatchewan and 
Alberta and from federal politics. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there 
was one notable person there — a former NDP MLA (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly), former NDP deputy minister, 
Dwain Lingenfelter. 
 
Congratulations to the Saskatchewan Party for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Before we 
proceed with question period, I wish to address a point of order 
from Thursday’s question period. 
 
Having reviewed Hansard, I confirm that some remarks made 
by the MLA for Saskatoon Southeast were out of order. 
Specifically on page 1911 of Hansard, left-hand column, the 
MLA for Saskatoon Southeast made remarks implying 
corruption on the part of another member. 
 
All members are to be considered as honourable. Remarks 
which reflect negatively on the character of another member are 
unparliamentary. Accordingly I do now request the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast to withdraw the unparliamentary 
remark referred to and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the remark is withdrawn and I 
apologize to the Speaker and to all members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Changes to Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 
people in the province would agree that right now at this point 
in our history, now more than ever, we need a government, Mr. 
Speaker, with a long-term vision and plan to build an 
enterprising and entrepreneurial economy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what we need. That’s what we need. 
 
What do we have instead, Mr. Speaker? We have a government 
that is going to introduce to Saskatchewan’s labour legislation 
something that they call additional hours of work, Mr. Speaker, 
something that we like to call government-directed hours. 
They’re going to proclaim this part of an Act that is 10 years 
old that would make us unique on the continent, Mr. Speaker, 
that would absolutely devastate our current business community 
and our chance to attract more investment from outside of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Question to the Premier is simple: will he stand in his place 
today and commit that his government will not only refuse to 
proclaim this regulation for government-directed hours, but 
they’ll take it off the books completely? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, when we talk about young 
people finding jobs in this province, and we need to look at 
other ways of accommodating that and improving the quality of 
jobs within this province, Mr. Speaker, I will not apologize for 
opening the discussion and engaging the people of this province 
in how do we achieve this. Mr. Speaker, the additional hours 
piece is part of that puzzle and I will not apologize and I will 
not commit to not doing anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have ideas here and if the Leader of the 
Opposition is afraid of being first in anything, Mr. Speaker, 
where would this province be? We would have no medicare, we 
would not have drive-throughs at fast-food restaurants, we 
wouldn’t have ATMs (automated teller machine), Mr. Speaker, 
and we would not have occupational health and safety laws. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, did I hear that right — that the 
minister is now saying that were it not for the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) there wouldn’t be 
drive-through restaurants in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, bring on the election. I mean I can’t 
believe that, Mr. Speaker. Here is the . . . here is an opportunity 
though for this NDP government to stand up and say without 
any equivocation that they reject this notion of 
government-directed hours, that not only will they, Mr. 
Speaker, refuse those who are urging they be implemented and 
proclaimed. 
 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

A simple question to the minister: will she stand up now and 
tell Saskatchewan businessmen and women who create jobs for 
young people, for part-timers, that they will wipe this provision 
off the books of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this government is not 
afraid to broach unique and progressive ideas that will improve 
working conditions in this province. Mr. Speaker, when the 
Leader of the Opposition has to go to Alberta for money and 
ideas, well that’s his problem. But the people of this province 
will continue to work on innovative issues and do good work on 
the problems that affect this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we were in Alberta last night. 
We were meeting with people from this province who are 
interested in growing the economy of Saskatchewan. They’re 
interested in investing in the province. And I noted something 
when we were there — we were only there for a short time — 
but notwithstanding the fact, Mr. Speaker, that they have never 
had a CCF government in Alberta, they had drive-through 
restaurants, unbelievably. They had them. They were all over 
the city of Calgary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this provision, this provision if it’s 
proclaimed, would make us unique in North America; she’s 
right about that. Sometimes it’s important not to be first if that 
first means that it will hurt our ability to attract new investment, 
if that first means it will devastate the employers of this 
province and therefore prevent them from hiring the people that 
need part-time work in Saskatchewan. If firsts do that, we just 
ought not to do them. And that’s the question to the Premier, 
since the minister refuses to answer the question, as the 
province would like. 
 
Would the Premier just stand up and say that this is nonsense, 
this notion of government-directed hours, and that he’ll wipe it 
off the books of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 
have never been afraid of being first at anything. And here we 
have the Leader of the Opposition who comes from one of the 
first health districts that was ever established, long before 
medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the people of Annaheim, Saskatchewan had 
been afraid of taking a chance and not being first, there 
wouldn’t be the industry and development there is in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province will continue to look at progressive 
ideas that will improve this province for the opportunities of 
young people and working people. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have a chance; we have an 
opportunity. If we get the fundamentals right in Saskatchewan, 
if we get a government that understands that we need to fix the 
fundamentals in our economy, we have a chance not just to, as 
the Premier says, be in and out of equalization, be needing 
welfare, be needing assistance from time to time. The 
Saskatchewan Party believes if we get those fundamentals right 
with that kind of vision, we can be a permanent member of the 
have provinces. We will be, Mr. Speaker. The Premier doesn’t 
agree. He thinks we’ll always need assistance and maybe in part 
he thinks that because he knows what his government is 
planning. Planning to, Mr. Speaker, kill investment in 
Saskatchewan and hurt our ability to create new jobs with 
things like government-directed hours. 
 
(10:45) 
 
I ask him, Mr. Speaker, to stand in his place now and send the 
right signal to those who will create jobs in Saskatchewan. Tell 
the people of the province that this provision will be wiped 
from the books of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to talk about long-term planning for the 
province and the people of Saskatchewan. It’s long-term 
planning that results in the kind of headlines we’re seeing in the 
national papers today. Right here in the National Post, national 
paper of Canada, a headline that says “Welcome the new ‘have’ 
province.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this province did not 
become a have province and it will not remain a have province 
by destroying the rights of working people. It did not become a 
have province and will stay a have province by giveaways, tax 
giveaways to friends. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it did not 
become a have province by going off to the city of Calgary and 
Alberta for your ideas. It became a have province by the work 
and the ideas, the vision and the planning of Saskatchewan 
people who believe in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Oh, Mr. Speaker, how much really does this 
Premier believe in his province? When he came back after 
having his equalization concerns addressed sitting on more oil 
and gas revenue than he budgeted for, Mr. Speaker, the media 
asked him what he thought about the future of Saskatchewan, 
whether or not we could be a permanent member of the have 
province club. Do you know what he said, Mr. Speaker, and this 
is a, quote, he said Saskatchewan will always be, quote, “in and 
out of equalization.” And that’s his view of the province, Mr. 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

Speaker. That we’ll always need assistance, that we’ll always 
need welfare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The article he quotes today has an interesting point, Mr. 
Speaker. The article highlights that there is a lot of work to do 
to get us to be permanent members of that club and I quote, it 
says: 
 

Taxes are higher there, as one might expect in a socialist 
province . . . . 
 
Yet the brain drain flows east to west in this part of the 
Prairies, a flight of professionals adding to an Alberta 
workforce which is already the youngest (and) richest and 
healthiest in the country. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, answer this question: will he send 
the right signal to those who create jobs? Will he scrap this 
government-directed hours provision, wipe it from the books of 
the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder last evening when 
the Leader of the Opposition was in Calgary, Alberta getting 
some policy ideas and consulting with his former colleagues 
from the Devine government, I wonder if he bothered to note, 
as this National Post article does today that, quote: 
 

Saskatchewan is now the only have province that doesn’t 
charge health . . . (care) premiums. 
 

I wonder if he knows that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we did not become a have 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. I urge . . . Order, please. I urge members to 
continue with the debate but to stop the yelling match. Order, 
please. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you this Premier 
and this government doesn’t take the view that’s expressed by 
the Leader of the Opposition in the Leader-Post in September 
of this year when the Leader of the Opposition said, get this, 
Mr. Speaker, what the Leader of the Opposition said. He said, 
“We’ve shipped out our best and brightest people.” 
 
That’s what he thinks. That’s what he thinks of the young 
people who are attending Riverview Collegiate in Moose Jaw 
today, who are attending the University of Regina, the 
University of Saskatoon. He says we’ve shipped out our 
brightest and our best. That’s his view. I guess that’s why he 
goes to Calgary for his ideas, to sit down with his former 
colleagues in the Devine government for ideas. Mr. Speaker, we 
build from the people of Saskatchewan, from the brightest and 
the best in the world who are right here in Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Day of Recognition for the Right Honourable 
John George Diefenbaker 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s taken 
the opportunity to announce and declare Tommy Douglas day 
in Saskatchewan, and while that’s all well and good, that still 
leaves one giant in the history of Saskatchewan politics 
officially unrecognized. I’m speaking of the man who served as 
prime minister of this country from 1957 to 1963, the Right 
Honourable John George Diefenbaker. Later today, Mr. 
Speaker, I will introduce a Bill calling for Diefenbaker day. My 
question to the Premier is: will you support this Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, many of us, 
many of us . . . Mr. Speaker, many of us grew up when John 
Diefenbaker represented the people of Prince Albert, when Mr. 
John George Diefenbaker served the nation of Canada as our 
prime minister, when Mr. John George Diefenbaker led the 
opposition in Ottawa. We are proud of this native son of 
Saskatchewan, of Borden and Wakaw, of Prince Albert. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this government, this Premier will be very 
supportive, very supportive of the motion or the Act or the idea 
brought forward by the opposition that we should celebrate in 
Saskatchewan a John George Diefenbaker day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I agree. I’m glad the 
Premier agrees with me, and I believe the centennial year, the 
100th year celebration, is a perfect year to have a John George 
Diefenbaker day on September 18, 2005. My question, Mr. 
Speaker: will the Premier call on his government to pass this 
Bill in the current session of this legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to be absolutely clear, it 
does not require a Bill. It does not require an Act of the 
legislature, we have a variety of ways. I have now designated a 
day in the year that we will name as the T.C. Douglas day. A 
day can be designated clearly without an Act of the legislature, 
unless the member is requesting that we create a statutory 
holiday. I don’t believe he’s doing that. If it were to be a 
statutory holiday, of course, we would have an Act of the 
legislature. 
 
While we are speaking, of course, of great sons and daughters 
of the province of Saskatchewan, I encourage everyone to be 
dialing CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) as soon as 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

question period is over to vote for the greatest Canadian, 
Thomas Clement Douglas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
Litigation 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, once again the NDP government 
gets caught abusing power, abusing the public trust. But the 
Premier sloughs it off and no one takes responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, someone made these decisions. Someone in the 
NDP decided to make these false allegations in court. Just like 
someone decided to conceal the Con-Force agreement for six 
years. Just like someone in the NDP decided to conceal the fact 
the NDP was selling GMO (genetically modified organism) 
potatoes. Just like someone made the decisions that cost 
taxpayers $35 million. Yet no one over there has ever taken 
responsibility. Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly why we need a public 
inquiry so, Mr. Speaker, then we will find out who is 
responsible. Mr. Speaker, why won’t the Premier hold a public 
inquiry? What is he hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear 
as I have before in the House, but to repeat it again. We have 
had a thorough airing of all matters with respect to SaskWater’s 
involvement in SPUDCO. And, Mr. Speaker, we have had the 
Provincial Auditor in the spring of 2000, examine this matter in 
depth, Mr. Speaker, and ascertain, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government acted lawfully with respect to the investments that 
it made, which was, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition’s number one concern with respect to this matter, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have had a thorough review of this matter by the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and they have closed the file 
on this matter, Mr. Speaker. We have had a thorough 
examination of this matter in this Assembly, and I have 
answered the questions of the members of the opposition with 
specificity, Mr. Speaker. And there have been many other 
opportunities to air this issue, and there is no need for an 
inquiry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about 
a thorough airing. Mr. Speaker, there are things that the Premier 
is hiding. He refuses to tell us. We have asked questions 
through the freedom of . . . (inaudible) . . . He refuses to tell us 
how many hours their NDP law firm put in on this case. He has 
refused to tell us what the hourly rate of this firm was, billing 
the government. 

We have asked this in a written question. The government 
refused to answer. We asked this in a freedom of information 
request, Mr. Speaker. The government refused to answer, 
claiming solicitor-client privilege. Mr. Speaker, over the past 
two years alone Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller, the firm, has 
billed taxpayers $680,000 on the SPUDCO case. And in the 
end, that firm lost 8 million more taxpayer dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the NDP tell us how many hours that 
firm billed on this case? Mr. Speaker, what are they hiding? If 
the minister wants to come clean, let him give us an answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, first of all we have provided members opposite 
with detailed information on all the legal expenditures 
associated with SPUDCO, and we have provided an itemized 
breakdown of the costs incurred, Mr. Speaker, both with respect 
to Olive Waller law firm and also with respect to all the other 
expert witnesses, Mr. Speaker, on this matter. And members 
opposite know they have that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, members opposite have now asked more 
than 300 questions on SPUDCO in this Assembly, written 
questions. And we have provided the answers, Mr. Speaker. We 
have thoroughly answered the questions to the very best of our 
ability, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the minister stands up and out of 
one side of his mouth says, I’ve given you complete answers, 
but yet in writing, there’s the refusal to give the answers. Mr. 
Speaker, if you do the math, Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller 
was billing the taxpayer over $1,500 a day every day for the 
past two years on this case. That’s a huge amount of taxpayers’ 
money, so we just want to know how much was the NDP’s law 
firm billing the taxpayer; how many hours did they bill on this 
case; and what was the hourly rate? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said he would answer all the 
opposition’s questions about SPUDCO. Why won’t he answer 
this question, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind 
members opposite, because they like to criticize the Olive 
Waller law firm, and, Mr. Speaker, I tell you, the government 
and the taxpayers of this province were being sued for $102 
million, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, thanks to the work of 
government and thanks to the representation of Olive Waller, 
Mr. Speaker — thanks to that work, Mr. Speaker — the final 
settlement was $7.9 million, Mr. Speaker, less than 8 per cent of 
what we were being sued for, Mr. Speaker. And I think Olive 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

Waller represented us well. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get into a debate 
with the member opposite over whether we got value for those 
legal fees or not. That’s a separate issue for another day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I recognize the member 
for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, another day we’ll have that 
debate. Today we’re talking about the legal bills. Mr. Speaker, 
taxpayers deserve answers. The NDP’s supposed crack legal 
team questioned the plaintiffs for 57 hours, nearly 300 . . . for 
57 days, nearly 300 hours of questioning. They asked them over 
50,000 questions. Mr. Speaker, in the history of this province 
there has never been such a lawsuit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the end the government lost. Mr. Speaker, I 
have never heard of such a case. It really seems that the NDP 
was using its unlimited access to taxpayers’ money to try and 
grind and pound these producers into submission. It didn’t work 
and the taxpayers ended up paying an $8 million settlement, 
Mr. Speaker, and on top of that a $1.8 million legal bill. 
 
Why won’t the Premier answer this question? What was the 
hourly rate the NDP lawyers were billing the taxpayers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that there were significant 
amounts of money spent on this case by both sides, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The plaintiffs in the case, Mr. Speaker, spent $3.2 million on 
their legal fees, Mr. Speaker. They spent $3.2 million on their 
legal fees. And, Mr. Speaker, I make no apology at all on behalf 
of government, that taxpayers were being sued for $102 
million; we decided to mount a vigorous defence, Mr. Speaker. 
We spent $1.8 million in legal fees, Mr. Speaker, and the final 
settlement, Mr. Speaker, was less, Mr. Speaker, than 8 per cent 
of the amount that the plaintiffs were seeking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, for the past two years this NDP 
law firm has billed the taxpayers over $1,500 a day. And what 
did they do to earn this money? They stalled the case past the 
election. They launched two ridiculous counterclaims, both of 
which were thrown out by the judge. 
 
One of those counterclaims contained false allegations against 

the Saskatchewan Party. The other contained false allegations 
against the plaintiffs and their accountants. They dragged this 
case out for four years. They asked the plaintiffs over 50,000 
questions and in the end they lost, because the NDP was dead 
wrong about SPUDCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is hiding behind solicitor-client privilege. 
Well in this case the client is the taxpayer, and the client 
deserves a complete accounting of where their money went. Mr. 
Speaker, why is the Premier hiding this information from the 
taxpayers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, and 
I’ll be pleased to table these documents again after the debate in 
question period today. But taxpayers have received a very, very 
detailed breakdown of how that $1.8 million was spent, Mr. 
Speaker, some two pages of detail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think that members opposite should be 
reminded of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we have now as a result 
of the investment the government made, yes money was lost 
and we apologized to the taxpayers of the province for this. But 
we have in the Lake Diefenbaker area today, seven potato 
storage sheds, Mr. Speaker, that have facilitated an expansion in 
potato acreage of more than 5,000 acres. Value-added, Mr. 
Speaker, of $3,000 per acre, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
those sheds are full, Mr. Speaker, and they build on the 
investment that was made in irrigation and the investment that 
was made in the John George Diefenbaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if this kind of litigation is what 
the NDP use to kick off new business initiatives in this 
province. I wish they’d go to another province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in written question no. 785 of 
this session, we asked the government about any outstanding 
lawsuits related to SPUDCO. The government listed three 
lawsuits. Mr. Speaker, one of those is an action against former 
NDP cabinet minister, Carol Teichrob. The answer notes that 
she is being sued personally and not as a member of 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is: who is paying the 
legal bills on this case? And if it is the government, how much 
has this cost to date, and who is the law firm that is defending 
that action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the lawsuit 
in question, I will get back to the member with more details. 
But to the best of my knowledge at this point in time, I’m not 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

aware, Mr. Speaker, that there has been a payment by 
government with respect to the lawsuit, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
question that I will be examining in more detail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I promise, first of all, to get back to the member with additional 
information. And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I will have to weigh 
the matter of whether or not government is involved in any way 
in this lawsuit, Mr. Speaker. I will examine that and get back to 
the member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Lakeview on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member speak to his point of order? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, in question 
period, the member for Melfort made these comments: 
 

Mr. Speaker, for three years Jim Williamson’s family 
wrote this government repeatedly begging for somebody 
to be done, somebody to listen. They didn’t get a response, 
Mr. Speaker — not a letter, not a phone call, nothing. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the first contact was made on October 11. The 
response by letter went back on October 18, 2001. A person in 
the health system contacted, as a result of that contact, on 
October 19 and has been in contact with his family ever since. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the member opposite apologize to 
the House for misleading the House and also . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The point that the member has 
raised cannot be regarded as a point of order. It is a point of 
debate. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 

SaskTel International Awarded Contract in Mozambique 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure today to announce an 
important achievement in the impressive history of SaskTel 
International. The Mozambique Telecommunications Company 
has awarded SaskTel International a contract worth $6.2 million 
to complete a rural network infrastructure project in Tete, a 
northern province in Mozambique. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, this is SaskTel 
International’s 11th contract in Africa, and with this being the 
first contract in Mozambique, SaskTel International is now 
strongly positioned for any future business the region has to 
offer. 

Over the past 11 years, SaskTel International has completed 10 
stand-alone projects to improve communications in east Africa 
totalling more than $58 million in contracts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today’s announcement is another reminder that SaskTel 
International is about much more than just investments. Since 
1986, SaskTel International has assisted in generating, Mr. 
Speaker, $476 million in revenue — 476 million in revenue — 
from its three lines of business: software solutions, project 
management, and investments. Mr. Speaker, that’s a net income 
— a net income — of $116 million that would not otherwise 
have entered the province of Saskatchewan’s economy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
SaskTel International, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel International’s 
ability to deliver world class network consulting and project 
management services across the globe continues to bring vital 
revenue back home to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, projects like the one I’m announcing today 
demonstrate that Saskatchewan is a technology leader. Our 
people and their skills are in demand around the world. Over 
the next 14 months, seven SaskTel International employees will 
work on site in Mozambique to complete this network 
infrastructure project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel International provides a good return for 
the people of Saskatchewan, posting a profit for the 13th 
consecutive year — a profit for the 13th consecutive year. I 
congratulate SaskTel International on this new contract and on 
its continued success in selling Saskatchewan know-how to the 
rest of the world. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was listening with 
some interest as the minister gave his ministerial statement 
concerning new investment by SaskTel International. As he 
indicated . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Contract. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I’m sorry. Contract. I’ll rephrase my language, 
Mr. Speaker. The Mozambique Telecommunications Company 
has awarded SaskTel International a contract worth $6.2 million 
to complete a rural network infrastructure project in a northern 
province in Mozambique. 
 
Now if I heard the minister correct, this is SaskTel’s 11th 
contract in Africa, with this being the first one in the country of 
Mozambique. And there had been quite a number of projects 
done in east Africa to improve communications. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to argue with SaskTel International 
providing that type of service to the people of Africa. There is a 
considerable need for telecommunications capability in Africa, 
and we would laud the intent and the purpose and the goal of 
this particular effort by SaskTel International. 
 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

However, Mr. Speaker, it does raise considerable concern 
among the people of Saskatchewan when they hear of SaskTel 
International moving overseas, while there are many, many 
areas of this province that still do not have cell coverage. There 
are many other areas of this province that have inadequate cell 
coverage. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, if you’re driving west on 
the No. 1 Highway, even though that is the primary 
transportation route in this province, there are a number of 
blackout points or blank points in cell coverage between 
Caronport and Swift Current. So we can’t even conduct 
consistent and continuous telephone conversations over 
Saskatchewan’s cellular network without interruption. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we think that there is plenty of opportunity for SaskTel 
to improve its performance right here in the province, as well as 
its work internationally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister in his ministerial statement indicated 
that this is a reminder, this particular announcement is a 
reminder that SaskTel International is much more than just 
investments. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s true. Much of SaskTel 
International’s story is about investment losses. And while 
SaskTel International might have generated a fair dollar in 
revenue and profit that have come back to this province, what 
the minister has not said in his statement today is how much 
more we might have had without the vast number of dollars lost 
in these investments in North America and around the world. 
 
And just so that, just so that the minister doesn’t forget, I’d like 
to recite some of the investments that have been made on behalf 
of SaskTel, that have ended up costing the taxpayers of this 
province a considerable amount of money. 
 
There’s an investment in Persona Inc., which is a money-losing 
cable company based in Newfoundland, which does provide 
services here in Saskatchewan but hasn’t generated any profit 
for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan); 
Retx.com, an Atlanta-based company, in which at least $26 
million was lost recently; Tappedinto.com, a Nashville-based 
company where we saw losses of $2.4 million; Clickabid.com, 
a failed Internet auction business, cost the taxpayers in excess 
of $2 million; Soft Tracks Enterprises, a wireless electronic 
payment company with losses accumulating to the people of the 
province to the amount of $2.2 million. And we’ve got 
Navigata based in British Columbia, a telecom that has cost 
taxpayers oh, probably in excess in of 25 or $26 million to date, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So while we understand that these investments have been 
horrendous on the record of the government, we do think that 
SaskTel International, as a consulting player, is doing the right 
thing in Africa, and we applaud this type of work. If they would 
just stick to consulting and less investing, we’d all be better off. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 203 — The Recognition of John George 
Diefenbaker Day Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
203, An Act to Recognize the Contributions of John George 
Diefenbaker be introduced and read a first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that Bill 203, The Recognition of John George 
Diefenbaker Day Act be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table a response to written question no. 834. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 834 has been submitted. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today on behalf of the government and convert for debates 
returnable questions 835 and 836. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 835, 836 have been converted to 
orders for return (debatable). I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today to table a response to written question no. 837. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 837 has been submitted. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today to convert for debates returnable questions 835 through 
853 inclusive. 
 
(11:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 835 to 853 inclusive have been 
converted to orders for return (debatable). I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

today to answer on behalf of the government written questions 
854 through 857 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 854, 855, 856, and 857 have 
been submitted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure that I enter into this 75-minute debate. Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of my remarks this morning, I will be moving the 
following motion. And the motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly acknowledges the hardships that 
Saskatchewan producers have faced over the last few years 
with drought, BSE, grasshoppers, and early frost, and that 
in order to prove its commitment to rural Saskatchewan 
for agricultural support, this Assembly calls upon the 
government to fully fund the Canadian income 
stabilization program for 2003 and to continue to lobby the 
federal government for fair and equitable funding formulas 
for agricultural programs. 

 
And Mr. Speaker, when I move that motion at the end of my 
remarks, they will be seconded by the member from Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CAIS program, Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization program is available to all agricultural producers 
regardless of the type of farming they carry on or the type of 
commodities they produce. Participants in the CAIS program 
select a particular level of protection for their operation, based 
on previous reference history of their farm, and that in turn, Mr. 
Speaker, is based on an average of the five previous years with 
the best and worst years eliminated. 
 
Participants in the program place the necessary deposit to 
secure the selected protection level which they can choose, and 
ranges from 70 to 92 per cent of their established reference 
margin. Requirement of the deposit raises some current 
concerns that some producers may not be able to afford to enter 
the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, producers are under extreme duress these days, 
and the program deposit requirement is a major concern. 
Program payments come from this deposit and government 
contributions. Thus the government states and contends that the 
deposit is not a premium because the deposit still belongs to the 
producer. Fair enough — call it what you like, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t think producers care; that’s not the point. 
 
The point is that producers must come up with this money, this 
cash money up front to participate in the program, and many of 
them are just unable to do so. It’s unusual and in fact precedent 
setting for producers to be asked to make a cash payment to 
enter into a federal-provincial, cost-shared agricultural program, 
and this provision of the program must be changed. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that while this government fights 
hard — and we support them in this — to change the funding 

formula, we haven’t heard anything from them about the 
prepayment provisions from producers. It seems, Mr. Speaker, 
that when it comes to making payments that may impact upon 
their budget, they’re fast to come to the debate. But when issues 
are discussed that only affect agricultural producers in this 
province, we don’t hear much from this government. 
 
In the program, Mr. Speaker, payments are triggered when a 
producer’s current year’s production falls below their 
established reference margin. And the program, Mr. Speaker, is 
cost shared between the federal and provincial governments on 
an agreed to — agreed to, Mr. Speaker — 60/40 basis, thus 
supposedly giving all provinces equal access to the program. 
 
In 2003 the Government of Saskatchewan limited its 
contribution to something in the neighbourhood of 25 per cent 
of the province’s initially promised 40 per cent share of the 
CAIS payments. And in doing that, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan government, this Saskatchewan NDP 
government capped its expenditures for the CAIS program for 
the year 2003 at $99 million. And this of course means that in 
the 2003 production year, eligible producers would receive only 
about 70 per cent of the full payment under the CAIS program 
that would be eligible to producers in every other province of 
the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And some provinces may not be able to offer the same 
assistance to producers due to differing provincial contributions 
to the CAIS program. For example, Alberta has gone above and 
beyond the required provincial contribution while other 
provinces, except Saskatchewan, have simply paid the required 
provincial contribution of 40 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, producers are able to obtain access with a 
minimum deposit of one-third of the determined deposit, 
thereby guaranteeing access to the program for producers with 
limited funds. However many producers will not be able to 
come up with that down payment, Mr. Speaker, and they want 
to hear this government lobbying the federal government to 
eliminate that provision. 
 
Saskatchewan producers have had a rough time. This year due 
to adverse weather conditions, many areas of Saskatchewan 
experienced growing periods comparable with those normally 
experienced at the 60th parallel. Yet the Minister of Agriculture 
refuses to pay fully into a program that the province negotiated. 
 
At first this NDP government delayed signing on to the 
program, demanding increased caps, and then they said that — 
after the government gave them everything they wanted — they 
said that . . . well they mused about suing the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker. That would help in the negotiations, 
I’m sure. Then they said, after they got over that one, then they 
said that we don’t have the funds; we don’t have the money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently this provincial government has stumbled 
and bumbled their way into nearly $1 billion of federal 
government generosity and additional oil and gas revenue and 
some savings through no good management of their own, from 
low interest rates, strong Canadian dollar, and virtually no 
forest fires in the last season. And now everybody in the 
province knows, every sensible person in the province knows 
that this government can easily fund the CAIS program without 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

eliminating anything else. Now they say that they won’t do it 
because they’re in the process of renegotiating the funding 
formula with the federal government. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, they have no intentions of fully 
funding the CAIS program. They have no intentions of ever 
fully funding the CAIS program for the Saskatchewan 
producers. They don’t . . . 
 
It’s payback time, Mr. Speaker. Producers, rural Saskatchewan, 
agricultural producers, and rural Saskatchewan people in 
general did not and do not support this NDP government, this 
vindictive NDP government that now says well, then we won’t 
fund the CAIS program either. We’ll fix you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a news release from the Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan, APAS, President Terry 
Hildebrandt said and I quote: 
 

This kind of attitude is unacceptable and does not build 
value for the agricultural industry. Funding for agriculture, 
the province’s largest industry which provides 40 per cent 
of the jobs in this province is an investment in the 
economy and not a waste of money. Saskatchewan 
producers need an agriculture minister who is willing to 
champion the cause of agriculture, not one who uses them 
as leverage to change an agreement they made previously 
with the federal government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Hildebrandt went on to say, and I quote again: 
 

If producers accept the minister’s example of not paying 
as a negotiating tactic, it would logically follow that not 
paying property tax is a method to achieve a reduction in 
education tax on farm land. It’s unacceptable for our 
government to promote a strategy like this. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this government agreed to the 60/40 funding 
formula when they signed on to this agreement in the first place 
— at long last, I should say, they signed on to it. Producers had 
been waiting for months for this government to finally do so. 
They did. They’re out of excuses. 
 
And right now, this Agriculture minister is using Saskatchewan 
producers as cards in a game, a game with the federal 
government, and he uses the card game analogy, Mr. Speaker, 
in answers to questions from the media. And unfortunately, 
agricultural producers are the ones who are suffering because of 
it. In the Agriculture minister’s card game, it’s time that the 
Premier shuffled the deck and replaced the Minister of 
Agriculture, who isn’t playing with a full deck and who treats 
hard-working agricultural producers as discards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by the NDP’s refusal to fund a formula that they 
signed on to, it just adds to the list of things that show you 
cannot trust this NDP government. And in rural Saskatchewan 
the list is long and growing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s examine for a minute the impacts, the 
economic impacts of the BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) crisis that we’re embroiled in and have been 
for some 18 months now. Since the first case of BSE, the total 
economic contribution of Canada’s beef industry has dropped 

from 30 billion Canadian to 23.7 billion, and that’s a loss of 
$6.3 billion to the industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Prior to the worldwide ban on Canadian beef products, Canada 
was the third largest exporter of beef in the world. In 2002 this 
beef export market was worth about $4.1 billion, with a trade 
surplus in beef totalling 3.2 billion for that year. 
Saskatchewan’s beef exports from January to April 2003 — the 
first quarter of 2003, the year when BSE occurred in May of 
that year — were worth approximately $23 million per month, 
second only in Canada compared to Alberta’s roughly 50, or 
slightly more than $50 million a month during that period. 
 
Despite the ongoing BSE crisis, Canada continues to import 
beef into our country, although the Canadian government has 
refused to issue, as they normally do, any supplementary beef 
import quotas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agricultural producers in Saskatchewan have been 
devastated this year by a cold, late spring, cold summer, and an 
unusually early and severe frost. In my area, Mr. Speaker, there 
was a severe killing frost on June 24. And my area is between 
Regina and Moose Jaw, and many areas of the province were 
more severely affected than we were: severe frost on June 24 
which set crops back, cold weather following that, and a killing 
frost that ended the growing season on August 20 with 
temperatures of minus 8. Mr. Deputy Speaker, August 20 
destroyed many crops completely and caused devastating 
damage to both quality and quantity. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, producers cannot go on without a fully 
funded CAIS program. And at this time I wish to move the 
following motion. I did read the motion in, Mr. Speaker. I wish 
to move that motion and I’ll defer to my colleague from the 
constituency of Humboldt, who is the seconder. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:30) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek, seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That this Assembly acknowledges the hardships that 
Saskatchewan producers have faced over the last few years 
with drought, BSE, grasshoppers, and early frost, and that 
in order to prove its commitment to rural Saskatchewan 
for agriculture support, this Assembly calls upon the 
government to fully fund the Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization (CAIS) program for 2003; and continue to 
lobby the federal government for fair and equitable 
funding formulas for agricultural programs. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would like to point out to everyone in this 
Assembly right now that the importance of this debate is not 
about an agriculture risk management program. The importance 
of this particular debate is not even about an untrustworthy 
government or an incompetent minister. 
 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

The importance of this debate that we’re having here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that we’re talking about hard-working men 
and women in our province. We’re talking about the pillars of 
our small communities. We’re talking about compassionate 
people who endlessly volunteer their time to make their 
community, and subsequently our entire province, a better place 
to live. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re talking about parents and 
grandparents. We’re talking about families who are going to 
find it very difficult to fund Christmas this year. And we’re 
talking about the children. We’re talking about children who 
may no longer be able to take piano lessons or participate in 
sports programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about farm families, and just as 
tragic, we’re talking about families beyond those who work the 
land. We’re talking about producers of farm magazines, people 
who work in feed shops, clothing store owners, machinery 
dealerships, grocery store workers; and the list just goes on and 
on and on. And that’s what’s important about this debate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But the actual debate, the debate will be about an enormous 
injustice being served on all of those people. It’s about a 
government, it’s about a government that has completely 
abandoned a sector of our society and that sector, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The debate is about the competence of a minister — a minister 
who’s completely forgotten what’s important about his job. 
He’s too busy playing cards, as the member who spoke before 
me talked about, Mr. Speaker. He’s telling the producers of this 
province not to worry, because he’s holding his hand close. 
What he really doesn’t want to admit to them is he is holding a 
handful of jokers and the time to stop playing this game with 
the producers in our province is now. We’re dealing with lives 
out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has been the pattern of this NDP 
government for over a decade. They came into power and they 
snubbed the producers of this province by tearing up their GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) contracts. They promised 
year after year they would replace those contracts with a safety 
net program. And they did absolutely nothing until the federal 
government took it out of their hands, took away the 
responsibility, and they designed the disastrous AIDA 
(agricultural income disaster assistance) program. 
 
And do you know where the NDP’s Agriculture minister was at 
that time, Mr. Deputy Minister? Well Eric Upshall, he cared 
about the families in the province, the farm families of our 
province so much that he went to Mexico. The program was 
designed in his absence and that program was an absolute, 
complete disaster and it was scrapped after only two years. 
 
That’s when the federal government designed CFIP (Canadian 
farm income program). The member from Yorkton’s chirping 
away. And don’t worry, we’ll get to his turn and what he had to 
contribute to the farm families of this province because he 
definitely had his time to do what he could, and he failed them 
as well. 
 

You know when they decided to introduce CFIP, which is 
considered the son of AIDA, you would have thought the NDP 
government would have learned their lesson earlier with the 
disaster of AIDA — but no, they didn’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The minister that time, Mr. Lingenfelter, stormed out of the 
negotiations and he left the producers of our province out on a 
limb. It was another negligent minister and another disastrous 
program for the producers of this province. 
 
So let’s move on to the next Agriculture minister, the one who’s 
sitting in his chair chirping away, very glad to speak now, but 
he sure wasn’t speaking on behalf of the producers when he was 
minister of Agriculture. The member from Yorkton, the 
member from Yorkton is quite busy chirping away. 
 
You know what? The first thing that he decided to attack was 
the crop insurance program. He increased the premiums of the 
program by as much as 200 per cent He dropped spot loss hail. 
He did everything to devastate the program — gutted it, made 
the coverage less effective. 
 
And then when it came time to negotiate the details of the 
existing program that we’re talking about now, the CAIS 
program, he was busy running around blaming the federal 
government. He was blaming the producers of the province. He 
was blaming the opposition, he was blaming anybody he could 
think of for the challenges that this province was facing, but he 
didn’t participate in the designing of the program. He refused to 
sign the agreement of intent to negotiate a program and he 
refused to sign it until much of the detail was already done. 
 
But after the CAIS program was designed in his absence, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting to know there was an election 
looming. That’s when the member from Yorkton finally showed 
some initiative that he was actually going to stand up for the 
farm families of our province and he insisted at that time — 
because there was an election looming; let’s not forget that — 
that the payment cap should be raised and the negative margin 
should be recognized. And we all know the member from 
Yorkton will do absolutely anything to get re-elected. So he 
finally put forward some initiatives for the farm families of the 
province and the federal government agreed. They agreed to his 
proposal and they made amendments to the CAIS program, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But unfortunately for the producers of this province, we already 
. . . you know, the election had already taken place and now we 
have our present Agriculture minister and a present Premier 
who was finally elected by the people. The election was over 
and there was no longer any reason for the NDP government to 
disguise their disdain for rural Saskatchewan . 
 
The first insult that this minister chose to give, Mr. Speaker, he 
decided to not live up to their obligation of a signed agreement 
for the final year of the funding for CFIP. To him, agriculture 
producers were not a priority and signed agreements obviously 
are meaningless to this government. 
 
But that’s not all. He further gutted the crop insurance program 
while he jacked up the premiums even more. And then he 
refused to sign the amendment to the CAIS program, the 
amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that his own colleague had 
negotiated when the pressure was on for him to get re-elected 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

because there was an election campaign on the go. 
 
The next minister, the minister we have now, refused to sign 
that amendment and he cried poverty, he cried poverty. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it just never ends. It just goes on and on and 
on. The NDP continue to back out on their word. They continue 
to break contracts. They continue to ignore signed agreements, 
and they continue to blame everyone else for their blatant attack 
on rural Saskatchewan. And they’ve always, always justified 
these unethical practices by pleading poverty. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve had a $900 million windfall 
and it’s time to face the ugly truth. The NDP does not now and 
has not ever given a rat’s you-know-what about the farmers in 
this province. They give lip service and absolutely nothing 
more. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they whine and they snivel about there 
being an un-level playing field in the global markets, and yet 
the most un-level playing field that we have is right here in our 
country from province to province. No other province did not 
live up to their agreement. 
 
They have deceptive messaging by saying that we pay more per 
capita for our producers than any other province, and that’s not 
fair. It’s indeed difficult, but how much do we pay to the 
fishery, to the fishing industry? How much do we pay for the 
auto industry? How much do we pay per capita for the airplane 
industry? None — none. Other provinces have their industries 
they must support, and it’s time we started supporting our own. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I move the motion or second the 
motion brought forward earlier, I just want to remind everyone 
once again, the importance of this debate is not about 
inadequate farm programs, and it’s not about the ethics of our 
NDP government. It’s about farm families, hard-working men 
and women and children. It’s about the rural families that own 
or work for companies that supply the agriculture industry. 
They deserve better. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to second the motion put forward 
from the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I’m very happy for an opportunity to 
once again address the issue of CAIS and the funding that we 
provide for our agricultural programs. 
 
I think it’s very important in this debate, and I agree with the 
member opposite who just finished speaking, that this is about 
farm people. It is about farm families who have faced very, very 
difficult years and difficult circumstances across this province. 
It has been so hard with the years of drought, there are some 
who have not been able to maintain, who have been driven out 
of business by the circumstances, Mr. Speaker. And there are 
others who are struggling just to survive. We know that. We 
understand that there is a great deal of anxiety and suffering in 
the rural community. It is not just restricted to farms. It begins 
with the poor farm economy but it expands throughout the rural 

community, and there are many people who are hurting and 
who are worried and whose businesses are suffering, Mr. 
Speaker. We recognize that. 
 
And I think if people clearly listen to what has been said from 
the very beginning of this process since I have been minister 
and previously, we do want to provide the supports that will 
enable people to successfully be a part of this industry. We 
want to make the investments that will help this industry move 
forward to a very prosperous future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also I think a number of distortions that 
have been thrown out as if they were facts, Mr. Speaker; pieces 
of comments taken out, put in public that are direct attacks upon 
our government, upon me personally. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
recognize the tactics of the Sask Party in this whole process to 
try and continue to drive a wedge between urban and rural 
Saskatchewan, between rural Saskatchewan and our 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important that people know 
very clearly the facts of what has happened and how we have 
worked to try and make sure that we have programs that not 
only provide the necessary investments and support for farmers 
and rural people in Saskatchewan but also are affordable for all 
the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of this province. This 
is essential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the critic’s speech just earlier, he referred to the 
deposit that farmers are expected to pay in the CAIS program 
and indicated on the record that this government was silent, that 
this minister was silent on this. 
 
I need to put on record very clearly that when the 
federal-provincial-territorial ministers met, I led the charge to 
have that removed and, Mr. Speaker, in that action and in that 
work that was done in Prince Edward Island, we were able to 
get the deposit, instead of moving up to the two-thirds that it 
was supposed to move up to, we got it held back to the 
one-third for another year and the date extended to March 31. I 
believe I also indicated that in the media and in the House. So 
the member should have been aware of that and I’ll just accept 
the possibility that he forgot or didn’t hear. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, very clearly we led the charge on trying to 
get that removed. We still are pushing to have the deposit 
removed. Mr. Speaker, we don’t see any sense in it. We have 
made that case. The federal minister said clearly that he would 
move as far as he could this year but there needed to be 
legislative change in order to remove that. Mr. Speaker, we are 
pushing for the legislative change to have that deposit removed. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what the situation is. Those are the facts 
about what happened. I think the critic needs to know that. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, with regard to our position on CAIS, I 
have said, and I think our government says very clearly that we 
do not want our farmers in this province to be disadvantaged 
against farmers anywhere. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Our position has clearly said that we want CAIS to be fully 
funded. But, Mr. Speaker, when we have looked at the numbers, 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

they are a far cry from the numbers that were given to our 
government when we were asked and coerced and pushed to 
sign onto the program. The numbers that we were given told us 
that we would be able to put in $100 million a year over five 
years, and that would be enough to cover the costs of this 
program. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, big surprise for us. We signed it. We got 
going on this program. And when the numbers started coming 
in March, we found that those numbers were far, far above what 
they had first been told to us, Mr. Speaker. They were up in the 
neighbourhood of 250 million to 360 million a year, and still 
those only guesses, Mr. Speaker. To sign on and say, yes, we’re 
fully funding CAIS at that point would have been basically to 
sign a blank cheque. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the range of numbers has changed, but we 
still do not have the final numbers for ’03 CAIS. The 
application period will end in November. After the application 
period, there will be a period for processing those. At that point 
we will know what the cost for ’03 CAIS is. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, to re-emphasize that from the very beginning 
we have been pushing, struggling to try and get 100 per cent of 
the funding for CAIS. There is no question about that. We have 
been unequivocal. But what we have been saying very clearly is 
that the way it is structured right now on a 60/40 base, it is 
absolutely unfair to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker 
— unfair to the urban people, unfair to the rural people, unfair 
to the farmers of this province, Mr. Speaker, because it draws 
so much per capita out of our tax dollars. Mr. Speaker we have 
to address that inequity. We have been addressing that inequity, 
and we will continue to. 
 
I would like to refer, Mr. Speaker, to the spirit that we want our 
federal government to continue to think about and to engage in. 
In section 95 of the Canadian Constitution, there is reference 
clearly under the constitution to the issues of equity and 
fairness. Under section 15 of the constitution, it calls for 
equality before and under law and equal protection and benefit 
of law. Under section 36 of the constitution, it calls for equal 
opportunities for the well-being of Canadians, promotion of 
economic development to reduce disparities, and commits to 
equalization payments as a means to help achieve this where 
provinces would have a reasonably comparable levels of service 
and taxation. That is with regard to equalization. But I can tell 
you that agriculture is not one of the factors that goes in to 
equalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is reference in some of the comments earlier 
to industries that other provinces have, that they are responsible 
for. Well, Mr. Speaker, if we talk about fisheries, if we talk 
about the automotive industry, if we talk about Bombardier, we 
see significant one-off federal dollars going in to make a 
difference in those provinces, making payments that will help 
those industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are asking for the same kind of thoughtful 
recognition that sticks with the spirit of this nation for equality 
across the nation. That is what is there in our equity proposal. 
We are asking for a cap on the amount that any province would 
have to pay, that no province should ever have to pay more than 
three times the provincial per capita average. 

I want to ask you, how does it make sense that we in this 
province would be paying somewhere for a CAIS program, 
somewhere between 100 million and $360 million which comes 
out to somewhere between $100 per capita and $360 per capita? 
How is it that we who are producing the food for this nation, for 
this world, should be expected to pay that kind of a cost where 
the people who are consuming that food — the people of 
Toronto, the people of Vancouver, the people of Calgary and 
Edmonton — are paying $35 per capita on average across this 
country? How does that make sense? Why should the producers 
of this province be faced with such a huge inequity? 
 
It is wrong. It must be restructured. I’m glad that’s in the 
motion, and that’s what we’re working for, Mr. Speaker, to get 
equity in this. And I tell you that we are pushing as hard as we 
can for full funding of CAIS. That was what the . . . excuse me, 
Mr. Speaker, that is what the meeting I had with the federal 
minister yesterday was about. We are still pressing for full 
funding, and we want to also make sure that there is investment 
in the future of agriculture, and we will continue to push for that 
investment in the future of agriculture. 
 
We do not want to always be simply in primary production. We 
want investment in value-add. Our producers want investment 
in value-add, and our rural communities need that kind of 
investment. We have an ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy) report that leads us and moves in that direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to push in that direction. We 
want 100 per cent funding for the farmers and the people of this 
province, and we want equity in the formula. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to have the opportunity to speak to the motion today 
and the underfunding of the CAIS program by the NDP 
government. 
 
I just want to make a couple of comments that the Minister of 
Agriculture touched on, and he touched on the urban-rural split 
as if blaming the Saskatchewan Party for trying to bring that 
about. I just want to remind that minister, and in fact I want to 
remind every member on that side of the House, in 1991 . . . 
and we go back to them cancelling the GRIP program. 
 
But there was some other things that helped cause that rift 
between urban and rural Saskatchewan — something like 52 
hospital closures in rural Saskatchewan. That caused somewhat 
of a rift out there. We also have school closures. We have 
crumbling highways. Why would the people in rural 
Saskatchewan be happy? They aren’t happy with that NDP 
government, and I don’t think they’re about to become very 
happy with them not funding the CAIS program, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that minister asked the federal government 
to remove the cap when the new programs were coming in. He 
asked them to accept negative margins. And it took a while, but 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

finally they agreed to those things. And what did the NDP 
government do at that point? They still wouldn’t fully fund the 
program. So they got what they wanted. And he’s saying today, 
well we want this, we want that from the federal government. 
The federal government has no respect for this NDP 
government because every time they try to do something for 
Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan farm families, this 
government finds a way to renege on their responsibility and 
will not back the farmers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
He even went so far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at one point — I 
believe it was on the BSE money — that minister and that 
government was going to sue the federal government. They’re 
going to put extra dollars into Saskatchewan. They’re going to 
give extra dollars to our farmers, and his response to that was, 
let’s sue the federal government. Well, Mr. Speaker, with that 
kind of an attitude we are never going to get any respect and 
any agreement from the federal government to really help 
Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity here about, oh, about a week 
ago, with my colleague from Last Mountain-Touchwood, we 
went to, we had the opportunity to go to an APAS meeting. And 
it was a good meeting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there was 
a number of farmers there, probably 50, 60 farmers there, and 
they all had the same story but to a different degree. They 
talked, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about crop insurance to start with, 
and the inadequacies of crop insurance. Some of the farmers 
talked about the quantity of grain they got . . . is fairly good in a 
number of areas, but the quality is terrible. In fact, the quality is 
so bad they don’t know if they’ll even be able to sell it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
They talked about auction sales in the southeast corner of the 
province where my colleague from Estevan comes from. 
Already, there’s 70 auction sales lined up for that corner of the 
province. It just goes to show the disaster that’s out there in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They talked about . . . A number of them felt they were going to 
get a crop insurance payout, Mr. Deputy Speaker, probably 
would amount to maybe $100 an acre. That sounds good, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, except for the problem they have. They’ve got 
$170 cash, a number of them, into this crop — cash out of their 
pockets for chemical, fertilizer, fuel. Doesn’t even count 
depreciation and things like that on machinery. And crop 
insurance is going to pay 100, and their costs are $170 an acre. 
They can’t keep going like that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They talked about the values of grain. They talked about crop 
insurance, the values that crop insurance is valuing some of 
these frozen crops. Lentils, for an example, crop insurance has 
valued lentils that are froze at 42 per cent of no. 2. But the 
farmers out there are saying that that’s a myth; that isn’t going 
to happen. The number they’re hearing is 17 per cent. Big 
difference on the payout that they should get to what they’re 
going to get. They talked about the quality on all of the grains 
that crop insurance has valued and felt that the value that’s 
being put on them is too high. Durum, for an example, talked 
about that and the values being too high. 
 
And the Ag minister talks about lobbying the federal 

government for more money, and we agree with that. That 
should be an ongoing process because the federal government 
should get up to the plate and pay more for Saskatchewan. But 
until that happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan need that minister and that government to stand 
behind farm families. They can’t keep going on. 
 
They talked, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, today I 
heard, on the radio this morning, farm income is down 40 per 
cent from what it was. Well now, that’s bad enough alone but 
think about that. We’ve gone through a number of years of 
drought in this province. We’ve had a number of other 
problems in this province — number one being that NDP 
government. But now, we’re down another 40 per cent. And the 
Minister of Agriculture has the nerve to say that it’s not fair to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers to help farmers. He says it’s throwing 
money in a black hole. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is not throwing money in a black 
hole. That money goes right around and right back into the 
economy. We’re talking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about paying 
fertilizer bills, chemical bills, fuel bills, taxes — both education 
and municipal. Education tax, a lot due to this NDP government 
and the rate . . . they’re a way up there, more than they should 
be. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they cannot continue out there in rural 
Saskatchewan. Farm families are going under, and not just one 
by one. The ones that we talked to the other night in Neudorf, 
there’s many of them talking; they’re not sure if they can go 
through to another year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I found it interesting today in question 
period, the Minister of Labour was bragging about the CCF and 
all the wonderful things Tommy had done, and when the CCF 
was in, all these things that happened. She even went as far as 
to say that if we hadn’t had the CCF, we would not have 
drive-throughs at fast food restaurants. How far can that 
government on that side dream, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
The next thing you know, she’s going to be taking credit for the 
horse and buggy. Or she might even take credit for us actually 
getting to the point where we had outhouses with buildings 
around them. I remember locking my grandfather in the 
outhouse one time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when he was 
hollering for somebody to come and let him out, I don’t 
remember him saying a word about this CCF-NDP-built 
outhouse. He just thought it was the outhouse on the farm, Mr. 
Speaker. So they can take credit for all the things they can 
dream about, but they’re not reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
If they want to take credit for something substantial, put money 
into the CAIS program. Fully fund the program for 2003, and 
the farmers of Saskatchewan will not be rich but they may be 
able to survive to another year. We can’t stand going on with a 
government like this and not having this government stand 
behind our farm families. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had calls, and I know other members 
here have had probably more calls this fall from farm families 
in trouble out there than we’ve ever had before. And that’s 
mainly because we not only have a problem with BSE and low 
cattle prices. We also have the frost now on the grain side. And 



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

I know in my farming days, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if grain prices 
were down, usually cattle prices were up, and you could find a 
way to survive and get through. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not the case this year. Both 
sides are down, and farm families need the help of this NDP 
government. And I’ll admit they certainly need the help of the 
federal government, and that’s where we agree with this 
Agriculture minister. We have to continue, continue to lobby 
Andy Mitchell and the federal government for more money, but 
until that happens we need that Ag minister and that 
government to step up to the plate. We cannot continue to go as 
we have. 
 
I go back to last spring’s budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 
government that says they help farm families. Let’s just remind 
this government of some of the things they did last spring. They 
closed 22 rural service centres. They closed health facilities in 
rural Saskatchewan. The elimination of the fuel tax on retail 
sales, a 20 per cent reduction on the rebate of farm fuel 
purchases, $700,000 reduction for funding the Prairie 
Diagnostics — all these things are out of rural Saskatchewan, 
and all these things have hurt farm families in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the calls we get are from farmers that need 
help out there. And they don’t need it next year or the year after 
for this year. They need it now. 
 
The minister said it’s like throwing money into a black hole. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I did not. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The minister says he did not. I wish the 
minister would get up and be consistent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because this money is not going to sit still. This money is going 
right back into the economy and there isn’t a better time of year 
for that government and that minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
change their mind. We won’t mock them for changing their 
mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If that minister would stand today 
and say, we’ve changed our mind; we’ll fully fund the CAIS 
program — we will applaud them. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this money is not disappearing 
into thin air. Christmas is coming. These farmers haven’t got 
money to even buy groceries in some cases. I’ve had farmers 
phone in that can’t even pay their power bill, especially now 
that that government’s raised power rates — higher in rural 
Saskatchewan, I might add. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that minister and that government 
wants to help farm families, it would be a perfect time, before 
the end of this session, to say, we lobbied the federal 
government; we did what we could and we’re going to continue 
to; but until that happens we will fully fund the 2003 CAIS 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. As a member of this 
legislature that comes from a rural farm family, I wanted to add 
my voice to the public policy goal of a fair and equitable 
funding formula for the Canadian agricultural support program 
that will ensure a long-term, sustainable safety net for 
agricultural producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been over 30 years that people in this country 
have been talking about a national agricultural policy. And for 
those of us who were at the University of Saskatchewan in the 
early 1970s, we argued for a national agricultural policy then 
and we’re arguing for a national agricultural policy now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to a fair and 
equitable solution that does not punish our producers or the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. The current flawed cost-sharing 
provisions in CAIS means that Saskatchewan taxpayers are 
expected to pay four or five times more than what taxpayers in 
other provincial jurisdictions pay to fund their share of the 
program. This clearly puts Saskatchewan at a disadvantage with 
respect to other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada was founded on the principle of equality 
and fairness, a principle that’s enshrined in our constitution. 
And this legislature should call on the federal government to 
make sure that all Canadians, all Canadians share fairly in the 
CAIS program. No longer are the challenges mainly weather 
and insects. Much of the challenge facing our producers is 
rooted in international trade barriers, unfair subsidization of 
foreign products, low currency exchange rates — well beyond 
the scope of any provincial jurisdiction. 
 
In this environment it is the responsibility of the federal 
government to properly fund agricultural support programs. 
And this is particularly the case for damage to our agricultural 
sector that is caused by low commodity prices resulting from 
unfair levels of agricultural subsidies provided to agricultural 
producers in the United States and in the European Union, or 
the damage caused by the closure of international borders due 
to the BSE crisis. 
 
In almost every country in the world, it is an accepted principle 
that agricultural assistance is the responsibility of the federal 
government and it is not shifted to local governments that face 
the added pressure of the fiscal stresses associated with a 
downturn in their local agricultural economy. It is not fair. It is 
not equitable to expect any provincial government to be hit 
twice for a matter that is properly and morally the collective 
responsibility of all Canadians. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition has difficulty 
understanding intellectual arguments, but maybe they should 
pay attention. In countries like Ireland, France, or the UK 
(United Kingdom) — and I’ve had an opportunity to visit that 
jurisdiction this fall — agricultural support is provided by the 
European Union. Our neighbour to the south recognize this 
principle so that in the United States individual states are not 
burdened with the cost of farm safety nets available to their 
producers. And we ask that this well-accepted international 
principle be recognized in the country of Canada. 
 
The challenges to our industry are, for the most part, well 
beyond the border of Saskatchewan or any individual province 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1935 

and so they must be addressed at the national and international 
level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farm families are tough. They face 
the adversity in the form of drought, frost, BSE, not to mention 
lingering low commodity prices coupled with higher input 
costs. They produce food and agricultural products that sustain 
and nourish not only Canadians, but also people around the 
world. And nowhere in Canada is the activity of agriculture and 
farming more concentrated than in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have 3 per cent of the national 
population, and we have approximately 40 per cent of the 
agricultural land in our country. 
 
We are not being unreasonable as policy-makers in asking that 
the federal government place a reasonable limit on the unfair 
burden that the 60/40 cost-sharing requirement places upon 
provincial taxpayers. Farmers across Canada should be on an 
equal footing. Taxpayers across Canada should be on an equal 
footing. 
 
It is not fair that the Saskatchewan . . . that in Saskatchewan the 
per capita contribution for just the provincial portion of CAIS is 
$156 compared to the national average of $35. On top of this 
inequity, Mr. Speaker, the federal government is contributing 
less than $27 in the mix. This is only 43 per cent of the total 
CAIS funding on a national per capita basis. 
 
Where is the equity in this? How can we justify such an unfair 
formula to Saskatchewan taxpayers, and more importantly how 
can we ensure that the long-term, stable funding arrangement is 
in place that will protect our agricultural producers not just this 
year, not last year, but years to come? 
 
The continuation of this burden to provincial taxpayers would 
result in provinces having large agricultural industries relative 
to their tax base becoming increasing less competitive in the tax 
structure. Accepting this unfair arrangement would not be in 
any of our interests, and it would undermine the long-term 
viability of our agricultural sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is working to get the best deal it 
can for Saskatchewan producers in the same way that we 
worked to ensure equity in Canada’s equalization system. From 
this experience, we know how we can be successful. 
 
I would invite the members opposite to join together with us on 
behalf of all Saskatchewan producers, on behalf of all 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, so that together we can effectively 
lobby the federal government to do the right public policy thing. 
The members opposite suggest that we should use this one-time 
funding as a short-term band-aid. This would not solve the 
underlying inequities and affordability problems with the 
current approach forced upon us by the federal government. 
 
What happens next year or the year after or the year after? Do 
we cut health care? Do we cut expenditures in education? Do 
we disadvantage our future youth? Do we stop paving roads 
which would harm our rural economy? No, Mr. Speaker, 
obviously not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t go down that road. We have to stand up 
for our agricultural producers and negotiate a fair deal with our 

federal counterparts. The people of Saskatchewan need to take a 
stand with the federal government, and we need to resolve the 
issue quickly. To give in now for expediency — and I know 
there are politicians that are into expediency — would be to 
send the wrong message to the federal government and it would 
affect the competitiveness of not only our farmers but our entire 
economy, not only this year but for years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation facing our farmers is no less than a 
disaster that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. There seems to be a lot 
of private conversations that I would ask the members to take 
behind the bar. The member for Saskatoon Nutana has the floor. 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the situation facing our 
farmers is no less than a disaster that requires a commitment at 
the national level. When a fire rages through regions, or storms 
or floods devastate communities, the federal government is 
there to provide assistance that is so desperately needed. We ask 
for no less. We are starting to get our message heard on the 
national stage. A one-size-fits-all approach to cost sharing is a 
problem not only here but in other provinces with a large 
agricultural basis as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, I want to make it clear that we 
have not forgotten that arguing over who pays for what does 
nothing to help the real and very immediate needs of our farm 
producers. While we negotiate with the federal government for 
a fair funding formula, we are also continuing to provide 
much-needed agriculture support. 
 
Our budget, Mr. Speaker, was increased 5.2 per cent from 252 
million last year to 264 million this year, and I don’t believe 
that includes the BSE money. We have a strong and fully 
funded crop insurance program that continues to support our 
producers. And since May, Mr. Speaker, of 2003 we have 
devoted 85 million provincial dollars to help our livestock 
producers deal with the effects of trade embargos due to BSE. 
 
We’ve committed $99 million for our 40 per cent share of the 
costs associated with the 2003 CAIS. We provide over $100 
million a year in fuel tax relief for our agricultural industry, and 
we’ve committed to addressing the issue of property tax 
fairness. And this year we have budgeted $55 million in 
property tax relief for the next fiscal year and another 55 
million is committed for the year after. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
continue to support the Canadian Wheat Board rather than work 
to undermine it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the opposition to stop the rhetoric. It’s 
time for the opposition to stop saying to urban residents, you 
have to pay for this. That’s how we get to the rural-urban split. 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m honoured 
to stand today to speak to this issue of the CAIS program and 
government’s underfunding of the program. I, like the minister 
opposite, come from a farm background and she had indicated 
that it was important to her to add her voice and to make sure 
people knew that they cared. 
 
Well you know what the people of Saskatchewan, especially 
our farmers, needed? We needed the minister to go to the 
cabinet table and add her voice at that time for the demands for 
money for farmers. To do it here, in the Assembly, is great. It’s 
standing up and showing the world that you care. But what we 
really needed to do is to have it done at budget time so the 
money was in their pockets when it came time to address the 
needs that they have as farming people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister talked about the money and 
what they were doing for farmers. But I think she failed to 
mention that in the last two years — for two consecutive years 
— there’s been $40 million less in the Agriculture budget in 
Saskatchewan. That is not helping the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we stand up here and discuss the issue of 
agriculture, we’re not just talking about the farmers. We’re 
talking about all the citizens of this province because everybody 
is affected. And everybody is betrayed by the government who 
doesn’t keep their word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government, when they planned to 
scrap all the previous agriculture programs which were 
supposed to be helping producers in a crisis — crisis situations 
like droughts and killer frosts and other inclement weather or 
lower commodity prices or unfair subsidies or trade disputes — 
they were hoping that they would design a program that was 
going to help in all these crisis situations. But it never does. 
 
Farmers are always told the latest program will ensure 
coverage, but the reality is the programs always have some sort 
of flaw in it and the government’s plan never really extends to 
meet the real crisis. And then they say they don’t have the 
funding to meet their commitments or they just refuse to pay a 
portion. 
 
Farmers learned the hard way in Saskatchewan, in the early 
’90s, that a contract with this NDP government is worthless. I 
think every farmer in Saskatchewan remembers the GRIP 
program and what this government did to them. They 
determined it was going to cost the government too much 
money, so they refused to pay it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now, the minister opposite is talking about 
Alberta and what they’ve done for their farmers. They have 
paid their CAIS commitment and they’ve given farmers even 
above what the commitment was. And you know what? Even 
Manitoba has paid their farmers. The Manitoba government 
actually kept their word to their farmers. 
 
We have CAIS and this government’s refusal to pay 30 per cent 
of its 40 per cent commitment, saying it’s not fair. The NDP 
Agriculture minister believes that fully funding the CAIS 
program would be like throwing money away. That’s the kind 
of statement that the farmers in Saskatchewan remember is 
when their Minister of Agriculture indicates that supporting 

them — more importantly, keeping his word — would be 
throwing money away. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Agriculture minister has lost touch with 
farmers — if he ever really was in touch with them — because 
what is happening on the farm today isn’t something that can be 
understood if you just sit behind a desk and talk to the people 
that come in. You’ve got to be living in their boots. You’ve got 
to be the person who picks up a power bill and sees that they 
can’t even afford to pay that when the government decided to 
up the power bills. It’s the necessities of life that they’re 
looking at right now and this government doesn’t have . . . 
doesn’t understand what’s happening in this community. 
 
I don’t see how there can be any future for the producers of this 
Saskatchewan if more farmers are forced to sell out and leave 
the province. I almost wonder if it’s just part of the 
government’s big plan, like the amalgamation of school districts 
and the amalgamation of health districts. Is it the overall plan to 
have fewer farmers and fewer functional communities with the 
services. 
 
I certainly agree that we should be encouraging the federal 
government to fairly spread the cost of the program over 
Canadian provinces, but in the meantime, who is going to be 
helping our producers? We have to go after the feds but we 
have to . . . in the meantime farmers need to know that they can 
trust the government to keep their word. This government has 
not kept their word and, Mr. Speaker, it’s not because the 
government can talk about a lack of money. 
 
We’ve moved from a have-not province to a have province 
which is, of course, wonderful for all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Of course, this change is as a result of 
unbudgeted windfalls due to higher oil revenues and 
equalizations program. It’s got nothing to do with good 
management or planning; it’s got everything to do with what’s 
happened is beyond their control. 
 
So we now have $900 million that the government wasn’t 
expecting in their budget in March and not one penny of it is 
budgeted towards the farmers that are still the backbone of this 
province. And this government now say they can’t afford to pay 
their share of the money that they committed to when they 
signed into the CAIS program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m really not surprised that they can justify this 
decision when they’re the same government that claims to be 
the champions of the poor, yet they haven’t raised the basic 
adult rate for social services recipients since 1989. At that time 
someone was allowed $195 a month to pay for their basic needs 
and today, 24 years later, they’re still allowed $195. This is 
from a social . . . a government that’s supposed to be caring 
about the poor, the one’s that are supposed to be the heart of our 
province, and they are not looking at the people who are most 
needy. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker, at the same time we have 
farm families that are going to be slipping into that same 
category, because this government is not recognizing what their 
job is and seeing what their job is. 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

Mr. Speaker, many producers have had current concerns about 
negative margins and the caps on payouts under the original 
program, so the government refused to sign on. Under pressure, 
the feds addressed this issue and Saskatchewan signed the 
agreement. Then the NDP government let the producers down 
and refused to pay their 40 per cent share. Basically what they 
said is, whoops, we got what we asked for; I’ve changed my 
mind. Maybe that should be the motto of this minister. It’s too 
late to agree; I’ve changed my mind. It’s been happening way 
too often for our farmers. 
 
This is absolutely reprehensible in a year when many farmers 
saw their bumper crops killed by a frost in mid-August. This on 
top of BSE and two years of drought is having a huge impact on 
farm families when it comes to their discussions with their 
bankers and with the people in their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides the money that the government is not . . . 
the employees . . . the producers are not getting from the CAIS 
program that the government is not funding, they are also 
finding many that aren’t getting . . . they’re asking for their 
money back again. We’ve had people that are saying the CAIS 
. . . getting a cheque one day, and two weeks later they get a 
letter saying that they have to pay it all back again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has been saying that they don’t 
have the money to supply, to pay for our producers for the 
CAIS program, and yet they have made decisions that cost us, 
the province and our farmers lots of money. The $35 million 
they spent on SPUDCO, they lost on SPUDCO; $25 million on 
Navigata, that was money that the people of the province 
deserved; $24 million on a dot-com in Atlanta; $16 million on 
Coachman Insurance in Ontario; $6.4 million on Persona; 8 
point million dollars on Ag Dealer. The list goes on and on, Mr. 
Speaker. The government has money. They make decisions 
every day on how to spend the money, and yet it seems like our 
farmers are never on the list of people that deserve the money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard a number of the speakers across the 
way talk about the spirit of the nation and relying . . . and why 
they’re doing actually what they’re doing with farmers, and 
they’re talking. What we need to realize is that farmers are 
relying on this government. They trusted this government. They 
relied on them to keep their word. And that’s something that we 
have not heard from this government. 
 
We’ve never been able to rely on the government to keep their 
word. When they go to their bank with a piece of paper that said 
we’ve got our CAIS commitment and then the government 
changes their mind, they say I can’t give you all of that, bankers 
don’t accept that. They don’t accept apologies or excuses. What 
they really need is a government that cares about rural 
Saskatchewan and cares about farmers, and the farmers need to 
be able to trust them. That’s what we’re not seeing from this 
NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The time has now elapsed for the debate 
portion. We now turn to the question and comment portion of 
the 75-minute debate. I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, my question will be to the 

member of the opposition, the critic of the opposition from 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year we had an election in Saskatchewan and 
we were, of course, looking for agricultural farm policy in it. I 
just heard the Leader of the Opposition travelled across the 
province in his Volkswagen tour this summer and, Mr. Speaker, 
he came back and said there was a great big storm in 
Saskatchewan — Mr. Speaker, a great big agricultural storm. 
 
And then we saw next, Mr. Speaker, the Enterprise 
Saskatchewan document and in the Enterprise Saskatchewan 
document we were looking for some agricultural farm policy. 
And I want to know, Mr. Speaker, from the member of the 
opposition, the critic, tell me what is in your document in the 
Enterprise Saskatchewan that addresses itself specifically to 
what, Mr. Speaker, you’re going to do for farm . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 
member from Yorkton to phrase all his questions through the 
Chair. I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member . . . I 
appreciate the question and the member will have a look at our 
agricultural policy after our policy convention in early 
February. 
 
But I’ll tell you — listen up and I’ll answer that question — and 
I’ll tell you what we’re not going to do. We’re not going to do 
this, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to increase the PST 
(provincial sales tax) without providing any relief for property 
tax and farm land. We’re not going to close 22 of 
Saskatchewan’s 33 rural service centres. We’re not going to 
eliminate the farm fuel tax rebate on gasoline and propane 
bought at retail outlets, and we’re not going to have a 20 per 
cent reduction in the rebate on bulk farm fuel purchases. We’re 
not going to cancel livestock and horticultural facilities and 
incentive programs, and we’re not going to reduce funding to 
Prairie Diagnostics by $700,000 — the people who test for 
chronic wasting disease. And we’re not going to cancel the farm 
family opportunities . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The member’s time has 
elapsed. I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, this 
week the rural municipality of Ituna Bon Accord held a special 
meeting to deal with the serious agricultural situation in their 
municipality. And they passed this resolution, and it reads: 
 

That due to excessive summer rainfall and the severity of 
early frost this year and the damage cost to the grain and 
oilseed sector along with poor cattle prices, the rural 
municipality of Ituna Bon Accord No. 246, make 
application to Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food that the 
rural municipality be declared a disaster area for 2004. 

 
And that resolution was carried unanimously, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Agriculture. If his negotiations fail 
with the federal government to change the funding formula for 
the CAIS program, will he assure the producers in the Ituna RM 



1938 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

(rural municipality) and all farmers across this province that his 
government will fully fund the 2003 CAIS program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
really appreciate again an opportunity to address this because 
we have said from the very beginning that we are pressing for 
100 per cent funding for CAIS. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that in some areas there has been 
severe impact from the frost and people there are in need. So to 
this point, Mr. Speaker, we have been providing the payments 
for CAIS at a pro-rated amount, that’s an initial payment of 70 
per cent. When we get the final numbers in, Mr. Speaker, we 
will know exactly what needs to be paid and we will make a 
decision. 
 
And I can tell you there is a commitment of this party, this 
caucus, and this minister to make sure that we provide the full 
support that we can provide for the people of this province, the 
farmers of this province, Mr. Speaker. We recognize that and 
we will be there for our producers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana. She ended her speech with 
urban people should not be expected to fund agriculture 
programs. Does the member from Saskatoon Nutana believe the 
farm families contribute nothing to the economy? Does the ag 
industry not contribute anything to the provincial coffers that 
help fund programs for both urban and rural people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened 
very carefully to the member from Saltcoats. And he said that 
urban people should pay for this; that’s what I clearly heard him 
say, Mr. Speaker. And what I wanted to say is I don’t have that 
view. My view is that the federal Government of Canada should 
pay for this and agricultural policy is in the purview of all 
Canadian taxpayers — not just urban taxpayers, as the member 
from Saltcoats clearly said in this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, recognizing that we have committed $100 million 
to CAIS, recognizing that we have been pushing very, very hard 
for full funding from the federal government, recognizing that 
we have been calling upon the opposition and others to support 
the equity proposal that we have put forward, I would like to 
know from the opposition critic why it is that they continue to 
support the federal government ignoring the huge economic 
challenge, ignoring the huge economic challenge to our farmers 
and our taxpayers in this province. Why do they support the 
federal government’s position over the position of our taxpayers 
and our farmers in this province? How can they justify that to 
the people? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
question. Clearly that is not the case at all. We are on record as 
supporting the government’s position on changes to the funding 
formula, but the funding formula is not likely going to be 
changed for the 2003 year CAIS program. 
 
And meanwhile, meanwhile, agriculture producers are nearly 
starving. They’re losing their farms; they’re losing their 
families. And we are in support of the position of changing the 
funding formula, but this government in the absence of that has 
a responsibility to agriculture producers to help them out of this 
crisis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this morning on the radio I heard the Minister of Agriculture 
commenting on the 40 per cent drop in income for farmers, and 
he said after two years of drought and on top of that BSE, it was 
a horrendous blow to agriculture. 
 
I agree; it was. The NDP does not, though, keep its word that 
they have made to the people of Saskatchewan, to the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. The Deputy Premier went to Ottawa and said 
that you have to fund CAIS better and cover these areas of 
negative margins. And Ottawa agreed. 
 
My question to the federal . . . excuse me, to the Minister of 
Agriculture: will the Minister of Agriculture ever keep his word 
and commitment to agriculture producers to fully fund the 
province’s share of CAIS for 2003? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
actually really do appreciate the question because it is my full 
intention and my commitment to do everything possible to get 
full funding for CAIS for the producers of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to note that recognizing the difficulties 
that our producers have faced and are facing today, we have 
come through, Mr. Speaker, in the BSE issue, with $40 million 
for the BSE program. Mr. Speaker, we have come through with 
the $150 million CAIS cash advance to try and make sure that 
the funding is there in the meantime, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we have been making the initial payments out of CAIS 
for those whose forms are complete in the process. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been there, are there and, Mr. Speaker, 
the negotiations that we have been engaged in are in every 
attempt to get CAIS fully funded. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Humboldt. In the document 
Enterprise Saskatchewan, the opposition are talking about, Mr. 
Speaker, about not, not providing any funding for public 
investment to grow our economy. And for rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to know from the member opposite, we 
have investment today in the corporation of Big Sky. I ask the 
member from Humboldt, should we be removing our 
investment that we have today in Big Sky — who support barns 
in Humboldt, who support barns in Kamsack . . . or support 
barns in Canora — Mr. Speaker, should we be removing that 
investment today based on your strategy of growing rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the member opposite for that 
question. I think the one thing we need to remove is the 
Minister for Agriculture but . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I really appreciate that the Deputy Premier 
has spent so much time reading such a fabulous document. But 
what he didn’t notice in that document was . . . he said 
agriculture policy in that document, but it is included. 
 
But we take for granted in this province, what we shouldn’t 
have to write in a document, what we shouldn’t be doing — 
what this government does all the time — is breaking our word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Time for the debate has elapsed. Why is the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast on her feet? Eastview, sorry. 
 
Ms. Junor: — With leave to introduce a guest, please. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Eastview has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, I’d 
like to introduce to you and to all the members of the Assembly, 
someone who is very important in my life, my son Sean Junor. 
He’s here from Montreal and part of a national tour promoting 
his book, The Price of Knowledge. So I would like all members 
to welcome him to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To ask a question if I may, Mr. 
Speaker. Are we still engaged in the debate and the questions? 

The Speaker: — The member is out of order. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Motion No. 5 — Government’s Commitments to 
Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak on the 
accomplishments of this government — positive 
accomplishments of a government with direction, vision, and a 
plan for the people of this great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has a plan and we are 
implementing that plan. Our province is looking toward a bright 
future and despite tremendous hurt that has been inflicted on 
our farmers and ranchers — three and four years of drought, 
international subsidies, closed borders, frost, and crop in the 
field — despite the challenges our producers have borne, there’s 
an economic and social momentum in Saskatchewan today that 
has not existed for a quarter century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks, I’ll be moving 
the following motion, seconded by the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains: 
 

That this Assembly commend the government for meeting 
its commitments to the people of Saskatchewan in a 
prudent, responsible, and timely fashion. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government is on a move implementing its 
plan. Our government made a promise to the people of 
Saskatchewan. A promise of the lowest cost package of utilities 
— phone, electricity, natural gas, and car insurance. A promise 
to be lower than anywhere else in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we are delivering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this December, Saskatchewan citizens will be 
receiving . . . $137 rebate will appear as a credit on the SaskTel 
residential phone bills as this government keeps its commitment 
to having the lowest cost bundle of basic utility services in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what we stand for. We stand for Crown 
corporations that are publicly owned — Crown corporations for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our government is also not stuck, but we are 
building. This government promised and we’re delivering, a 
renewed federal-provincial home repair program providing 
more than $20 million during the next three years for 
renovations to older homes. The programs will support 
low-income homeowners, facilitate easier home access for 
seniors and persons with disabilities, upgrade affordable rentals 
for families and students, and support emergency 
accommodation for victims of family violence. Mr. Speaker, the 
CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation) housing 
renovations program was signed in February 2004 and extends 
to March 31, 2006. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are not stopping there. We’re looking for 



1940 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

the future and expanding the century affordable housing 
program to provide 2,000 new homes over the next five years. 
We’re building 2,000 new affordable homes for seniors and 
low-income families. Since January 2004, 330 new housing 
units have been started or committed that have received funding 
from the centenary affordable housing program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite, we are building this 
province and are not bogged. We have a plan and a direction. 
And, Mr. Speaker, while it appears that the other side hasn’t a 
direction and are bogged down, as I had mentioned, this 
government through its publicly owned SaskTel system is 
keeping its promise to expand high-speed Internet from 74 per 
cent of Saskatchewan’s population using wireless technology to 
86 per cent. 
 
Every community with more than 200 people will be covered 
by the wireless high-speed Internet. That’s 159 more 
communities including the North, Mr. Speaker. Another 1,500 
Saskatchewan businesses and farmsteads within a 30-kilometre 
radius of these communities will receive this service. Mr. 
Speaker, this is the best coverage in the entire world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the labour front, we have promised and will 
deliver to the people a minimum wage that’ll have a regular 
review of the minimum wage — and we have kept that promise. 
We will regularly review the minimum wage rate and keep it 
from being eroded by a rising cost of living. And we won’t 
introduce, Mr. Speaker, a two-tier system that discriminates 
against young people and new employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to further read in some of the other 
accomplishments which have been implemented. 
 
In revenue-sharing grants to municipalities, a further 10 million 
increase in unconditional revenue-sharing grants to 
municipalities for a total of 85 million each year, Mr. Speaker. 
The 2004-05 provincial budget include a 10 million increase in 
revenue-sharing grants to urban, rural, and northern 
municipalities — 1 million to northern municipalities with 178 
allocated as unconditional grants and 822 allocated for northern 
water and sewer; 1.6 million for rural municipalities; 7.39 to 
urban municipalities, with 5.35 million allocated to cities and 2 
million, Mr. Speaker, to towns, villages, and resort villages. 
 
And there is more, Mr. Speaker, more for health where we are 
on track and ongoing. Increasing nursing training spaces. 
During the next two years, we’re adding 100 more training 
positions for registered nurses in Saskatoon and Regina, 
increasing the annual enrolment in Saskatchewan’s nursing 
education program to 400 students. We doubled capacity in the 
practical nursing program. And during the next two years, 60 
more training positions will be added to Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies. On track and ongoing, Mr. Speaker. 
The 100-seat expansion includes 50 seats by September 2005 
and 50 seats by May 2005 for the second option. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you about new child care 
spaces. We’ll provide 1,200 new licensed child care spaces 
supporting a total of more than 8,600 across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. We are ongoing in this. 
 
Increased occupational health and safety inspections. This year, 

we’re adding six occupational health and safety inspection 
officers to increase workplace safety and inspections to reduce 
workplace injuries, Mr. Speaker. We’ve completed this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I see I have everybody’s attention, Mr. Speaker, so I guess I 
will continue. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Rapt — rapt attention. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Rapt attention, right. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve hired four new occupational health officers; 
increased on-site inspections from 3,000 to 3,242; reviewed 300 
health and safety programs in higher workplaces; increased the 
number of workplace occupational health and safety 
committees to 4,056 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A promise kept. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — . . . an increase of 211 over 2002-03. Mr. 
Speaker, as the member says, a promise made, a promise kept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, there is more; there is more. Mr. Speaker, there’s 
compassionate leave legislation, consistent with new federal 
legislation, will ensure Saskatchewan workers can provide 
compassionate care for gravely ill or dying child, parent, or 
spouse without putting their jobs or income at risk. Employees 
will be able to draw up to six weeks employment insurance for 
this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment to The Labour Standards Act was 
passed in the spring 2004 session, clarifying the jobs that 
employees who are receiving EI (Employment Insurance) 
benefits are protected while receiving these benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s important to people, and many people in 
my own constituency, is a safe and secure community. To that 
end, Mr. Speaker, we have put in, on an ongoing basis we’re 
giving police and social workers the tools to eliminate abuse of 
children and youth in the sex trade. We’re hitting hard at those 
who would exploit children and we’re providing new safe 
houses and counselling services for victims of abuse. 
 
Building on the success of Regina auto theft strategy and the 
North Battleford youth crime project, our government will 
continue to partner with RCMP and municipal police forces to 
develop innovative crime reduction strategies. We’ll help police 
officers and justice officials use the tools of the new criminal 
justice Act to target and get tough with chronic offenders. 
 
During the next four years, Mr. Speaker, we’ll target funding 
for 40 additional police officers to develop innovative, 
community-based crime reduction strategies building on Regina 
and North Battleford pilot projects. These strategies are already 
outpacing Ontario boot camps, Mr. Speaker, in cutting down on 
the number of repeat offenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an important Act, The Safer Communities and 
Neighbourhoods Act. The Act provides a means for using civil 
remedies to shut down residential and commercial buildings 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

and lands that are habitually used for illegal activities. 
 
In March 2004, Mr. Speaker, The Pawned Property (Recording) 
Act was proclaimed. This provides a framework for electronic 
reporting system for pawnbrokers to report pawned property 
they receive to the local police in June 2004. 
 
The target approach, Mr. Speaker, to crime reduction focuses on 
a small percentage of offenders, usually young offenders and 
young adults, who are committing a significant percentage of 
crime. Projects underway include the successful Regina auto 
theft strategy and crime response programs in North Battleford 
and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is so much more that I could go on for a 
couple of days, actually. But at this time I would like to move a 
motion which will be seconded by the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains: 
 

That this Assembly commend the government for meeting 
its commitments to the people of Saskatchewan in a 
prudent, responsible, and timely fashion. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:45) 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview and seconded by the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains: 
 

That this Assembly commend the government for meeting 
its commitments to the people of Saskatchewan in a 
prudent, responsible, and timely fashion. 
 

I recognize the member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
much has been said over the last number of weeks from the 
opposition about promises made and promises kept. And today 
I can tell you that unlike the Saskatchewan Party . . . who has 
conventions that are held without any public scrutiny, that don’t 
want to develop policies, and that tell the public of 
Saskatchewan it’s our job to oppose rather than propose 
anything, that, just elect us and you’ll be surprised and it will be 
a pleasant surprise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the public in Saskatchewan don’t trust those kinds of 
platform promises that are made when they can’t read exactly 
what’s on the minds of the opposition. Unlike the New 
Democrat Party, from year to year, who have policy 
conventions that are held within public . . . full public purview 
and development of platform happens over many, many months 
and discussions with many, many people to develop an open, 
forthright and honest platform to be presented to the people to 
be voted upon. And it was this side of the House that the people 
in the last election said they trust and they want to govern for 
four more years in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What did they vote on? Well the first point was that we would 
make Saskatchewan the most affordable place to live and raise a 

family. As the member from Fairview says, we’re well on the 
way to keeping that promise to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Number two, to provide the best public health care in Canada. 
Number three, build a green and prosperous economy and, 
number four, build a future here for young people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that we’ve made plans, set 
down the foundation to keep those promises. Many, many of 
those promises made have been promises kept. But the truth is 
obvious. The true test of a campaign commitment is to measure 
performance over a term, to present to the people promises over 
a complete term. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party’s major campaign promises, many of 
them spread over 10 years and even some promises about the 
education property tax relief, were promises made that they 
wanted to keep over eight years. And then there were many, 
many other promises that they made that said, well we’ll deliver 
on those when we can afford them. Or how about, we don’t 
deliver on them, we’ll contract out our decision making to third 
party groups in Saskatchewan who will make decisions on 
behalf of you, the people of Saskatchewan, those who aren’t 
elected and those who can’t be held accountable. 
 
On our promises made and promises kept today, I really want to 
start off with quoting Don Martin, who today wrote in the 
National Post. Now these are Don Martin’s words, quote, not 
mine, but he says: 
 

But — yeeow! — check out those . . . (budget) biceps. The 
flatland is no longer flatlining on the balance sheet. 
 

Don Martin’s words, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The latest update posted earlier this month shows a nice 
mix of one-time spending, tax relief (tax relief — promise 
made, promise kept), debt repayment and rainy day 
savings . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, he’s even talking about rainy day savings being 
important to the province of Saskatchewan. Does that sound 
like a Fiscal Stabilization Fund or what? Well it also talks about 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’m having 
difficulty deciding who’s words are coming from where. But I 
do believe that the floor belongs at this time to the member 
from Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me 
the floor once again. What does Don Martin say? This is “all 
bottom-lined in fiscal black,” Mr. Speaker. And he says: 
 

. . . most shocking of all is the revelation that lowly 
Saskatchewan has emerged seemingly from nowhere to 
become a “have” province, joining an exclusive club of 
two occupied, until now, by the economic powerhouses of 
Alberta and Ontario. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, promises made to community in 
Saskatchewan, promises kept. The reality is, Mr. Speaker, when 
you promise to build a green and prosperous economy you 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2004 

don’t rely on just what people of Saskatchewan are saying 
about New Democrats. You talk about what we’re saying about 
ourselves. We ask other people. And the reality is that in 
Saskatchewan, despite two years of drought and BSE, the 
Saskatchewan economy is one of the top performers in the 
country. 
 
Who says that, Mr. Speaker? Well the Bank of Montreal and the 
CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) both say we 
have the fastest, real economic growth in Canada last year. And 
the Conference Board of Canada and the Royal Bank both 
placed us in second despite opposition claims that 
Saskatchewan’s economic performance is at or near the top 
with 11 credit . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Despite what the 
member’s opposite are saying, Mr. Speaker, our performance, 
our performance is at or near the top with 11, 11 credit upgrades 
since 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Eleven credit upgrades since 1995. Not only 
that, Saskatchewan is one of the most successful 
trading/exporting jurisdictions in the world. And we didn’t get 
to be this way by accident. No we didn’t. We get to be that way 
by planning, by presenting a sound plan to the people of 
Saskatchewan, making promises, and then keeping those 
promises, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And says, John Treleaven, president and chief executive officer 
of STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.), 
we’re very good at what we do in Saskatchewan. Well, if 
people in Saskatchewan believe we’re very good at what we do, 
and other people who are third-party validators believe we’re 
very good in what we do, why can’t we get from an opposition 
who says we should be open for business, and the future’s wide 
open, the future’s here. Why can’t we get them to stop calling 
down Saskatchewan with gloom and doom stories here in the 
Assembly day after day? 
 
When you listen to the members opposite, nothing’s right, Mr. 
Speaker. But when you hear from other people you know, you 
know Saskatchewan was at or near the top in economic 
performance in 2003. Both the Bank of Montreal and CIC say 
we’re the fastest, real economic growth in Canada last year. 
KPMG report, Mr. Speaker, says our business climate is 
competitive with other provinces and with other countries. A 
KPMG report tells people that we’re doing very well in 
reducing regulations and supporting businesses and reducing 
the small business tax rate in Saskatchewan. 
 
And what does that give us in Saskatchewan? A competitive 
business climate. I’m not certain that’s what those members 
opposite told people in Calgary last evening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan is now one of only two provinces in Canada that 
doesn’t charge an income surtax, a payroll tax, or a health 
premium, Mr. Speaker. Can you imagine what those initiatives 
mean to the people of Saskatchewan and the money that they’re 
able to keep in their businesses or keep in their homes to future 
the province of Saskatchewan and our economic growth. 
 
Last year we registered the highest average annual employment 
in our history. In June and July we had more than half a million 

people working for the first time ever. Over the 1994-2003 
period, Saskatchewan’s real GDP (gross domestic product) per 
capita increased at an average annual rate of 2.3 per cent. And 
Saskatchewan’s productivity, the real GDP per employed 
person, was tied at third highest among the 10 provinces in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re there. We’re keeping our promises. We’re 
making our commitments. It must be a very difficult couple of 
weeks for the opposition in this province when they can’t see 
that, when they can’t put on a happy face for Saskatchewan and 
sell this province to other people and tell those people our 
future’s wide open and our future is here, Mr. Speaker, because 
promise made on economic growth, promise made. On a green 
and prosperous economy, promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Do you know that Stats Canada last year 
projected total investments in Saskatchewan will exceed $6 
billion for the eighth consecutive year? Investment is $1.7 
billion higher than in 1991. Well, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite say, and I’ve said too, despite very difficult times with 
BSE where will our Premier go next week? He’s going to speak 
to the President, Mr. Bush, about our problems, and we’re 
getting very good response. 
 
Many of us were at the midwestern legislators conference last 
year. Many of the opposition joined us. We went there to talk 
about the BSE crisis and to talk about opening the borders. And 
we worked together to pass resolutions. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I just ask everybody to just 
hold it for a minute and just . . . Order, please. The member for 
Regina Wascana, please. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — So there at the Midwestern Legislative 
Conference we were able to band together and get a resolution 
passed by midwestern legislators to open the borders — 
working together, working in a positive way to get a green and 
prosperous economy moving for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
How can the members opposite with their faces in solemn 
repose go out to the people of Saskatchewan and not tell them 
about the year’s announcement of $95 million investment in 
biofuels industry in Lloydminster? Is the member from 
Lloydminster out talking about that investment in a green and 
prosperous economy for this province? We won’t hear from the 
gloom and doom opposite. 
 
Will they talk about the small business tax was reduced to 5.5 
per cent on January 1 and will be reduced further up to 5 per 
cent . . . further 5 per cent in January 1, 2005 — half of what it 
was when we took office in 1991, half. No, those members 
opposite won’t be talking to small businesses and saying what a 
competitive tax climate we’ve got. They’ll be talking gloom 
and doom. And then they’ll wonder why businesses wouldn’t 
flock here under a Saskatchewan Party government because 
they wouldn’t trust what they have to say. 
 
Northern municipalities in our province need a lot of our help, 
and looking at how we can assist their communities to grow and 
be green and be prosperous. But northern municipalities have 



November 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

received an increase of $825,000 towards funding safe drinking 
water and infrastructure in their communities. 
 
Now that’s in opposition to members who stood in this House, 
members of the opposition who stood and voted against having 
more people in place to look at clean and safe supplies of 
drinking water in the province, to have more inspectors out 
there to do that. They’re the ones who stand up and talk about 
voting against many, many initiatives in this Assembly that 
have furthered the green and prosperous economy. 
 
There’s so much more that we can talk about. Because when we 
talk about the positive things happening in Saskatchewan, and 
when I go out to public meetings, I find one or two people there 
who have come home to Saskatchewan. 
 
They’ve heard the message of the future’s wide open and your 
future is here, and they’re coming back to Saskatchewan. Why 
are they coming back to Saskatchewan? Because there are 
opportunities here and they know that they have the most 
affordable place to live and raise a family anywhere in this 
country. And of course, this past week we’ve just announced 
that we will keep our promises on the lowest bundle of basic 
utility rates anywhere in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Anywhere in this country, Mr. Speaker. For 
young people, for young people, Mr. Speaker, the list does not 
stop and young people know that. They’re in a positive mood. 
 
You know, I’ve never been so proud of a group of young people 
as the Premier’s youth advisory council that came to speak to 
us. Men and women from across this province who said things 
like, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been involved in parks advisory groups, 
I’ve been involved in volunteerism, they’ve been involved in 
the economy, and they’re investing in this province, and they 
will stay here . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It now being past the hour of 1 o’clock, the 
House stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. I wish 
everyone a pleasant weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:00. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1913 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1913 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1913 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1913 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1913 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1913 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1913 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1914 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1914 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1914 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1914 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1914 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1914 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1915 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1915 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1915 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1915 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1915 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1915 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1915 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1916 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1917 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1916 
 Bill No. 62 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1916 
 Bill No. 63 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
 Loi de modification législative de 2004 (no 2) 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1917 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1917 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1917 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1917 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1918 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1918 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1918 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1918 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1918 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1918 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1918 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1939 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Suellen Beatty Presented with Meritorious Service Medal 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1919 
 2004 United Way Campaign 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1919 
 Health Care 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1919 
 Souls Harbour Mission 15th Anniversary 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1920 
 Highway 35 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1920 
 Saskatoon Youth Action Now Holds Youth Forum 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1920 
 



 

 Saskatchewan Party Dinner in Calgary 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1921 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1921 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1921 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Changes to Labour Legislation 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1921 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1921 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1922 
 Day of Recognition for the Right Honourable John George Diefenbaker 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1923 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1923 
 Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company Litigation 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1924 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1924 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1926 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 SaskTel International Awarded Contract in Mozambique 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1926 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1926 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 203 — The Recognition of John George Diefenbaker Day Act 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1927 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1927 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1927 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
  Stewart ...........................................................................................................................................................................1928, 1937 
  Harpauer .......................................................................................................................................................................1929, 1939 
  Wartman........................................................................................................................................................................1931, 1938 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1932 
  Atkinson.........................................................................................................................................................................1934, 1938 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1936 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1937 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1937 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1938 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1938 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 5 — Government’s Commitments to Saskatchewan 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1939 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1941 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


