















































Hansard: May 12, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 37A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 12, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1065 
 May 12, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a former 
educator I take great privilege in presenting this petition on 
behalf of the students of the province. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 

 
And that is signed by students from Springwater and from 
Biggar. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the Speaker’s 
indulgence I have a brief explanation of a petition I’d like to 
present. The grade 7 class at St. Gabriel’s School completed a 
unit on tobacco and smoking, and the question was raised: if 
smoking is so bad and costs so much money, why doesn’t the 
government do something? And further discussion led to this 
petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to thank the grade 7 class at St. Gabriel’s School for 
taking the initiative to discuss this issue and to ask people to 
sign the petition. And I’d also like to thank my colleagues for 
assisting me in presenting the petition today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the students, staff, and families at St. Gabriel’s 
School in Biggar, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition signed by students, staff, and families of St. Gabriel’s 
School in Biggar, Saskatchewan. The prayer of this petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, the students who have signed this petition are 
from the community of Biggar, and I’m pleased to present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a similar petition 
from students from Biggar, Saskatchewan, dealing with 
smoking as well. And I will read from the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s commendable that these students have 
taken an active interest . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the member for 
Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition signed by students in the Biggar school regarding 
smoking. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of the students from Biggar school. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and the use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 
 

And I’m very pleased to present on these students’ behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the students of St. Gabriel’s in 
Biggar. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 
 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2004 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And it’s signed by students from Biggar and Plenty. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from the 
students at St. Gabriel’s School in Biggar. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from the students, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this also is signed by the students of St. Gabriel’s School. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition to put an end 
to smoking. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from the 
students of Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of students from St. Gabriel’s School, forwarding a 
petition on their behalf. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, signed by students of Biggar School, but also 
students from Springwater and Duperow. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of the grade 7 students at St. Gabriel’s School for their 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 

 
Signed by grade 7 students from Biggar, Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition on behalf of the students, staff, and families of 
St. Gabriel’s School in Biggar. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and to put an end to smoking. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is all signed by, what I take it to be, students from Biggar, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of the grade 7 
class at St. Gabriel’s School in Biggar. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from 
Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise with a 
petition from St. Gabriel’s School. The prayer reads: 



May 12, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately pass a law outlawing the sale and use of 
tobacco and put an end to smoking. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it is signed by the students of Biggar. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have done in the 
past consistently, I have presented a petition on behalf of 
producers in the constituency of Cypress Hills concerned about 
the Crown land issue. And I’d like to read the prayer which 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
communities of Abbey, Maple Creek, and Tompkins. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise on behalf of the people from my constituency who 
is really fearful of closures of the hospitals in our area: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Wadena Hospital is not 
closed or further downsized. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from the town 
of Wadena. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Craik Health Centre is 
not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
communities of Craik and Findlater. 
 
I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of my 
constituency concerned about the future of Mainprize Manor & 
Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Mainprize Manor & 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Weyburn, Estevan, Moose Jaw, 
and Tisdale. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to reinstate the bulk beer discount structure: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to reinstate the bulk beer discount 
structure cancelled in the recent provincial budget. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Davidson, Kenaston, and 
Bladworth, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of members from west central Saskatchewan 
concerned with health care in the region: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Kerrobert Hospital is 
not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kerrobert and Major. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received: 
 

A new petition concerning the Pleasant View Care Home; 
 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 48, 96, 97, 145, 160, 166, and 167. 
 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2004 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 42 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of SPMC: has SPMC found a buyer for 
Souris Valley Regional Care Centre in Weyburn; if so, 
who is the buyer? If not, what is SPMC’s next step in 
finding a buyer or alternate tenant or alternate use for this 
facility? If a buyer or alternate use for this facility is not in 
place by December 31, 2004 what is SPMC’s plan for this 
facility? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a second 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 42 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the minister of SPMC: what was the cost of the study 
entitled Free Market Evaluation Study for Souris Valley 
Regional Care Centre, Weyburn, completed in February 
2004 by NAI Commercial Real Estate Services Limited? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 42 ask the government the following question: 

 
To the minister responsible for STC: can the minister 
please provide the names of those who have received a 
severance package in your department in the year 2004, 
and please provide the compensation package amount 
given for each person? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for years 2003 and 2002 
and similar questions for several Crown agencies. I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview, 
the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
today to introduce to you a number of people who have been 
very instrumental in the work as we deal with the whole issue 
of reduction of the use of tobacco in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’d ask these people to give us a sign when we introduce 
them. The first person Paul van Loon from the Lung 
Association. Lynn Koehler from Health Canada. Jennifer Miller 
from Health Canada. Lynn Greaves from the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Authority and the Saskatchewan Coalition 
for Tobacco Reduction. Donna Pasiechnik from the Canadian 
Cancer Society. Dr. Thakre from the Canadian Cancer Society. 
Rhae Ann Bromley from the Heart and Stroke Foundation. 
 
And Mayor Don Schlosser who is the president of SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and the 
mayor of Weyburn. Mayor Phil DeVos of Yorkton who is also 
with SUMA and on the chair of the cities’ committee working 
on this particular issue. 

And also there are three people here from Saskatchewan Health 
who have been working hard on this project: Tanya Mengel, 
Eva Davis, and Lindy McIntyre. And one person who wasn’t 
able to be here today who very instrumental was April Barry. 
 
And I’d ask all members to welcome them here today and thank 
them for their hard work. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort, the 
opposition critic for Health. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the minister and welcoming the distinguished guests 
in the gallery this afternoon. I know that they have worked 
tirelessly in their quest to denormalize the use of tobacco in our 
province and in our country, and we have consistently 
supported and encouraged them to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think today’s introduction of further legislation 
in the province of Saskatchewan is indeed very important. And 
we look forward to seeing this legislation and being able to in 
any way we can be supportive of the principles of 
denormalizing tobacco use in this province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South, the 
Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I 
am very pleased today to be joined in the Assembly on the west 
gallery by a group of grade 8 students from St. Matthew School 
which is in the heart of Whitmore Park in my constituency of 
Regina South. There are indeed 25 of them — I didn’t count but 
this is what the sheet says. There are 25 of them I hope, from 
Mr. Biegler’s class. 
 
And I am looking forward to being able to visit with them a 
little later on today, have a picture, and I understand they’re on 
a bit of a tour. So you and all members of the Assembly would 
join me in welcoming this group from St. Matthew School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to introduce a great group of students. We have 14 grade 12 
students here from the Allan School. They’re accompanied by 
their teachers, Ms. Teresa Field and Noel Roche. I was able to 
meet with them earlier and they’re great young people that 
would love to stay in our province. 
 
So with that I would welcome everyone to welcome them to 
their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 12, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
stand in the House today to introduce a fine young man who 
works in my office as a summer student. He attends the 
University of Regina in the administration program. He is a 
husband and a father of a five-year-old son. I would like to 
extend my congratulations for his third-year anniversary 
coming up on May 25 to a very lucky woman. 
 
Not only is he a great basketball player, Mr. Speaker, he’s also 
a great man. I would like to ask all members of the House to 
join with me and welcome the future premier of Saskatchewan, 
Sheldon Dean, who is here today. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join with the Minister of Health in welcoming the 
mayor of Yorkton to the Assembly today. 
 
As you know, the mayor was elected just recently for a second 
term, and two very significant pieces of work that are 
happening in our area of which the mayor has been leading. 
One is that we are just building in our city a recreational project 
somewhere in the tune of about $15.3 million — a major, major 
piece of work, of which the mayor is leading. 
 
And secondly, we’ve been very successful on the eastern side of 
the province to have a number of people from Alberta move to 
Saskatchewan and actually farm in the area. And much of that 
is due to a project that the mayor has led called the Last 
Frontier, and recently have had a major project of that nature in 
Yorkton. The mayor has been leading that campaign and has 
done a tremendous piece of work for our region of the province. 
So I want to recognize him for that. 
 
And finally, he’s been working very hard, Mr. Speaker, as well 
as on the issue of smoking, but also he’s been working hard on 
changing the time on that side of the province. So daylight 
savings time is very much on his agenda. 
 
And so, we wish him well as he continues his work, Mr. 
Speaker, and welcome the mayor to the Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to welcome a 
former colleague of mine to the House, Donna Pasiechnik, and 
you can’t find a more enthusiastic lobbyist than Donna. She 
even stopped me on a jogging trail early one morning. 
 
So I welcome Donna to the House this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

2004 Saskatoon Achievement in Business 
Excellence Awards 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last night I had the pleasure of 
travelling to Saskatoon with some of my colleagues on this side 
of the House and some from the other side of the House to 
attend the annual SABEX (Saskatoon Achievement in Business 
Excellence) Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SABEX is the Saskatoon awards of business 
excellence. It is one of the more popular business events in 
Saskatoon. It is jointly sponsored by the Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce and the Women Entrepreneurs Association of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Business of the Year was Brainsport The Running Store, 
owned by Brian Michasiw. This business specializes in shoes 
for walking and running, and is a specialty store. 
 
Another successful contestant in there was Draganfly 
Innovations, and it’s spelt D-r-a-g-a-n, named after the owners 
of the business. And this is a company that manufactures and 
makes small, remote-controlled aircraft which can be used for 
both recreational and military uses as a drone aircraft. It is 
marketed exclusively on the Internet, and it’s been advertised or 
featured on CNN (Cable News Network) and Discovery 
Channel. They received two awards; one of them was for 
exports. 
 
Other significant winners, Mr. Speaker, were Co-op Trust for 
community involvement; Independent Medical Rehabilitation 
for customer service; VCom for growth and expansion, a 
Saskatoon-based high-tech company that has now over 400 
employees; Prairie View Chapel for innovation; Cronus 
technology for new product development. 
 
There was also an Athena Award which recognized the talents 
of women in business leadership. That award went to Nancy 
Hopkins, a Saskatoon lawyer. An award of innovation went to 
three university scientists; there was also a Hall of Fame Award 
that went to the Klombies family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to ask all members to join me in . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to say a few 
words about the Celebrate Success! gala held last night in 
Saskatoon to recognize dedication, excellence, and outstanding 
achievement by members of the Saskatoon and district business 
community. 
 
I particularly want to congratulate the Klombies family for their 
deserving induction into the SABEX Hall of Fame. It being 
Women Entrepreneurs Week, I would be remiss if I did not 
mention Nancy Hopkins as did my friend, winner of the 2004 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2004 

Athena Award. And of course congratulations to all the 
nominees and winners at last night’s Celebrate Success! gala. 
 
Celebrate success, it’s something we don’t do often enough in 
this province. We’re often too modest about our impressive 
achievements — not just in the area of progressive social 
policies, but in business, in research, in science, and in 
technological innovation. Yes, we have our challenges, but we 
also have many successes to celebrate and a solid foundation on 
which to build for future opportunity. That’s what last night was 
all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the entrepreneurial spirit is one of the things that 
has made Saskatchewan great — the recognition of opportunity 
and the pursuit and realization of a dream in the competitive 
world of business. Again I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating the nominees and winners of the 2004 SABEX 
Awards, and congratulating all entrepreneurs in and around 
Saskatoon for making it one of the most dynamic and 
cost-competitive cities on the continent. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

International Nurses Day 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to stand today to recognize International Nurses Day as 
part of National Nursing Week. International Nurses Day is 
celebrated on May 12, Florence Nightingale’s birthday, to raise 
public awareness of the ongoing contributions that nurses make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would specifically like to acknowledge the 
efforts of Saskatchewan nurses for their commitment to patients 
and to their profession. They truly are an important and 
essential component of our health care system. Over the last 
number of years, health care in Saskatchewan has faced many 
challenges, including the shortage of nurses and other health 
care professionals. 
 
These shortages have created an increased workload for nurses, 
with many nurses working countless hours of overtime. Nurses 
work these overtime hours, Mr. Speaker, because of their 
dedication to their chosen profession. Whether it’s tending an 
emergency situation or comforting a dying patient or countless 
other duties, our nurses are there caring for our needs. 
 
As legislators it’s important that we recognize the important 
role nurses play in the delivery of health care. And it is 
incumbent on the government to move forward with plans that 
will increase the number of nurses and improve the quality of 
their workplace. 
 
Today we would like to say thank you and let nurses know that 
they are truly appreciated and valued. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members of the legislature to join with me and applaud the 
efforts and ongoing commitment of Saskatchewan nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 
 

International Nursing Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nurses play an 
important and valued role in our health care system. And 
everyday we see powerful examples of nurses’ compassion, 
professionalism, and knowledge, whether they’re helping to 
welcome a newborn baby into the world or caring for our most 
senior citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, May 10 to 16 is International Nursing Week 
around the world and National Nursing Week here in Canada. 
This week provides us with an opportunity to recognize the 
hard work and dedication of all Saskatchewan nurses. Today is 
also National Nurses Day which is celebrated every year on the 
birthday of Florence Nightingale. 
 
The theme of National Nursing Week this year is Nursing: 
Knowledge at Work. This theme is particularly well chosen 
because of the many unique and valuable skills required of 
nurses. Saskatchewan’s nurses are constantly learning new 
techniques and new technologies to help them best care for their 
clients. Nurses today are expanding their roles, gaining 
advanced skills, and continuing to increase their contribution to 
the health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that nurses are currently in short 
supply around the world. In Saskatchewan we are addressing 
this issue head-on in our action plan which was released in 
December 2001. In partnership with nursing organizations and 
health regions, we have made significant progress in 
implementing the plan’s recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a registered nurse and as the first nurse elected 
to this legislature, I extend my best wishes to all nurses for a 
successful celebration of National Nurses Week. I ask all my 
colleagues to join me in thanking all the nurses for their 
dedication, their commitment, and their contribution to quality 
health care in Saskatchewan, and in congratulating them all for 
a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Distinguished Researcher Award 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise in this 
Assembly today to recognize the exemplary work of a professor 
at the University of Saskatchewan. Bill Waiser, professor of 
history, has been singled out of his many peers to receive the U 
of S’s (University of Saskatchewan) Distinguished Researcher 
Award at this spring’s convocation. 
 
Professor Waiser, who has been a member of the department of 
history for the last two decades, has been recognized for his 
ongoing contributions to the field of Western Canadian history. 
As U of S vice-president, research, Steve Franklin, notes, and I 
quote: 
 

Perhaps more than any other Canadian historian, Professor 



May 12, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

Waiser has found innovative ways of reaching out to 
general audiences with his insights that make the history 
of our region come alive. 
 

Bill Waiser has written eight books and is in the process of 
writing the history of Saskatchewan for the provincial 
centennial in 2005. At this year’s Saskatchewan Book Awards, 
his most recent work All Hell Can’t Stop Us now earned him 
the award for non-fiction. Professor Waiser also hosted and 
co-produced looking back a series of 50 historical vignettes for 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) television that 
focused on little known and sometimes bizarre tales that 
celebrated real people from Saskatchewan’s past. Dean of 
College of Arts and Science, Ken Coates, says of Professor 
Waiser: 
 

No one in Saskatchewan for over a generation has worked 
as successfully to engage both scholars and the province at 
large in debate about this . . . (inaudible) . . . character. 
 

I would like to ask all members of this Assembly to join with 
me in congratulating Professor Bill Waiser on the receipt of this 
award and to thank him for his engaging work that he continues 
to breathe life into the people and stories that have shaped this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 

Gathering of Nations Powwow 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year 
First Nations people from across Canada and the United States 
come together to celebrate the world’s largest powwow, the 
Gathering of Nations Powwow. 
 
This year’s event brought together more than 3,000 people from 
500 different tribes throughout North America. This celebration 
is an opportunity for indigenous people to come together to 
celebrate culture and to compete in traditional dancing, 
drumming, and other events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that 12 dancers from 
Saskatchewan placed in different dance categories at the 
celebrations. The dancers who placed in first place in the 
competition: Irene Oaks from the Nekaneet First Nation; Brian 
Waskewitch, Onion Lake First Nation; Randall, Symone and 
Jamon Paskemin from the Sweetgrass First Nation. 
 
Second place winners: Kevin Haywahay, Carry The Kettle First 
Nation; Alanna Tootoosis from the Poundmaker First Nation. 
 
In third place: Yvette Ewalk from the Ocean Man First Nation, 
Andrea Redman from the Standing Buffalo Dakota First Nation. 
 
In fourth place was Linda Standing, White Bear First Nation; 
and Maria Shepard also of the White Bear First Nation. 
 
And in fifth place Murdo Tootoosis from Poundmaker First 
Nation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Big Bear Singers drum group from the 

Thunderchild First Nation in my constituency of Meadow Lake 
placed fifth out of 31 drum groups in the northern drum contest. 
And it is with great pleasure that I congratulate my ministerial 
assistant, Gerald Okanee who is the lead singer from that group. 
 
I’m sure all my colleagues will join with me in congratulating 
these and all the competitors from Saskatchewan for their fine 
showing at the 21st Gathering of Nations Powwow. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Future of Health Care Facilities 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, people all 
over Saskatchewan are concerned about the future of health 
care facilities in rural Saskatchewan and across the province. 
 
On budget day, the NDP announced their intention to close 
long-term care, acute care beds and facilities in the province of 
Saskatchewan in spite of the fact — in spite of the fact — that 
shortly after the Fyke Commission reported, the Premier of this 
province committed to not closing any beds in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the intervening time between now and the 
budget, communities have been asking questions. They want to 
know from this government what its plans are, and it’s a fair 
request. 
 
So we ask the Premier today to do the right thing. Will he 
highlight for these communities the fact that he has decided to 
change his mind and to keep his promise not to close long-term 
care facilities in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve 
explained before, we had $160 million new money into the 
health budget on March 31 in the budget that was presented on 
that day. Since that time, we’ve been working with the regional 
health authorities across the province, looking at all of the 
different options with the funds that have been made available 
to the regional health authorities and set out in that budget. 
 
We are looking at all the things that we do because we do have 
challenges around the resources that we have. And this is no 
different than any other province in Canada. And we are 
working diligently at that and we anticipate having a response 
for communities across the province. But practically, Mr. 
Speaker, we are going to make sure that people get the care they 
need here in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, communities across the province 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2004 

are worried about the future of their health care facilities. The 
worst thing is, they get answers like that from the government. 
They can’t get any straight answers in terms of what they 
should be planning, in terms of what they should be doing to 
protect their beds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Community leaders from Craik came to the legislature last 
week. They were looking for answers. They didn’t get any. 
People from Gull Lake and Lafleche and Herbert and Porcupine 
Plain and from communities across the province can’t get any 
straight answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the government to give them some 
very clear answers about their intentions with their long-term 
care beds, with acute care beds, with health care in rural 
Saskatchewan. When is the Premier going to announce these 
hospital closures? How many hospitals is he going to close, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the budget for this year, 
we have $160 million in new money for health care. There are 
many more demands. 
 
The member opposite who raises the question knows that we 
put substantial money into his community in Swift Current to 
make sure that we go ahead with the hospital project there, that 
we go ahead with the new CT (computerized tomography) 
scanner in that particular community. 
 
We are looking at all of the things that we do across the 
province to make sure that we’re providing what we know is 
going to be for the long-term care of all the people in the 
province. This is not an easy task. There are many complex 
issues. But, Mr. Speaker, we have very many careful, caring 
people who are making these decisions, and we’re going to do 
that and make that decision and give that information to the 
people very soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s an excellent letter to the 
editor in today’s paper from a resident of Herbert, 
Saskatchewan. She writes: 
 

. . . (our) hospital has 17 beds. Often, these beds are filled 
with patients from Swift Current . . . If the hospital in 
Herbert is closed, where are . . . (these) patients to go? 
 

Here are the concerns of Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister raises the spectre of that situation. People in Swift 
Current understand that this new project will have fewer beds 
— fewer beds than the previous hospital in Swift Current. Mr. 
Speaker, what they’re worried about then is that if this 
government goes ahead and closes acute care beds and 
long-term care beds in the surrounding area around Swift 
Current, how will that provide better health care to the people 
of Swift Current or the surrounding region? 
 
And these are the questions that are being asked across this 

province. They’ve been waiting patiently since the budget. This 
government said they would close beds in the budget. That was 
weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. When will this minister stand up and 
be straight with communities in Saskatchewan and tell them if 
their hospital will close? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite and all 
his colleagues can do a good thing for the people of 
Saskatchewan by supporting the budget that we presented 
because it has 160 million new dollars in health care. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the tone of the questions and the kind of 
questions that the member opposite is asking reflect the fact that 
he doesn’t understand how difficult some of the decisions you 
have to make when you’re in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are taking a very careful look with all of the 
regional health authority boards, their senior management, and 
the people in the Department of Health to make sure that 
whatever we do will provide good care for the people of 
Saskatchewan in the long term. But there are many complex 
questions and they involve every community, and we want to 
make sure that we do this in an appropriate way. And we will 
do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the wake of Fyke, the Premier of 
this province, the current Premier said that closures didn’t make 
financial sense in terms of reforming health care, Mr. Speaker 
— that’s what he said. And he said he wouldn’t do them. 
 
The former premier has highlighted the fact that the closures 
that we faced in this province in the early ’90s maybe weren’t 
the best medicine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: has he changed his mind? 
Has he changed his mind? Does he now believe that the best 
medicine for health care in the province of Saskatchewan is to 
close beds in rural Saskatchewan and further exacerbate the 
situation in our tertiary centres? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of government 
let me say this. The Minister of Health has made it very clear 
the process that is engaged here. This is nothing different and 
it’s happened in each and every year. This government has 
found 160 million new dollars to invest in health care, an 
amount that that opposition votes against. The ministry of 
Health is currently working with the regional health authorities 
on how those new resources can best serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But let me remind this legislature, Mr. Speaker, under this 



May 12, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

government and with this budget we are investing in new 
diagnostic services across this province, new CT scans in the 
Leader of the Opposition’s own hometown, new MRIs 
(magnetic resonance imaging). We are engaged in new 
bursaries to provide support for students in health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question that begs to be answered in this 
House and in this province: where are the opposition in terms of 
health care policy? What are their policies? Would the Leader 
of the Opposition just acquaint the people of Saskatchewan 
what are the policies of the Saskatchewan Party when it comes 
to publicly funded and publicly administered medicare in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Summer Employment for Students 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
Yesterday, the minister admitted the NDP’s (New Democratic 
Party) decision to eliminate $156,000 in youth employment 
funding to our regional parks will kill 70 jobs for students this 
summer. And then this morning the same minister announced 
she was spending $200,000 to recreate those jobs under what 
she called the Green Team program. 
 
Will the minister confirm the NDP is actually spending $46,000 
more this summer to create a grand total of zero new summer 
jobs for students? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I am so glad that you asked 
that question because it gives me an opportunity to tell again or 
to explain again our new Green Team initiative that’s providing 
meaningful jobs in the area of environment. And we have some 
really good partners that are working with us in this area, Sask 
Environmental Industry and Managers Association and Sask 
Environment, and young people. I met a young person there this 
morning that’s very excited about her job that she’s got already, 
and she’s studying climate control. To me, this is one way of 
not only looking to the future of our province, but providing 
meaningful jobs to young people in the area of environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the 
Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association, they received 
$156,000 last year from the centennial student employment 
program. Executive director Darlene Friesen indicates regional 
parks then created 70 summer jobs for students with that money 
in 2003. 
 
And the minister told reporters this morning the NDP is going 
to spend $200,000 to recreate those summer jobs under a new 
program, the Green Team program. So simple math would 
suggest the NDP is spending $46,000 more this year to create 

zero new jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the 70 new jobs that were announced this 
morning to replace the 70 jobs the NDP cut from regional parks 
— and the member already alluded to one young person she’s 
talked to that has filled, that has a position — how many 
positions have already been filled? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I just want to re-emphasize how important 
this initiative is for our students and this province. And as far as 
the CSEP (centennial student employment program) program, 
there are 600 summer students under that program. Under this 
initiative, it’s meaningful partnerships. It was young people 
themselves that recommended changes to CSEP. They wanted 
more jobs that were meaningful, and this is one way of doing 
that. We are listening to the young people of this province. You 
know, they want to work in the area of environment and they 
want to stay in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister announced the new Green Team program to the 
general public this morning. And yet the minister said also this 
morning that at least 40 of those jobs before . . . have been filled 
before the program was even announced. 
 
If the program was only made known to the general public this 
morning, how did the 40 students who have already been hired 
under the program even know about the program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, we have good partners under 
this program. And there is some initial work that has been done, 
especially with post-secondary students. So you know, that 
outreach has been there. There’s some high school students that 
will be part of this program, and there is two more application 
deadlines that will be coming up. 
 
So the information will be announced all over the province; it’s 
getting out. And young people, including high school students, 
will be able to apply for jobs 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
Madam Minister. I’m glad that the people of Saskatchewan are 
able to find out that there is a deadline to apply. It’s unfortunate 
that there’s more than one deadline, and the one deadline seems 
to be for the minister and the NDP’s friends to fill these 40 
positions. And what about the other students in the province? 
 
So again the question to the minister: how did the 40 students 
who have already been hired under this program even know 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2004 

about this program when it was only announced today? And 
what is being covered up here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, this is an innovative 
program that was developed with good partners. And it’s 
getting out to the province. There’s incredible interest in this 
initiative because students want meaningful jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
And I would like to ask the member opposite, what is it, you 
know, what is their plan as far as meaningful employment in the 
area of environment? We are committed to young people in this 
province and they want meaningful work and that’s what we’re 
doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Costs of Closing Rural Service Centres 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. The minister keeps telling us the NDP’s 
decision to cut 22 of 31 rural service centres throughout 
Saskatchewan will save $2 million. Yet on Monday night in 
Agriculture estimates, the minister told the Committee of 
Finance that the department would not have a handle on the 
total cost of the closures until the end of June. 
 
If the minister has yet to tabulate the costs of paying out leases 
on the closed service centres and the expenses associated with 
severance payments, how can he assure the House the savings 
are indeed $2 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as we’ve restructured the agricultural extension program, we 
have brought some of the people into the new program. Some 
of them will be hired as agrologists in the new program, some 
will be retiring, and we are carrying some of the rent for some 
of the buildings that we were using. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that this program will save ongoing $2 
million a year. It was explained to the members opposite in 
estimates and they just don’t seem to get it yet. We can explain 
it again any time. But the ongoing savings will be $2 million 
per year — $2 million per year. And we will apply those to 
programs which we have been very, I think, adept at doing in 
times of emergency and crisis that meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan producers. That’s what this government is 
working at. That’s what we’re aiming for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — That’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Party has learned through a response to a written 
question that the department will be spending an additional $6.5 
million on the remaining service centres. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
$6.5 million for renovations to existing service centres in nine 
communities and the knowledge centre in Moose Jaw. It seems 
like the NDP is spending more money to provide producers 
with fewer services, or at least poorer access to the same 
service. 
 
(14:15) 
 
To the minister: how does this expense of $6.5 million factor in 
to the $2 million in savings he keeps referring to? Does the cost 
of these renovations negate the savings completely? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I’ve explained before, this savings is an ongoing savings of 
$2 million per year and that will be the figure. But as it’s 
working out right now, we will see what the determination is 
for this particular year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that this change is not about 
contracting services. This is about changing the type of service 
that people have been asking for, meeting the needs for 
agribusiness development in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people were showing by their actions they 
were not using the agricultural extension agrologists as they had 
been in the past. We’ve talked about the surveys and the 
amount of use they were getting. Now, Mr. Speaker, we believe 
that with this new process we will be providing the information 
through the knowledge centre, and we will be making sure that 
the agrologists in the other centres are out there in the 
communities working with the people and helping develop this 
agriculture industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, first we find out that there are a 
number of outstanding leases for the closed rural service centres 
that will continue to cost taxpayers, no matter what department 
they may fall under. 
 
The minister has also as yet to get a handle on how much 
severance payments will cost the department. And now, Mr. 
Speaker, we hear that the government will spend an additional 
$6.5 million on renovations and a new knowledge centre. 
 
With all of these additional costs, how does the minister expect 
to save $2 million a year? And if we are ever going to see 
savings in this program, how far down the road will that be? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
these figures were explained to the members opposite in 



May 12, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

estimates the other night. Mr. Speaker, we will have an ongoing 
saving of $2 million per year and we will be putting service into 
the communities where it is going to be most effective. 
 
We want to see this province move ahead. We want to see more 
slaughter and processing. We want to see more development in 
livestock and we will have the people in place that are going to 
enable this to happen, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to provide 
the resources and the information that is needed. 
 
For those people who are farming who are looking for on-farm 
guidance and advice, we have seen in the past few years there 
has been greater and greater uptake of industry agrologists and 
of private agrologists, Mr. Speaker. And if people want a 
second opinion, we’re going to have people available — 
agrologists available — at the knowledge centre to answer those 
questions, Mr. Speaker, and to support our producers in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Funding For Wide Open Future Campaign 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the minister responsible for Crown Management 
Board. Mr. Speaker, the question: how much money did 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations spend last year contributing 
to the NDP (New Democratic Party) government’s Wide Open 
Future campaign? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
My understanding is that the Crown Investments Corporation 
spent approximately $2.2 million on the Wide Open Future 
campaign last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the minister for 
the answer. Mr. Speaker, the NDP has introduced legislation in 
this session — Bill 35, The Crown Corporations Amendment 
Act — that establishes legal authority for the Crowns to spend 
money on the NDP’s Wide Open Future campaign. And 
according to the government’s own briefing note, the reason for 
the amendment is that the Crown corporations don’t currently 
have legislative authority to undertake activities that, and I 
quote here, “ . . . promote a positive business environment in 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm the NDP government’s 
use of Crown corporation money to fund this Wide Open Future 
campaign last year was illegal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Crown Management Board. 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can confirm for the member is 
that CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), 
and the mandate of CIC, is to support programs that can 
promote and enhance economic development. We think that by 
clarifying the legislation we will ensure and leave no doubt that 
CIC has the authority to expend funds that promote and 
enhance the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s Wide Open Future 
campaign was nothing more than a taxpayer-funded NDP 
re-election blitz. The NDP has admitted that not a single job 
was created as a result of millions of taxpayers’ dollars the NDP 
spent on the Wide Open Future campaign. And the government 
has also been unable to point to a single dollar of new 
investment as a result of its so-called Wide Open Future 
campaign. And, Mr. Speaker, it now appears that it was illegal 
for the NDP to use Crown corporations to fund its re-election ad 
blitz. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm the NDP was spending 
taxpayers’ money illegally by using the Crowns to fund the 
Wide Open Future campaign? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Crown . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I as a member of this legislature 
between 1986 and 1991 know all about what illegal means in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say to the members 
opposite is that we believe that the Crown corporations in this 
province have the right and the authority and the mandate to 
promote economic development in this province, and to 
promote this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day in this legislature we listen to the 
members opposite throw doom and gloom over this province 
and the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. We believe that 
this province has a future. We believe that . . . This province 
just had 6,000 new jobs created in the month of April, Mr. 
Speaker. That is progress. 
 
We’re opening this province to immigrants, and you know 
what, we’re going to go and promote Saskatchewan to the rest 
of the world and we’re not making any apologies for that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
with me right now a copy of Bill No. 35, entitled An Act to 
amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
legal authority to the government to do a number of things 
through the Crown corporations, but if I might for the record, 
I’d like to read section (r.3) and it says: 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2004 

“establish, operate, administer or manage programs or 
policies that promote or enhance business opportunities in 
and for Saskatchewan”. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the explanatory note says this was important and 
necessary because there was, “No existing provision.” 
 
Clause (r.3) is added: 
 

. . . to clarify authority to undertake promotional activities 
and programs on behalf of Crown corporations that 
promote a positive business environment in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it now appears that the spending undertaken by 
the NDP in the Wide Open Future campaign was illegal. Will 
the minister confirm the NDP was spending taxpayers’ money 
illegally by using Crown funds for that campaign? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The books at CIC are audited by the 
Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. We are simply going to clarify 
the legislation to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that CIC and other 
Crown corporations in this province are able to promote the 
province of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have to 
remember the context. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Would the 
members allow the response to be put. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have to 
remember the context, Mr. Speaker. Every day — day in and 
day out — the members opposite threw doom and gloom over 
the people of this province. Every day, day in and out, Mr. 
Speaker, they were talking about how we all needed to go to 
Alberta. Please turn out the lights, the last person out of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that this province has a future. That’s 
why, Mr. Speaker, we are expanding our immigrant nominee 
program. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, businesses are coming to 
this province. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, there are 6,000 new 
jobs, the largest number of jobs in April of this year, Mr. 
Speaker. We think this province has a future and we want to 
create the conditions so that the doom and gloom ends across 
the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I believe we are beginning to see 
a trend here, Mr. Speaker. The beginning of the end — the 
beginning of the end — for the $28 million SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) debacle 
began with no authority to spend money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another example of this government doing 
what it needs to do for election purposes without legal 
authority. Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that the money 
spent on behalf of Crown corporations on the Wide Open 
Future campaign was done so illegally? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the member over there 
says he sees a trend. Well we’ve seen a trend in this province 
since this group of people decided to create the Saskatchewan 
Party. And every day, Mr. Speaker, all we hear about is Alberta 
envy. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? The people in the last 
provincial election spoke loud and clear, Mr. Speaker. They 
were absolutely sick of it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve listened to these members since they 
got into this Assembly, since March 17, and what have we 
heard? They don’t want us to do anything, Mr. Speaker, that 
promotes the people of this province. Everything we do, Mr. 
Speaker, is negative. It’s wrong. We put more money into 
health care — it’s wrong. We put more money into education 
— it’s wrong. We change our rural service centres — it’s 
wrong. 
 
But in 2001, Mr. Speaker, what did they do when we hired 570 
new civil servants? All they could do was bring in motions to 
get rid of them, Mr. Speaker. Well make up your mind. Are you 
in favour of services in this province or aren’t you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004/ 
Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services 

de l’état civil 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I recognize the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 49, The 
Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health that 
Bill No. 49, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 50 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 



May 12, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50, 
The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 50, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Limitations Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 51, 
The Limitations Act, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice that 
Bill No. 51, The Limitations Act, be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Limitations Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives 

découlant de la loi intitulée The Limitations Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 52, 
The Limitations Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice that 
Bill No. 52, The Limitations Consequential Amendment Act, 

2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 53, 
The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice that 
Bill No. 53, The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(14:30) 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Tobacco Control 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great honour that I 
move that Bill No. 54, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 54, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2004 

be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 278 through 303 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 278 to 303 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the Standing Committee on the Economy and the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies, I move the House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:32. 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Dearborn........................................................................................................................................................................1066, 1067 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1066 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1067 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1068 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1068 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1068 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1068 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1068 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1068 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1069 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1069 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1069 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 2004 Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1069 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1069 
 International Nurses Day 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1070 
 International Nursing Week 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1070 
 Distinguished Researcher Award 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1070 
 Gathering of Nations Powwow 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1071 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Future of Health Care Facilities 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1071 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1071 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1072 
 Summer Employment for Students 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1073 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1073 
 Costs of Closing Rural Service Centres 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1074 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1074 
 Funding For Wide Open Future Campaign 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1075 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1075 
 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 49 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1076 
 Bill No. 50 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
 Bill No. 51 — The Limitations Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
 Bill No. 52 — The Limitations Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Limitations Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
 Bill No. 53 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
 Bill No. 54 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1077 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1078 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1078 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




