















































Hansard: April 23, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 24A  FRIDAY, APRIL 23, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 717 
 April 23, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise on 
behalf of constituents of the region of Cypress Hills to present a 
duty. . . I’m sorry, to present a petition related to the increase in 
crop insurance premiums again this year. And the prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary steps to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by constituents from the 
communities of Gull Lake and Webb. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition from the Rosetown-Elrose constituency signed by 
people who are concerned about recent changes to the crop 
insurance program which results in large premium increases for 
insured farmers while overall coverage is reduced. Mr. Speaker, 
the prayer of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Demaine and Beechy. 
 
I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise in the Assembly with a petition from citizens of southwest 
Saskatchewan that are extremely concerned about the condition 
of Highway 43 and the impact it has on the economic side of it, 
and the safety side of the individuals there. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Gravelbourg 
and Limerick. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today, actually this morning, to bring forth a 
petition signed by the citizens of rural Saskatchewan that are 
concerned with the crop insurance premium increases. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase to crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Unity, 
Leoville, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet with another 
petition with many citizens opposed to the closure and possible 
reduction of services to Davidson, Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Davidson, Imperial health 
centres be maintained at the current level of service at a 
minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctor 
services available as well as lab, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services available to users in the 
Davidson, Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Davidson, Regina, Lloydminster, 
and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again in the 
House today to present a petition on behalf of citizens in west 
central Saskatchewan concerned with the funding for the Unity 
senior lodge project. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 
from Unity, Saskatoon, and Denzil, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — The following petitions for private Bills 
are hereby presented by members and laid on the table as 
follows: 
 

By Mr. Heppner, of the Bethany Bible Institute in 
province of Saskatchewan; 
 
By Mr. Toth, of the Fountain of Life School of Ministry in 
the province of Saskatchewan; 
 
By Mr. McCall, of the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning repairs to Highway 15 from the 
junction of No. 20 east of the village of Semans; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 50, 65, 69, 72, and 97. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 29 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: what 
was the total cost of the recent overhaul and refit of the 
Riverhurst ferry? Who was the general contractor awarded 
this job? What was the tender price for the job? Did the 
general contractor hold a bid bond? How much downtime 
was experienced by the Riverhurst ferry in the 2003 
season following the refit and overhaul? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 29 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Investment Saskatchewan: for each of 
the suppliers, consultants, contractors, and financial 
institutions used by the government in the discussions and 
negotiations with Broe industries over the development of 
the Belle Plaine ethanol project, what was each paid for 

their services, and how much did each receive from the 
Government of Saskatchewan as its share of the cost? 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Prototype Vehicle 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to share 
an outstandingly successful happening. On Wednesday right 
here in Regina, the Saskatchewan Research Council unveiled 
the world’s first pickup truck fuelled by a combination of 
hydrogen and diesel fuel. 
 
This prototype vehicle is a heavy-duty pickup truck with a 6.6 
litre turbocharged diesel engine that can be operated on diesel 
fuel alone or on a combination of hydrogen and diesel fuel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the development of hydrogen as an alternative fuel 
is a key part of a green and prosperous economy. And with this 
move the Saskatchewan Research Council is helping to make 
Saskatchewan the national model in researching and 
demonstrating hydrogen as a new source of energy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cleaner energy technology will help Canada 
address climate change and build an efficient and sustainable 
economy for the 21st century. And yesterday’s unveiling is 
proof positive that this new economy will not only happen in 
Saskatchewan, but that we are playing and will continue to play 
a big role in its development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating everyone involved in this project, in particular 
the Saskatchewan Research Council and their partners, Ecce 
Energy Corporation, on the success of this prototype and 
wishing them every success with this technology in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

2004 Snowbirds 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had the distinct pleasure of attending the formal 
acceptance show for the 2004 Snowbirds. 431 Air 
Demonstration Squadron, better known as the Snowbirds, 
represent a tradition of excellence as ambassadors; 
demonstrating the skill, professionalism, and teamwork of the 
men and women of the Canadian Forces. While not a combat 
unit, the Snowbirds exhibit the skills and courage that Canada’s 
combat forces count on to contribute to world peace and 
security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Snowbirds are a Canadian national institution, 
flying Tutor jet aircraft in the colours of the Canadian flag. The 
team represents the vibrant spirit of this nation, thrilling 
audiences across the continent with precision formation flying 
and crisp solo aerobatics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now in their 34th season, the Snowbirds have 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

flown 1,902 air shows for over 100 million spectators. The 
2004 team will perform 65 shows at 41 locations across North 
America. Also, the Snowbirds are proud ambassadors for the 
Children with Intestinal and Liver Disorders — acronym 
CH.I.L.D. — Foundation. The objective of the relationship is to 
provide greater awareness for CH.I.L.D. and its goals through 
activities such as public appearances and air demonstrations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Major Steve Will and 
his 2004 team for an excellent acceptance show demonstration 
yesterday, and wish them all the success for a successful 2004 
air show season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal Presentations 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, as we go about our daily lives 
there are many things we too often take for granted, including 
those people who are there to protect us. Yesterday in 
Saskatoon, 43 of our province’s protective services personnel 
received the Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal from the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recipients include RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) members from Warman, Swift Current, 
Saskatoon, and Rosthern; municipal police from Saskatoon; fire 
protection personnel from Dundurn, Saskatoon; and National 
Defence and Correctional Service Canada employees from 
Saskatoon. 
 
This medal is our province’s way of honouring individuals who 
have given 25 years or more of exemplary service, protecting 
lives and properties of citizens. Mr. Speaker, it takes a 
commitment and a special kind of individual to persevere in a 
profession that typically demands so much and often puts them 
in harm’s way. Theirs is not an easy job. Our protective services 
personnel are ensuring people in this province have the best 
possible opportunity to develop their full potential in a safe and 
secure environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I express my gratitude and I’m sure the gratitude 
of all residents of this province to those receiving the 
Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Valley Trails Wildlife Supper 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A week ago today I 
had the privilege of attending the Valley Trails wildlife supper. 
Valley Trails basically covers the area between Saskatoon and 
Duck Lake and then between the rivers. 
 
The MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) has for a 
decade or two been the one that have been asked to emcee the 

affair. And I always consider it a privilege to follow big Bill 
Neudorf in that area, and it was always a hard act to follow. 
 
Anyways, the evening is always an exciting evening. There’s all 
sorts of wildlife meets out of there, and then the awards that are 
given out for the individuals that have the trophies. A lot of 
young people are out at that, a lot of kids are out at that, and 
that’s great as well. 
 
Unfortunately when I got there to get the program, the president 
of the association said we have a glitch. And I thought well, I 
wonder what the glitch is. The glitch was they had no speaker. 
 
What had happened, Mr. Speaker, was that they had invited a 
member from SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) about two and a half months earlier and 
said he could come, and the day before, he got a note from this 
individual from SERM saying, due to NDP (New Democratic 
Party) cuts, I cannot come. 
 
Due to NDP cuts, the member from . . . person from SERM 
could not come and address the wildlife federation. What a 
shame, Mr. Speaker. What a shame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

2004 Saskatchewan Literacy Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
On Wednesday evening at Government House the 
Saskatchewan Literacy Network acknowledged the 
accomplishments of six individuals and groups at the 2004 
Saskatchewan Literacy Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Literacy Awards recognize 
volunteers, professionals, corporations, programs, and adult 
learners for their contributions in support of literacy in the 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the recipients of the 2004 Saskatchewan 
Literacy Awards are: in the corporate category, McDonald’s 
restaurant won for their support of raise a reader program. In the 
category of the volunteer literacy worker, the winner was 
Adeline Steinley of Cypress Hills Regional College. And Larry 
Crook of Saskatoon won in the professional literacy worker 
category. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Regina Home Economics For Living Project received the 
awards in the project category. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Katherina Aguilera of Saskatoon and, 
I’m very pleased to say a constituent of mine, Flora Sylvester of 
Buffalo Narrows were recognized in the learner category for 
overcoming great difficulties in learning to read. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in Prince Albert that evening and could not 
attend this event, and I’m really sorry I missed it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all of my colleagues will join me in 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

congratulating Ms. Sylvester and all the recipients of the 2004 
Saskatchewan Literacy Awards on their contributions and their 
accomplishments. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Melfort Constituency Provincial Hockey Championships 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Melfort 
constituency hockey world closed the season with bragging 
rights to three provincial championships. The Naicam AA 
Bantam Vikings claimed the AA Provincial Championship by 
defeating Weyburn with a two-game total-goal series of 11 to 7 
in the championship series. This victory earned them a chance 
to experience the Western Canadian Bantam Championship in 
Fort Saskatchewan. 
 
The Melfort Grapes Pee Wee Girls claimed the female Pee Wee 
B Championship after beating Maple Creek in the best of two 
championship playoffs. Their first game was won handily and 
the second game was won with a small margin of 2 to 1. 
 
And last but not least, the LeRoy Braves provincial B 
champions played a memorable season with only two losses in 
the regular season. They were undefeated in both the Long Lake 
Hockey League playoffs and the provincial B playoffs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members, please join me in congratulating the 
team members, coaches, support staff, and families of these 
teams for their successful hockey season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

United Way Tribute Luncheon 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since 1935, 
concerned Regina citizens have been working together to find 
ways to care for those in the community who are less fortunate 
and in need of support. Today, Mr. Speaker, that group of 
caring citizens has evolved into an organization that this year 
will invest more than $2 million into programs and services to 
help develop healthy children, strong families, and supportive 
communities. 
 
I’m speaking of course of the United Way. Yesterday I had the 
privilege of attending, along with the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment and the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres, the United Way of Regina’s 2004 Tribute 
Luncheon. 
 
During the luncheon, the United Way of Regina paid tribute to 
the thousands of people and volunteers who support their efforts 
every year and to a select group of community leaders for their 
contributions. 
 
The Investors Group volunteer awards went to two energetic 
women, Amy Balfour and Tammy Beck from Ranch Ehrlo. 
 

Raynard and Joanna Kirsch and Audrey Roadhouse received 
President’s awards in recognition of their outstanding voluntary 
and philanthropic efforts. 
 
Farm Credit Canada and Harvard Broadcasting received 
Distinguished Corporate Philanthropy awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these individuals, these members of the corporate 
community, and the United Way, all demonstrate a deep-rooted 
commitment to the people of Regina. I ask all my colleagues to 
join me in thanking them for their efforts and congratulating 
them on their fine accomplishments. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Commitments Made During Election Campaign 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, rural 
municipalities are angry with this NDP government and rural 
municipalities are angry with this Premier. And yesterday just 
made them more angry and more frustrated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) delegate after another told me how disgusted 
they were that this Premier wouldn’t even stand in the House 
and explain his election promise about property taxes. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier should know the Speaker cannot recognize 
him when he’s hiding under his chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier made a promise to deal with the 
property tax issue. When is this going to happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We had a good day yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We sat down with the executive, the 
board of directors, staff members, the president of SARM. We 
sat down as a cabinet, and we discussed matters that are of 
concern to all residents of this province. We discussed the ideas 
that might lead to some solutions to a very difficult problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so far the only solution seems to be, write the big 
cheque. But, Mr. Speaker, this problem requires a lot more 
effort than that. The delegates, the delegates who are attending 
the SARM convention have got some real concerns. They’ve 
got issues that need attention. Mr. Speaker, the government 
recognizes that attention is being paid to their issues. We have 
to find solutions; we need the opposition’s help to find 
solutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if that government had a good day yesterday, I don’t 
want to miss it if they have a bad one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, on the day the Premier 
launched his election platform he said, and I quote, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

It is a platform that provides . . . the room to receive the 
recommendations of the Boughen Commission on the 
funding of education. 

 
Those were the Premier’s words, Mr. Speaker. But now we 
know he didn’t mean a word if it. In fact yesterday one delegate 
said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

If (an agreement) was signed in blood by Mr. Calvert . . . it 
wouldn’t be worth the paper it’s written on. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier make these promises if he 
had no intentions of keeping them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that members opposite will recognize and applaud the 
Premier for yesterday when the SARM delegates, when the 
SARM delegates appeared here at the legislature. The Premier 
went out onto the front steps to greet them. He talked to 
members . . . delegates to that convention on the way out of the 
building, on the steps of the building. He encouraged the 
president of SARM to come forward and talk to him in front of 
the media. 
 
All of the debate was in front of the public, in front of all of the 
delegates, and there was a general understanding that there’s a 
. . . We recognize on this side of the House that there are 
concerns that have to be met, and this government is going to 
take steps to meet those concerns within the fiscal realities of 
this province and with the co-operation of the Board of 
Directors of SARM who seem willing to sit down to discuss 
solutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, they 
may have applauded that Premier if they could have found him 
hiding under his desk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last election that Premier promised to lower 
taxes. And what did he do? He raised taxes. That Premier 
promised the lowest utility rates in country. No, not on, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact now we see SaskPower may even ask for an 
increases. He also promised, Mr. Speaker, to lower the 

education tax on property, and yesterday he had a perfect 
chance to follow up with that promise. And from the reports I 
get this morning, he didn’t even come close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier stand today and explain to the 
public and Saskatchewan taxpayers what happened to these 
promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And what about 
the member of Melville-Saltcoats’ own words, Mr. Speaker, 
that I quoted back to him yesterday in the House? The member 
had said that they couldn’t even keep up to reducing property 
taxes in this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. No new tax increases and 
no addressing that particular issue. But this government, Mr. 
Speaker, with the fiscal problems that we have in this province 
. . . Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I recognize the Minister 
of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
Saskatchewan’s problem isn’t Saskatchewan’s alone, Mr. 
Speaker. All across this country, provinces are having 
difficulties with financing health care. 
 
This morning we hear of Nova Scotia’s budget where they 
promised in an election campaign a 10 per cent tax cut across 
the board in the province of Nova Scotia. Today in the budget 
they had to drop that tax cut because of the pressures on health 
care in that province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they stand every day in the House to say we need 
more money in health care. We put more money in health care, 
Mr. Speaker — $160 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Ethanol Industry Projects 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if you hear the minister and 
hear the Premier, I guess it’s okay if you don’t keep your 
promises if other people are doing the same thing, Mr. Speaker. 
Children hear from their parents every day that that’s not 
acceptable behaviour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier promised to cut taxes in the election 
campaign; this budget raised them. The Premier promised to 
look after seniors; he’ll be closing long-term care beds. And 
you remember, Mr. Speaker; the Premier promised that he had a 
plan that he was going to build an ethanol plant at Belle Plaine. 
Do you remember that one, Mr. Speaker? 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

They pitched a big tent, and they had a kind of a little picnic 
there. And they bused out kids, Mr. Speaker. Premier jumped 
on a backhoe, and they had a photo opportunity. And, Mr. 
Speaker, do you know what’s there today at Belle Plaine? An 
empty field and two posts where the sign used to be that said, 
future home of this ethanol plant. There is no ethanol plant 
there. The field is as empty as the Premier’s promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The question for him today is: how many 
taxpayers’ dollars did the Premier spend on his imaginary 
ethanol plant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Leader 
of the Opposition will want to get up in his place and express 
his happiness that Husky Oil has announced that they’re 
constructing 180-million-litre ethanol plant in Lloydminster, 
Mr. Speaker. I know the member from Lloydminster will 
certainly be pleased that Husky Oil is making a major new 
investment in Saskatchewan, and I know the member from 
Weyburn should be very happy that $25 million ethanol plant is 
going ahead in Weyburn. 
 
And what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, through the policies of this 
government in taking the tax off fuel-produced-and-consumed 
ethanol in Saskatchewan and in mandating the blending of 
ethanol, we are building this industry, Mr. Speaker. The 
industry is being built, and we will continue to build that 
industry in partnership with the private sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister references the project 
in Lloydminster where there will be no provincial government 
money. Now, Mr. Speaker, that minister and the previous 
ethanol minister said there would be no way we’d ever have an 
ethanol plant in the province without the NDP risking 
taxpayers’ money — that’s what they said. It’s happening, Mr. 
Speaker, despite this NDP government, not because of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he didn’t, the minister didn’t come close to 
answering the question, but according to a freedom of 
information request done by the Saskatchewan Party, the total 
bill to date on the imaginary ethanol plant for taxpayers — the 
total bill — is $2.2 million. Forty per cent of it is the taxpayers’ 
share according to this freedom of information request. That’s 
866,000 taxpayers’ dollars for a project that doesn’t exist. There 
was never a deal, Mr. Speaker, for this project. Would the 
Premier please stand up and explain to taxpayers how spending 
$866,000 on an imaginary ethanol plant is good for the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, it was made 
known by this government that as long as there was no private 
sector money developing ethanol we were prepared to partner 
with the private sector. We also said, Mr. Speaker, that if the 
private sector would build the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan 
that it was not up to the government to build the ethanol 
industry. 
 
Now here you have an opposition, Mr. Speaker, which on one 
hand likes to say that there’s never any private sector 
investment in Saskatchewan, which of course isn’t true because 
we have record investment in oil and gas, forestry, and mining 
in the province, but never mind that. On the other hand, Mr. 
Speaker, when we have major private sector investment 
building the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan, do we hear 
anything enthusiastic or supportive from the opposition? No, 
Mr. Speaker, instead they get up and criticize. And what we do, 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t have time to sit around and criticize 
because we’re too busy working with the people of 
Saskatchewan to build. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a credit, there’s a credit card 
company that would be interested in this Premier’s ethanol 
story for one of its commercials, Mr. Speaker. Let’s take a look 
at the costs of this project: project management fees, $438,000; 
consulting and public relations, $181,000; legal fees, $171,000; 
damage to the Premier’s credibility — priceless. There are some 
things that money can’t buy but, Mr. Speaker, for everything 
else the Premier has the taxpayers’ MasterCard — $866,000. 
 
There was never a deal. There was never a project. It was all 
about politics for the Premier. It was all about a coming election 
campaign. Will he stand up today and apologize for using the 
community of Belle Plaine and for betraying taxpayers of 
$866,000? 
 
(10:30) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know day after day 
we hear the negativity of the opposition; that’s what we hear 
from the opposition. But what I want the people of the province 
to know, Mr. Speaker, is last year we had record investment in 
oil and gas drilling in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the last few years, we’ve had two of the world’s largest 
ethanol . . . the largest oriented strand board plants built here in 
the province of Saskatchewan at Meadow Lake and at Hudson 
Bay, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, last year the 
Saskatchewan economy was the fastest growing economy in 
Canada, and we expect to see growth of about 4 per cent this 
year in Saskatchewan, growth on growth. 
 
Part of that, Mr. Speaker, will be investment at the Husky 
ethanol plant in Lloydminster; part of it will be the ethanol plant 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

in Weyburn, which are going ahead. And I would have thought, 
Mr. Speaker, that those members would support that and be 
enthusiastic about it, but I think their job is just to be critical, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, according to the freedom of 
information response we received, all the bills for this are not 
yet in. How much more taxpayers’ dollars will be spent on this? 
How much more can taxpayers expect to see in terms of the bill 
for this project — question to the minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has 
asked for information. In a spirit of openness and 
accountability, of course the government has provided the 
information, Mr. Speaker. We have provided the opposition 
with the information about the costs of this project. 
 
And I would say to the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
that when you’re trying to actually do things and build, whether 
in the private sector or the public sector, sometimes you invest. 
Sometimes there are ventures. Sometimes those ventures don’t 
succeed. Most of the time they do. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have seen in this province a change 
whereby the private sector has come forth as a result of the 
regulatory framework the government has created, and the 
private sector is going to invest in the construction of ethanol in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the main point I would say to the Leader of the Opposition 
is there are positive things happening, and he should get off the 
doom and gloom and help us build Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well the minister, the minister, Mr. Speaker, talks 
about sometimes you make an investment in this project and 
sometimes . . . Generally speaking, the projects should not be 
imaginary, Mr. Speaker. Generally speaking, they should be 
more than just political ploys, more than a sign in a field at 
Belle Plaine to say that you’re building an ethanol plant, when 
there’s no deal, Mr. Speaker. Let’s be clear here. The Premier 
bused in school children. In fact there’s a bill for the buses on 
this freedom of information request. He bused in school kids for 
this announcement of a deal that didn’t exist. 
 
He climbed up on a backhoe. He put on a hard hat, Mr. Speaker, 
and had a big revival tent meeting in Belle Plaine for a project 
that didn’t exist. And in the bargain, the taxpayers got hung 
with a bill for $866,000. 
 
The Premier owes some apologies here. That’s the question to 

him today. Will he stand up, and will he apologize to the people 
of Belle Plaine for using them and to the people of the province 
for blowing $866,000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the difference between 
members on that side of the House and members on this side of 
the House is this: members on that side of the House like to tell 
young people in this province that there is no future in 
Saskatchewan. Members on this side of the House, led by the 
Premier, like to tell young people, Mr. Speaker, that there is a 
great future in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And is any member of this side of the 
House going to get up and apologize for, almost on a daily basis 
— and yesterday I was at Robert Usher Collegiate speaking to 
young people — about the great opportunities there are in 
Saskatchewan and about the great things that happen in 
Saskatchewan? No, Mr. Speaker, because we don’t consider it 
our jobs to tell young people that there’s no future in 
Saskatchewan. There’s a great future in Saskatchewan. We’re 
going to keep telling them that, and we’ll never apologize for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Facilities for Universities 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. During last fall’s provincial election, the Premier made 
many promises that he had clearly no intention of keeping. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Would the 
member start again? I will ask the member to start again in full 
time. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. During last fall’s provincial election, the 
Premier made many promises he clearly had no intention of 
keeping, like his promise to build a new academic health 
sciences facility at the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday the deputy minister of Learning confirmed 
what most people in Saskatchewan already figured out. You 
just can’t trust the word of this Premier or any of the promises 
in his phony NDP election platform because according to the 
deputy minister, there’s no money for an academic health 
sciences facility at the University of Saskatchewan this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier mislead the people of 
Saskatchewan by promising a new health sciences facility in 
Saskatoon when the Premier had no intention of keeping his 
word? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well the member opposite should 
understand fully that the academic health sciences centre at the 
University of Saskatchewan is in the planning stage. Money has 
been provided for planning; planning continues. 
 
I don’t understand why the member seems to think that there’s 
something off-kilter here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing a little bit of a 
pattern here. Whether it’s the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) strike, the reaction to the 
Boughen Commission, or the academic health sciences centre, 
it’s delay, delay, delay from this . . . that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier may not like hearing the truth, but the 
truth is that he promised a health sciences facility in Saskatoon, 
and now the deputy minister of Learning says it won’t happen. 
And the minister says wait for next year. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier will have to forgive the people 
of Saskatchewan when they simply don’t trust his word any 
more. 
 
The Premier also promised to build a new laboratory building at 
the University of Regina and the University of Regina made the 
mistake of believing him. Now the NDP say there won’t be any 
lab building built this year at the University of Regina. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s yet another NDP broken promise. Why should 
anybody believe a word of this Premier or the NDP 
government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I always appreciate the 
advice of that member opposite. Sometimes we take it; 
sometimes we don’t. Fortunate for the students at SIAST, we 
didn’t take his advice, or we’d be still 20 more days in cooling 
off as opposed to at a collective agreement which has been 
negotiated. 
 
I appreciate the advice that he has on the health sciences 
building. I can advise him that that is proceeding to move 
forward. The university understands that. We understand that. 
The department understands that. I have no idea why the 
member opposite doesn’t understand that. 
 
With respect to the laboratory building at the U of R (University 
of Regina), we continue to recognize that there needs to be a 
new laboratory building at the U of R. The question is what the 
size and scope of that is, and what the cost is, and how that fits 
in the university’s operating budget that doesn’t put pressure on 
tuition. 
 
I assume that the member opposite could ask these questions in 
estimates. I’m always happy to answer them here in question 
period, but he should first of all do his research. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure this House that 
this member understands a promise is a promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the University of Regina was so confident that the 
NDP would actually honour its promise, the University of 
Regina was actually so confident that the promise would be 
honoured that they cleared off the land to get ready for an 
official sod-turning ceremony. Now they didn’t actually pitch a 
tent or bus in a few hundred kids or hold a wiener roast like the 
NDP did when the Premier held his phony ethanol 
announcement at Belle Plaine, but the result was the same, Mr. 
Speaker — another broken NDP campaign promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier make an election promise to 
build a new health sciences facility at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) and a new laboratory building at the University 
of Regina when he had absolutely no intention of keeping his 
word, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The promise is made; the promise will 
be kept. We’re moving forward on both of those files. I don’t 
understand why the member doesn’t understand this. The 
universities understand this. We understand this. 
 
He talks about us pitching a tent. He talks about us bringing in 
people for it. I’ll tell you what. When we go and we pitch the 
next tent on the academic health sciences centre and we open 
that building, we’ll be there. We’ll provide the tent. Why don’t 
you ask your former leader to come forward and provide the 
balloons that he had left over from that little election campaign 
that you people thought you were going to win? 
 
We wait and we make sure the plan’s done. We make sure the 
blueprints are there. We make sure the funding is in place. We 
make sure it’s sustainable. Then we make sure the project and 
the promise is kept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Commitments Made During Election Campaign 
 
Mr. Wall: — Please, please, Mr. Speaker — through you to the 
government — please don’t pitch any more tents in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We’ve had enough NDP tents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in this province are asking how they can 
believe the word of their Premier. He promised to cut taxes. He 
promised to look after seniors, Mr. Speaker, to protect 
government jobs, to hire more police officers, to build an 
ethanol plant at Belle Plaine, to build a health science centre at 
the University of Saskatchewan, a lab building at the University 
of Regina. But he’s raising taxes, and he’s closing long-term 
care beds, and he’s firing government workers. He’s not 
keeping his promise with respect to police officers. There’s no 
Belle Plaine ethanol plant. There will be no lab building at the 
U or R when they hoped there would be. There is no health 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

science centre going to be constructed at the U of S. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is pretty clear. We’re 
going to give him a chance to answer that question that people 
have of him today. Why in the world should they trust what he 
has to say? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, you know they say the 
proof is in the pudding. When we went to the people of 
Saskatchewan in the fall, we made a number of commitments 
that will carry this government through its term. 
 
Among those commitments was a commitment to the best 
public health care in Canada that we could possibly build. It is a 
commitment to a green and a prosperous economy, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a commitment to making Saskatchewan first 
choice for our young people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, since the days, since the days of that 
election campaign, we have worked with the private sector to 
see the announcement of the tremendous ethanol capacity that 
we’re going to build in Saskatchewan — a capacity that began 
with solid planning, that has worked through the process of 
regulation, that has worked with the private sector opposed to 
being offside to the private sector. We’re building a tremendous 
ethanol capacity in the province. 
 
Now what do we hear today from the Leader of the Opposition? 
I think I’m going to ask him a question. Will he stand in the 
House today and tell us today the position of the Saskatchewan 
Party when it comes to building industry in Saskatchewan? 
Does he take the position, as they have taken in past, that they 
would never partner with the private sector, that they would 
never partner? 
 
If the answer is they’ve changed their position and today they 
would partner with the private sector, then I ask the Leader of 
the Opposition: would he do due diligence on any partnership 
with the private sector? Let’s hear some answers from the 
Leader of the Opposition just for once. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we will 
continue to forward to the people of this province a plan to 
build an enterprising and entrepreneurial economy. Mr. 
Speaker, we will pledge to do things differently in this 
province. We’ve been trying the same thing for six decades in 
Saskatchewan in terms of growing the economy. It is time to 
ask the Dr. Phil question: how’s that working for you so far, 
Mr. Speaker? It’s not working, and a change is coming. 
 
And compare that, Mr. Speaker, if you will, to the NDP’s plan 
to keep young people here. The minister talked about it earlier. 
The member for Saskatoon Sutherland highlighted for a young 
person in Saskatoon the reasons why he should stay and not 
move to Alberta. And here’s a couple of them. The fact that we 

have the Internet here, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that marvellous? And 
get this; the NDP reason why you should stay in Saskatchewan 
— in Saskatchewan I can use a pay phone for a local call for 25 
cents. In Alberta, in Alberta it costs 35 cents, and it has for 
several years now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The answer is clear. The question is clear. The Premier made 
promises with respect to an ethanol plant. It’s an empty field; 
it’s as empty as his promises. Will he apologize to the people of 
Belle Plaine and to the province for wasting almost $1 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, a few of us 
last night were able to attend a reception provided by the 
Brewers of Canada. Four young men stood on the platform 
there and said to us why it is they’ve chosen to make their 
futures in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They’ve chosen because 
we are a province of innovation. We are a province that believes 
in its future. We are a province that’s building the fundamentals 
of education, the fundamentals of the economy based on a plan 
that’s been extended by this government, is being pursued by 
this government, and will be fulfilled by this government as 
opposed to the kind of plan that we get from the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
What did we hear in the election? We’ll slash all the taxes, 
throw the province into deficit and debt, and somehow that is 
supposed to produce a growing economy of 100,000 people. 
 
(10:45) 
 
The people of Saskatchewan rejected that kind of thinking. 
They rejected that plan, and now even the Saskatchewan Party 
leader has rejected it by his Web site. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today, today the member of North Battleford 
stood and said that yesterday was a good day for the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, any day that New 
Democrats are in government and the Saskatchewan Party is in 
opposition is a good day for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford on his feet? 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been requested for introductions. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed, the member for 
Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure for me 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

to you, through you, to this Assembly to introduce students 
from Glaslyn Central School, seated in the east gallery. We 
have grade 11 and 12 students accompanied by their principal, 
Mr. Brian Goota, and their bus driver, Mr. Mervin Pritchett. 
 
It’s a special honour for me, Mr. Speaker, as this is the first 
school group that I as a rookie MLA have had the opportunity 
to introduce. I would ask that we all join in welcoming our 
guests from Glaslyn to their legislature, and I look forward to 
meeting with them shortly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cumberland on her 
feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I request leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I too want to welcome the students from 
Glaslyn. Some years ago, I attended that — not many — I 
attended high school there, so I welcome them here. And one of 
the students from Glaslyn, his name is Gordon Stomp. He’s the 
mayor of Air Ronge, and he’s in my constituency. So I have 
some feelings of ties to that high school. I still have some good 
friends from there, so I too want to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Health Care Bursaries 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today it’s my pleasure to rise and to announce that we now have 
more than 600 new and continuing health care bursaries, an 
investment of $5 million this year. Mr. Speaker, this confirms 
our government’s ongoing commitment in the Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care. This government believes in the 
high-quality health care system that is accessible to all 
Saskatchewan residents, and one that is sustainable into the 
future with the resources available. 
 
A key ingredient for a strong health care system is having an 
adequate number of well trained and qualified health care 
providers. Like many other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is experiencing shortages in key health care 
professions. Keeping and attracting key health care providers is 
one of the biggest challenges facing our health care system and 
addressing this challenge is one of the top priorities of the 
government. 
 
A part of the action plan involves a detailed strategy to retain 
and recruit health professionals to the province. The plan 
includes initiatives to train more health providers, develop a 

representative workforce, expand continuing education and 
development, improve job satisfaction, implement 
province-wide health human resources planning, and target 
bursaries to fill vacancies for needed health care professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, bursaries will be awarded to Saskatchewan 
students studying in health-related areas where shortages exist 
or are anticipated. In exchange these students agree to work in 
Saskatchewan’s publicly funded health care system upon 
completion of their studies. More than 220 new bursaries will 
be targeted to Saskatchewan students studying to be registered 
nurses, registered psychiatric nurses, licensed practical nurses, 
primary care nurse practitioners, and those studying to re-enter 
the nursing profession. 
 
As well, a bursary will be offered to seven nurses in graduate 
studies who agree to teach at one of Saskatchewan’s 
post-secondary educational institutions upon graduation. This 
initiative will help fill the vacant nursing teaching positions at 
post-secondary institutions in Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, the government, in partnership with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, will offer more than 50 
bursaries to students and residents studying medicine. The 
government is also targeting 40 bursaries to those students 
studying to be emergency medical technicians. 
 
More than 80 new bursaries will be targeted to Saskatchewan 
students studying many health sciences professions including 
pharmacy, nuclear medicine, medical radiation and medical 
laboratory technology, combined laboratory and x-ray 
technology, cytology, medical resonance imaging technology; 
physical, occupational, and respiratory therapy; prosthetic and 
orthotic technology, speech language pathology, audiology, 
public health inspection, clinical psychology, dietetics, and 
ultrasonography. 
 
Students receiving these new bursaries will join more than 180 
other students with ongoing multi-year bursaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our bursary program is proving very successful. 
Its success in recruiting health professionals played a key role 
that enable us to expand MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 
capacity, a priority this government committed to on budget 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that investing in students through 
bursaries is a very effective way of encouraging them to remain 
in Saskatchewan after they complete their studies. At the same 
time investing in our young people supports good health system 
planning and follows through on our commitment of making 
our province a great place to live and work, today and for the 
next generation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I commend all bursary recipients for their 
commitment to health care in Saskatchewan by returning to 
work with and serve the people of this province. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort, the 
opposition Health critic. 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
I rise this afternoon or this morning to respond to the minister’s 
statement in regard to the bursaries for health care 
professionals. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Mr. Burgess and 
the minister for providing me with an advance copy so that I 
might peruse it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to formally and absolutely 
congratulate the minister and the Department of Health for this 
new initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people who have listened to me speak on many 
occasions on the challenges of the health care system will 
remember and acknowledge that the issue of retaining and 
training sufficient health care professionals to meet the system’s 
needs is one of the highest priorities that I’ve articulated over 
the years. And, Mr. Speaker, this certainly will go a good 
distance in providing for those extra people that we need in the 
health care system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in looking at the breakdown of the bursaries, I 
think that they are done in a very thoughtful and intelligent way 
and that they are allocated in a way that, in relative terms, is 
going to provide the proper balance of bursaries across the 
province. 
 
And so I have to rise and say to the minister and the department 
that this is very good news. And I too would like to congratulate 
all the bursary recipients and encourage them to build their 
futures in Saskatchewan for the betterment of the province and 
the health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Credit Reporting Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 38, 
The Credit Reporting Act be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 38, The Credit Reporting Act be now introduced 
and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 39, 
The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 39, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Fatal Accidents 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 40, 
The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 40, The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Effect of Budget on Seniors 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 75-minute 
debate today there’s a very important motion that we put 
forward. I’ll read that at this time and then present it at the end 
of my time. And the motion will be as follows: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the particularly harsh toll 
this year’s provincial budget has taken on seniors in 
Saskatchewan, especially the closing of long-term care 
beds, further reduction of acute care services, and raising 
the provincial sales tax which most adversely affects those 
people on fixed incomes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as the person responsible for the seniors issues in 
the Sask Party, I’ve taken this one on very seriously, and it’s 
been a rather unfortunate situation that this government has 
created for the seniors in this province. And saying rather 
unfortunate is probably an understatement — it is highly 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are a whole long litany of things that this government has 
done that make life much more difficult for seniors in this 
province. And I’m going to list seven that I’ve picked today. I 
know some of the other people that are speaking will have some 
other ones, and I want to make sure I get these on the record in 
case my time doesn’t allow to address each one fully. 
 
One situation will be, and I’ll discuss this further a little later 
on, is what’s happened with utility rates. Very specifically to 
the motion, Mr. Speaker, the number of long-term care beds. 
Another one that’s very important for seniors is the long 
waiting lists that this province has. Sales tax. The education 
portion of property tax. High crime rates. 
 
And one that is . . . permeates the whole NDP philosophy, and 
what’s happened — it was just mentioned earlier on in question 
period, Mr. Speaker — and that is that the seniors of our 
province too often find their children and their grandchildren 
out of province. That’s the effect of decades of NDP 
government, and they have to take that responsibility for that. 
And we’ll be discussing all of those as we progress through this 
particular debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, on each one of these seven 
items — each one without fail — during the election, this 
Premier made a promise. He made a promise on every one of 
these. He made a promise on utility rates, long-term care beds, 
longest waiting lists, sales tax, education portion of property 
tax. He talked about keeping young people here — it affects the 
last one I mentioned. He addressed crime. He addressed every 
single one of those. And, Mr. Speaker, to date he has broken 
every single promise that he made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in yesterday’s situation that we had here, when we 
had the galleries full of people from the RMs (rural 
municipality) of the province, there was a discussion afterwards 

with some of the media. And printed in the Leader-Post today, 
April 23, is a little bit of a reference, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a 
statement made by Mr. Larry Grant. And I quote: 
 

If (an agreement) was signed in blood by Mr. Calvert . . . it 
wouldn’t be worth the paper it’s written on. 

 
Seven issues I just mentioned here. A promise on all seven 
issues. A promise broken on every seven issues, Mr. Speaker. 
What a shame, Mr. Speaker. What a shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, going through those issues that I mentioned. 
Long-term care beds — we had a discussion on this about a 
week ago, and I’m sure a little later on today the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview is going to get up and try and clarify the 
statement that was headlined so well in The StarPhoenix. She 
told me yesterday she would. I think she’s been rankling for the 
whole week, especially if she’s listened to some of the boots 
and salutes, to find out how the ordinary person on the street is 
thinking about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(11:00) 
 
So let’s discuss that. Long-term care beds. We have in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I believe something like 148,000 
seniors. Those are people over the age of 65, and as yet I’m not 
a member of those, Mr. Speaker. I know the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview and myself both have a number of grey 
hair. And we’re getting closer to that age, but we’re not there 
yet. One hundred and forty-eight thousand — more seniors than 
we have net taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, and they’re going to cut 
beds. They’re going to cut beds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the statement made last week was, well we’ll teach them 
to live healthier and then they’ll die quickly. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
to live healthy is a good idea. It is a good idea. It’ll do 
marvellous things. We might have a few more people that aren’t 
as sick as often. Myself, Mr. Speaker, trying to take the 
government’s advice, I walk 3 to 5 miles a day, and I’d invite 
the member from Saskatoon Eastview to join me. But I should 
say we walk those 3 to 5 miles a day; we walk that in minutes, 
not in fortnights, so I’m not sure if she’ll want to join me on 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I need to give a very specific example about why 
I’m so determined on the need for long-term care beds, and that 
example, Mr. Speaker, was my mother. Born in the North-West 
Territories in 1901; went to school; stayed home for one year; 
went back to high school; finished her high school in two years; 
decided to become a nurse; went to Newton, Kansas and 
became a nurse and practised her profession for quite a time in 
the United States; then came home to Saskatchewan, was swept 
off her feet by a humble farmer; and here I am, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that’s not the story, Mr. Speaker. The story is she lived a 
very healthy life, did a lot of exercise even when she was well 
into her 80s. When her grandchildren were around in winter, 
they’d all go out. They’d make snowmen and play outside in 
the snow. A very active person, a fairly sprightly person, and 
that’s because of all the work that she did. She didn’t just sit 
around and lounge and gain weight. She kept her weight down, 
too low sometimes, but a very sprightly and a very feisty 
woman. 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

When she was in her late 80s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, she wasn’t 
feeling that well. She was diagnosed after a fair bit of diagnosis 
as having a severe cancer situation in her stomach. The medical 
advice was this: if we go ahead and operate, we’ll have to 
remove basically her whole stomach and she’ll be living on 
intravenous for the rest of her life, which really affected the 
quality of life, or we can do nothing and she will probably live 
for a short period of time and then eventually just starve to 
death. Both choices weren’t very easy for the family to make. 
We made the latter choice, Mr. Speaker, because we felt that 
our mother wouldn’t want to live her last years with a whole lot 
of tubes hooked in. 
 
Well the statement was made by the medical profession, and 
rightly so, that she should be moved for those last days, as they 
thought that it would be, to a senior’s care home. Unfortunately 
there was no room there. So she had to languish in a hospital for 
four months, waiting to get into seniors’ care home. She spent 
in that seniors’ care home, I believe, another two and a half to 
three years. 
 
And that’s why I believe we can’t just sort of say live a healthy 
life and these beds won’t be needed, we’ll be able to close the 
beds. That’s the end of that discussion we had last Friday, that 
that would be a solution. It’s probably a good way to live, and it 
is a good way to live, Mr. Speaker — no one in this province is 
going to deny that — but it is not the solution to long-term care 
bed shortage. 
 
Now we had given the other day by one of our MLAs a 
particular home that had 15 beds, 10 people waiting. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, we realize that there may not actually be 10 
individuals waiting for that; that’s the number of people on the 
waiting list. They may be transfers from other homes that want 
to move into these particular ones. There are some of those 
situations. However, that wouldn’t reduce that more by one or 
two individuals out of the . . . from the 10. That would still 
leave you with approximately eight or nine, eight or nine people 
that are waiting to get into a seniors’ care home. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the seniors of this particular 
province don’t plan and want to be in a seniors’ care home. And 
that’s why they stubbornly — and most of us have had to go 
through this with our parents — they stubbornly fight to live in 
their own homes independently until the situation just becomes 
unbearable and impossible. But as family members we have to 
say we cannot in good conscience, mom or dad, allow you to 
live here any more. It just isn’t workable. That’s using all the 
care facilities that come to homes that are there. It just doesn’t 
work any more. The NDP government has made it more 
difficult to fit the categories to get into those hospitals. 
 
But that’s not the biggest problem. The biggest problem is these 
people don’t want to be in there. So then suddenly something 
goes wrong with their health. After years of hard work, good 
living, whatever else, suddenly that happens — it happens to 
every one of them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Then suddenly there’s 
a need to get in there and there is a long lineup. 
 
Now admittedly, no one’s going to promote that there should be 
5 or 10 per cent empty beds in every home. We don’t want that. 
But the number should be very near to the number that needs to 
get in so it’s on almost a perfect equilibrium, as close as 

possible. 
 
And there will always be glitches. There are times of the year 
when, let’s say, we have a flu that comes through the province, 
and we have more people that need to access long-term care 
homes than some other times. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
number needs to be fairly close. 
 
And this NDP government that already has hundreds of people 
on a waiting list — people who aren’t looking forward to being 
in there, who don’t want to be in there, but who are being 
forced to be in there because of their health condition — they 
want to increase the waiting time by decreasing the number of 
beds. 
 
We can go ahead and do all we want with healthy living. That’s 
not going to account for those large numbers — 10 people 
waiting in a 15-bed situation. Walking an extra mile a day isn’t 
going to help, Mr. Speaker. If it helped by one, we’d all be 
happy for that. It doesn’t fix the problem. It’s still there. And 
this NDP government needs to address that, Mr. Speaker; Mr. 
Speaker, need to address a few more of the issues that I brought 
up. 
 
We also have in Saskatchewan, amazingly, the longest waiting 
lists in Canada. And I say amazingly, and I’ve mentioned this 
before, and I’ll mention it again, and I’ll mention it right now. 
In the home of medicare, where medicare is supposed to have 
been born — and people planned for, most births are planned 
— people planned for it, they created it, they had a head start on 
it, when problems came along they should have been able to 
solve them sooner than everyone else. Why in the world could 
we have the longest waiting lists in Canada? 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is shameful. We squandered, Mr. 
Speaker, we squandered the opportunity in this province. Where 
we had a head start on making the best health care system in 
Canada, we squandered it, and now we have the longest waiting 
lists. 
 
Part of that is due to the bad planning in health from this NDP 
government. The other part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the pathetic 
economy that this NDP government has created. Pathetic 
economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The longest waiting lists affects 
our seniors very much, very much, because they are the key 
users of our hospital and our medicare. We know that. We 
expect that. That’s the way life is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You 
usually have your most illnesses sometime before you die. We 
live healthy in our early years of life and then when the end 
comes, some sickness comes along and takes us down. We need 
that service. 
 
Here in the province of Saskatchewan our seniors have to wait 
longer than anywheres else in Canada. Again shameful, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we would do that to the people of this 
province, the people who built this province, the people who 
took care of us when we were young, who provided an 
education for us, who gave us the opportunities, who made sure 
that the roads were here for us, who made sure that the 
educational and health and universities were here for us. They 
provided all of that for us that are sitting here right now. 
 
And what does the NDP on that side of the House want to do? 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

Maintain the longest waiting lists, reduce the number of 
long-term health cares. It is shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Cannington, this motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the particularly harsh toll 
this year’s provincial budget has taken on seniors in 
Saskatchewan, especially the closing of long-term care 
beds, further reductions of acute care services, and raising 
the provincial sales tax which most adversely affects those 
people on fixed incomes. 

 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Will the members take 
the motion as read? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . I 
recognize the hon. member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, I’m not sure that it’s a pleasure to rise today on 
this issue because of the shameful performance of this 
government. Mr. Speaker, promises were made not just in the 
election campaign, but for many years prior to the election 
campaign of 2003. Promises were made many years before the 
budget of 2004. 
 
The seniors of our province had expectations that had been 
given to them by governments over time, that if they worked 
hard in their communities, if they supported health care in this 
province, if they supported long-term care in this province, that 
there would be a space available for them in their waning years. 
 
And this is not a new expectation. This is an expectation that 
goes back decades. And it’s not a new phenomena, Mr. 
Speaker, that NDP governments have broken that promise. 
 
I remember back in the mid-1970s, under the Allan Blakeney 
NDP government, when long-term care beds were frozen — no 
new long-term care beds would be put into place. And there are 
members in this House that sat here when that happened. The 
member from Saskatoon Greystone was a member of that 
government that froze long-term care beds in this province. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re still suffering; the seniors of 
this province are still suffering because of that decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is abandoning the seniors of this 
province, the pioneers of this province, the veterans who fought 
for this province. It’s abandoning our parents. 
 
Take a look at what’s happening here. 2002 in the budget, the 
NDP government of the day proposed a change in long-term 
care fee structures, that the base rate would be raised to 
approximately $1,300 a month and the maximum would be 
capped at $4,200. And the difference in between the 1,300 and 
the 4,200 would be related to a person’s income. And the tax 
rate to be applied on that income was 90 per cent — a base of 
about 1,300 and 90 per cent tax rate on anything earned above 
that to a cap of 4,200. 
 
And one of the members opposite, and I believe it was the 

member from Regina Lumsden said, well seniors in long-term 
care don’t need any money; everything is provided for them. 
Their clothes aren’t provided for them; any small 
entertainments that they might have, such as a television set, are 
not provided for them. And yet that member said, seniors in 
long-term care don’t need any money. 
 
And you know what he said about the idea of charging them a 
90 per cent tax rate, Mr. Deputy Chair? It’s the right thing to 
do. 
 
Well we raised it in the House, Mr. Speaker, as the opposition, 
and the seniors certainly raised it with the government. And the 
government backed off. 
 
Well that member and this government don’t like to be 
embarrassed. So what have they done now? They’re taking 
revenge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, revenge on those very seniors 
that stood up for their rights. What are they doing? They’re 
cutting their beds now. There’s going to be fewer beds in 
Saskatchewan than there were previously. 
 
(11:15) 
 
You phone around the province to long-term care facilities, Mr. 
Speaker, and ask them, what’s your utilization rate? And 
inevitably they will tell you it’s 100 per cent, every bed is full. 
Are there waiting lists? Absolutely, they say, we have long 
waiting lists. It’s waiting lists for people who want access to 
any bed in the province. But it’s also waiting lists from people 
who, because they have to accept any bed, are moved out of 
their communities, a long ways from home, a long ways from 
where their loved ones can come to see them on a regular basis. 
 
Most of these seniors . . . And the rates that the government 
uses is the numbers over the age of 75, it’s getting difficult for 
these seniors to travel easily. They may not even have driver’s 
licences any more, or they may never have had the ability to 
drive. So how do they visit their partner in a facility outside of 
their own communities? The government’s response is we don’t 
care, it’s the right thing to do. That’s an unacceptable situation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know back in the 1980s I remember the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana being up on her high horse proclaiming when 
the government of the day changed the drug plan to put in a 
$125 deductible, being on her high horse and saying it’s either 
drugs or food, you’re forcing seniors to choose. 
 
Interesting comment. What does it mean, Mr. Speaker, when 
the NDP government brought in a $1,700 deductible? 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Seventeen hundred dollars. Mr. Speaker, 
do seniors now have to choose between food, rent, and clothing 
because of what this government has done to them? Those are 
the situations. 
 
The member from Regina Lumsden during the last election 
campaign goes up to one senior who had a lawn sign supporting 
a political party — not of his choice — goes to that senior and 
tells them if you vote for that political party and they win, they 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

will take away your health care tomorrow, the day after the 
election. That’s what he said. 
 
And when he was questioned by the media about that comment, 
his response was, that’s what’s going to happen. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that is not the truth; that is not what was going to 
happen. It was simply a scare tactic that the NDP utilized across 
this province to gain support. Mr. Speaker, it’s a despicable act. 
 
There’s one other item I think that’s very, very critical. The 
NDP have raised the price of utility rates across the board for a 
number of years. The promise is the lowest utility rates in 
Canada, and it isn’t going to happen, and it isn’t happening 
under these . . . But it’s an attack on seniors on fixed incomes. 
They have no ability to offset that cost in any way, shape, or 
form, and yet the Crown corporations are simply being used as 
a tool of taxation by this government. 
 
When you pay a dividend of 90 per cent to the government on a 
false paper profit of $113 million and extract $100 million and 
the Crown corporation has to borrow money to pay for that, 
those seniors are going to have to pay that money back in 
increased utility rates. And that’s direct taxation on those that 
cannot afford to pay, Mr. Speaker. That’s an attack on seniors. 
But as this . . . as members of this government like to say, that’s 
the right thing to do. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the NDP way of 
doing things and it’s not the right thing to do. 
 
And the very concept, Mr. Speaker, that you would want 
seniors to die quicker to help out with the bed situation is 
absolutely diabolical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll use the example of my own father-in-law who 
is 87 years old, who doesn’t drink, who doesn’t smoke, who 
worked hard all of his life and was in very good health until the 
last few years, has cancer and cannot get into a long-term care 
bed. But he was virtually . . . he was almost qualified for 
palliative care but can’t get in to long-term care. Thankfully the 
federal government through the Veterans Affairs supports a 
program in Saskatchewan for veterans; he, being a veteran, took 
that opportunity and is in federal long-term care. But the 
province could . . . would not and could not supply a long-term 
care bed for him even though he has cancer and will soon be in 
palliative care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that is a shameful way 
to treat the seniors of this province who built this province, and 
Tommy Douglas would be rolling over in his grave seeing this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will not be 
speaking on behalf of this motion, and I will not be supporting 
this motion. At the end of my remarks I will be moving a 
motion that basically says we recognize that this year’s 
provincial budget has invested $160 million in health care and 
that the top priority of our government is to provide top quality 
health care services, like long-term and others that are the top 
priority of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s a good thing that we have a perfect segue from the 
member from Cannington’s comments about my comments last 

week because I want to talk about the deliberate 
misrepresentation and misleading use of those comments. And 
when we’re talking about scaring seniors . . . He just finished 
speaking about scaring seniors. And I think that that is probably 
the most despicable thing I’ve ever seen is to use that tactic to 
scare the seniors of this province into thinking that in some way 
this government . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. Order. 
Order. I simply want to remind all hon. members on both sides 
that the debate is focused around a motion, and I urge members 
to use temperate language with respect to each other. 
 
I recognize the hon. member for Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, I 
think it’s unconscionable to use the seniors in this province to 
move your agenda forward. My son told me when I first was 
elected into politics that I was naive and I was too naive for this 
job. I was offended and I disagreed with him. But I think it’s 
true because every time this happens, it still startles me and 
surprises me and disturbs me that we would use the most 
vulnerable in our society to further a political agenda. 
 
In no way has anybody ever said that to encourage seniors to 
die quicker or sooner is the agenda of anyone in this Assembly 
or in this province. When we talk about living healthier longer, 
people that listen to that understand it. People that look at the 
games that are being played in this Assembly as being the story, 
miss the message. And I had many, many calls and e-mails 
from people who understood the message. And frankly, the 
editorials of the paper have understood the message and have 
basically said the opposition is deliberately obtuse. 
 
And as I said in my remarks last Friday to the Speaker, I have 
hours of good things I could talk about on health care in this 
province. I’m going to just focus on a few things today to focus 
the debate basically on long-term care and the things we were 
talking about — seniors that have options, different options 
than we have had in the past. 
 
My own father is in a nursing home. He is a veteran and he is in 
a nursing home. My in-laws are elderly and frail. They don’t 
want to go into a nursing home. They want to remain 
independent, so we have home care; we have daycare programs. 
There’s respite. We have assisted living and enriched housing. 
Many, many seniors are interested in that. And for myself, I’m 
interested in having options. 
 
The member from Rosthern even said seniors are not all that 
interested in long-term care. That’s not their end goal. We had 
an awful time moving my grandfather into a nursing home. He 
didn’t want to go. He wanted to maintain his independence at 
home. So it is our view and my colleague’s view and this 
government’s view that those options need to be available. 
 
We spend a lot of our time and money in health care treating the 
end of disease. We need to focus our attention on what we can 
do as citizens to prevent disease. And it isn’t indicting someone 
for making wrong choices when we start this discussion. It’s 
encouraging and empowering people that they have the ability 
to affect their own health and how their lives evolve and how 
they live. And I think that’s empowering. 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

For me, I think that’s a wonderful thing. I may not take up the 
member’s offer of the walk, but I’d probably prefer different 
company. 
 
And also we need to talk about . . . When we spend our money 
differently, we need to talk about what those options are for 
people that foster independence, but also foster feelings of good 
health because the things that you do to . . . the choices that you 
make — not only how you change your dietary habits but your 
exercise — they have positive effects on your whole life. 
There’s socialization. There’s all sorts of things that people 
want to talk about when they make their healthy choices to have 
different options than basically only long-term care. 
 
The Sask Party’s own report to the Fyke Commission has said 
they don’t want to see micromanaging at the district level. They 
want to talk about an inventory of long-term care beds. 
 
The districts have been doing that inventory on an ongoing 
basis for years. They have a very, very good idea of what we 
need in long-term care and where we need it and what we will 
need in the out years as the baby boomer bulge goes through. 
So it’s not that this is not a new idea to the districts, and they do 
have this data and they do use it in their planning. 
 
They now have their budgets. From this year’s budget they now 
have their global allotments and they are making their decisions 
based on those assessments. And they are making those 
decisions about where they can best spend the public’s money 
to deliver the services that we all agree are important to us. And 
those decisions are going to be difficult because we all know 
that even $160 million added into the budget this year is not 
going to fund the status quo. 
 
And we talk about change, and people resist change. It’s pretty 
difficult to change your attitude. It’s not easy for even any of us 
to change. When my job was changed, I didn’t like it. I resisted 
and I still have feelings of resentment over that 10 years later. 
It’s difficult to change. 
 
It’s a change in culture when we started thinking about instead 
of putting all our money into treatment, we start looking at what 
we can do to influence our own lives and what us as 
policy-makers can do to influence our lives. And we have a fair 
amount of . . . the onus is on us as policy-makers to look at 
what will be the best use of the public’s money. 
 
We really do need to pay attention to evolving diseases like 
diabetes, which are coming into the population at a younger 
age. We need to make different choices and we need to 
empower people to do that. And the calls that I’ve been getting 
into my office are quite interesting. Granted there are some who 
have heard the spin that the Sask Party has put on, and when 
you talk to them they go, oh, of course; of course that’s what I 
want. 
 
So it really disturbs me that that sort of thing has been used to 
scare the seniors when really they understand. When I was 
minister responsible for seniors, I went out and talked to seniors 
groups across this province and we talked about this very thing, 
and they got it. Unfortunately those members don’t get it. Or if 
they do get it, as the editorial said, they’re deliberately obtuse. 
And I think the only way you can explain that obtuseness is, it’s 

just for political gamesmanship. 
 
And that’s what disturbs me because seniors are scared that, for 
some of them they think they are going to be evicted from their 
bed. That is absolutely untrue. And it really bothers me to see 
that that’s being used on those people. And when they phone in 
and say, but I don’t want to be out of my bed — well nobody is 
going to do that to you; nobody is going to do that. And I think 
it just really reflects badly on politicians to use seniors. 
 
When we talked about trust in this building, daily in question 
period, I would wonder who I would trust with my future as a 
senior, if all that my future means and my peace of mind means 
is that it’s a game to them. That would bother me, and I would 
seriously ask myself, could I trust them? And I would surely 
say, no. 
 
Now when we talk about the choices that people are making, 
they’re phoning in and saying to me, it’s time we had this 
debate; I want to talk about this because I want to know what 
choices I can make, what difference I can make in my own life 
and what influence you as a legislator can have on that. So I 
think it’s time to have the debate. And the calls I’m getting are 
quite . . . they cover a wide range of people — from people in 
the medical field, people far and wide in this province — not 
just my own constituents. But many people from around the 
province have taken the time to pick up the phone and tell me or 
e-mail me what they think about this comment. And they 
understand it and they actually support it, and they like the 
concept. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Now when we talk about living healthier longer, we talk about a 
long, healthy life. When we talk about dying quicker, we talk 
about not lingering in dying. Every one of us will choose that 
because we understand it. When you start thinking about the 
alternatives, of course this is the logical thing to do. 
 
And I appreciate the people who have called and expressed their 
views to me. And I appreciate the people who have called that 
are unhappy and that misunderstood because they were led 
down that path. And I really appreciate having the chance to 
talk to them. And I appreciate the health debates that are 
brought up every time because I have hours that I could speak 
on them. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will make the motion: 
 

That all words . . . 
 
The amendment, sorry, to the motion: 
 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and substituted 
with the following: 

 
recognizes that this year’s provincial budget has 
increased the funding for health care by $160 million, 
and that the top priority of the Government of 
Saskatchewan is to use the means available to deliver 
high quality services like home care, long-term care, the 
drug plan, and acute care, which are all a top priority of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

Moved by myself and seconded by the member from Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The member for 
Saskatoon Eastview has moved an amendment to the motion. 
Will members, committee members, take the amendment as 
read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — That’s agreed. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the hon. member 
for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. I’m 
proud to enter into the debate to second the amendment before 
the Assembly because our publicly funded, publicly 
administered health care system is a source of pride for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
I have to say that I’m very suspicious of the motives of the 
members opposite when they rise day to day with outraged 
indignation to say they wouldn’t do this, or they wouldn’t do 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they’re not putting forward 
what they would do. Although from time to time members 
opposite let comments slip — like the member from Weyburn 
constituency who says, why shouldn’t people be able to pay if 
they can afford to pay for their services, or why wouldn’t we 
privatize the health care system? And then of course it makes 
sense because of course then they wouldn’t do this or they 
wouldn’t do that; a third party would be doing this or that with 
profit motive in mind. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s not anyone in the province that wants 
to go there. And that’s why trust has not been placed in the 
members opposite to put forward a privatized health care plan. 
And that they voted for this government to maintain and 
support publicly funded, publicly administered health care that 
has been a gift to the rest of this country, because of the work of 
the members of the New Democrat Party and the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) before them. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about a health system, 
of course part of that discussion always has to be what we are 
doing to look at curative care and to look at the supports that we 
put in place for people to live a long and healthy life. But we 
also have to talk about the broad picture. 
 
As the mover of the amendment says when we . . . All of the 
kinds of supports that we put forward to seniors which includes 
. . . As the person moving the motion said, seniors stubbornly 
want to be in their own homes as long as possible. And of 
course then we would move into looking at housing being an 
important, important issue for seniors. And with that in mind, 
we have social housing for seniors. We’ve got assisted living 
mechanisms in place for those who want to stay in their own 
homes. I think of the housing options, like a life-lease housing 
option for seniors. There’s the home repair program that will 
make adaptations to help seniors stay in their homes longer. 

And the list goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The rehab program, 
the residential rehab program to assist them with making repairs 
to their homes . . . there’s a long list of the ways that we would 
support seniors to stay in their homes as long as possible. And 
that’s the first choice for seniors in our province. 
 
But when it comes a time to support services beyond that, we 
have invested in medicare in this province and urged the federal 
government to continue to and increase their support for 
medicare in this country. 
 
Saskatchewan’s health care system provides a range of health 
services and supports to seniors in their communities, in their 
homes. And all these services are aimed at helping seniors 
remain healthy and independent Saskatchewan residents. 
They’re eligible for receiving hospital services, medical and 
public health services, and mental services as insured health 
services provided by funding from the provincial government 
administered through Saskatchewan’s regional health 
authorities. 
 
The health budget for 2003-2004 totalled $2.5 billion which 
was an increase that year of a 184 million over the previous 
year and, has been mentioned, this year another increase of 
$160 million. So we can look at since 1999-2000 budget an 
increase of about 33 per cent in health care funding for publicly 
administered, publicly funded health care for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to take a few moments to talk about the home care in the 
province of Saskatchewan because, as we said, for those who 
want to stay in their home longer, Saskatchewan health care’s 
. . . home care program helps many seniors with their health 
problems, who may need acute or palliative care or supportive 
care in order to live independently longer in the comfort of their 
own home. 
 
The program helps people maintain their quality of life and 
provides support for people who may otherwise have had to be 
hospitalized or put into the long-term care system in the 
province. There’s case management and assessment. There’s 
home nursing services. Physical and occupational therapy 
services are provided at no charge. And for things like meals, 
personal care, respite, or homemaking, that’s based on income 
and the amount of care that’s required, so it’s based on the 
individual. 
 
There are some services that we once had available many years 
ago only through the hospitals, that we now deliver at home. 
And some of the examples of that might be, the people who 
need intravenous antibiotic therapy and palliative care, and they 
can receive those services now in the comfort of their own 
home. 
 
Individualized funding makes a difference for seniors as well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health 
Care, the provincial government’s plan to improve health care 
in Saskatchewan, provides individualized funding as an option 
available through the regional health authorities for home care 
programs. 
 
And what does that mean? That means that people with 
increased . . . will have increased choices and flexibility in the 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

way their needs are met. Through the home care program, 
where individuals are eligible for home care and are 
responsible, they receive monies to take the responsibility 
themselves for hiring, for training, scheduling and determining 
their own staff, managing their payroll, following applicable 
legislation, and reporting to the health region. This provides yet 
another flexible option, but is available through the action plan 
for health. 
 
Much has been said about long-term care and special care 
homes. And the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 
continuing to provide a publicly subsidized, long care system 
for individuals whose assessed needs cannot be met through the 
community and home-based services and the housing options 
that I have mentioned. 
 
And much has been said about saying, where were we trying to 
go when we looked at the changes that were contemplated to 
the long-term care subsidizations. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re 
talking about the very upper-end incomes, high-level incomes 
who are now capped. And we were asking if they could support 
a little bit more in the system to allow us to continue the 
subsidies for all members in the system, that we would have 
that option remain strong and viable into the future. 
 
The way it translated and the fear that the members opposite 
portrayed in the communities of us taking away from capital 
assets and other things that were not part of the equation led us 
to believe that we need to change the perception of fear that’s 
been created, and we did other things to support that system, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Long-term care services are delivered by almost 200 special 
care homes and long-term care units in this province. And this 
totals about 8,600 residents as of March of last year, so it’s 
increased this year as well. Our current ratio of beds per 
thousand population aged 75-over is second highest in all the 
provinces in this country. 
 
Typically persons requiring levels of care use special care home 
services. And to make the best use of special care home 
resources, individuals are admitted on the basis of assessed 
needs. Assessments are done by the health authorities. The 
average cost of a nursing home bed is about $4,300 per month 
or approximately $51,600 annually, so the provincial 
government currently subsidizes those costs by 77 per cent. 
 
Province-wide cost of care and accommodation in long . . . 
(inaudible) . . . care services are a priority. The subsidy is a 
priority to allow those seniors the best care with the income that 
they have available to them. 
 
And of course as I’ve mentioned that these are income-tested 
charges based on annual income plus their earned interest . . . 
that’s not personal assets such as land, houses, bank accounts. 
They’re not taken into account when determining this. And 
that’s exactly what the members opposite said we were trying to 
do when they mentioned the members’ opposite comments. 
 
With those kinds of comments, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t even 
been able to get into the move that we have to improve surgical 
care lists. There’s the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan. 
There’s the Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living, There’s 

many, many aspects to the support that we give to deliver care 
for seniors in this province. 
 
And that’s the reason why I stand with great pride to support 
the motion that’s before us from the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview, and would have wanted to spend many, many hours 
more in the Assembly talking about the things that we do to 
support seniors living a long, healthy, comfortable life in their 
homes or long-term care homes in this province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the member 
from Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
am pleased to rise and support the motion put forward by my 
colleague from Martensville, and seconded by my colleague 
from Cannington, which states: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the particularly harsh toll 
this year’s provincial budget has taken on seniors in 
Saskatchewan, especially the closing of long-term care 
beds, further reductions of acute care services, and raising 
the provincial sales tax which most adversely affects those 
people on fixed incomes. 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been interesting to listen to this 
debate. And I’ve heard my colleagues stand up and speak on 
behalf of seniors, defend seniors. And then I’ve listened to the 
members on the opposite side, the NDP members, and what did 
they do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They lectured the opposition for 
defending seniors and for standing up for seniors. I think that 
that is a terrible way to conduct a debate. I think that the NDP 
should reconsider their strategy because it’s a terrible strategy. 
 
I happen to know that many, many seniors watch the debate in 
this House, and I’m guessing that there are hundreds, perhaps 
thousands of them watching. And they saw my colleagues in the 
Saskatchewan Party speak up in their defence, and then they 
saw NDP members ridicule and put down the Saskatchewan 
Party MLAs that were speaking on behalf of senior citizens. I 
believe senior citizens are beginning to recognize the truth of 
the NDP, that they care nothing about their needs and concerns, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, it used to be that when I went to school and when 
you went to school, Mr. Speaker, we were taught about myths. 
And there are a lot of myths going around. I mean, one of the 
old myths was that the earth was flat. And of course we know 
that that caused explorers to fear going out and exploring new 
horizons because they were afraid they’d fall off the earth. 
 
Well myths have been replaced by urban legends, and there are 
just a number of urban legends floating all over cyberspace 
right now. But a new urban legend that has unfolded over the 
last few years is that the NDP in Saskatchewan cares about 
seniors. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that urban legend is false. The NDP care 
nothing of seniors, and this budget that they introduced last 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

month conclusively proves that the NDP is attacking seniors, as 
they are many people in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
myths and urban legends need to be debunked, and that’s what 
the Saskatchewan Party is doing. And we do not need to be 
lectured by the member for, particularly from Eastview who 
should be also defending seniors rather than lecturing my 
colleagues here on the Saskatchewan Party side of the House. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was in my community here in 
Regina — I have a home here in Regina as well — and a 
neighbour came up and said, you know I’ve been NDP all my 
life; in fact I’ve been pretty involved with the NDP. And he said 
that when the NDP government was considering raising 
long-term care fees a few months ago prior to the election, that 
he wrote his MLA, an MLA here in the city of Regina. And he 
said he had a petition that he wanted this MLA to present in this 
legislature — a legislature that belongs to the senior citizens of 
Saskatchewan as much as any of us. 
 
And he said his NDP MLA from Regina refused to bring that 
petition and present it in the House, a petition that was opposed 
to the increase in long-term care fees. So he had to go to my 
colleague, the member from Melfort, to get that petition tabled 
in the House, to respect his views on the NDP’s decision to 
raise long-term care fees for senior citizens. He said, you know 
I worked hard for the NDP all my life, but that was a real 
eye-opener. And he said to me, he said, you hold those guys 
accountable; you go after them. He said, I’m particularly 
disappointed that all of my support over all these years means 
nothing as I now become a senior citizen and watch how they 
treat me. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my own community of Rosetown, 
my own constituency needs a new long-term care facility. The 
community have been working on this project for a long time. 
They have all of the money committed to contribute to this 
project from the constituency, from the community. The town 
of Rosetown is committed. The rural municipalities around 
Rosetown are committed to this project. All they need is the 
provincial government and the Minister of Health and his 
colleagues on the other side of the House, the NDP, to agree to 
fund this project. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the project wasn’t needed I 
wouldn’t get up in the House and speak in support of it. But I 
want you to know and I want the people of Saskatchewan who 
are watching to know and I want the NDP on the other side to 
know that right now senior citizens are forced to live long-term 
care in a basement under the hospital. It’s not safe. It is 
frustrating for them. They don’t have proper lighting. They 
don’t have windows. Can you imagine after contributing for 
decades to the province of Saskatchewan and then needing 
long-term care, to be put into a basement, a place that’s not 
safe, a place that if a fire was to ever break out, would put their 
lives at risk . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, everyone in Rosetown 
knows that it’s not right. They know that it’s not proper 
treatment for senior citizens. They know they need a new 
facility, and they also know that they’re prepared to do their 
part. They will put forward the money required to build this 
new facility if the NDP will do their part. The NDP have been 
dragging their feet. The NDP have been pleading poverty. 

The people of Rosetown know that the money that the NDP 
have lost outside of the province of Saskatchewan could build 
that long-term care facility over and over and over again, that a 
facility could be put in Rosetown, that a facility could be put in 
every community in Saskatchewan where it’s required — if the 
NDP government had not blown those millions and millions of 
dollars on Las Vegas type gambling projects all over the world. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the senior citizens of Saskatchewan 
are beginning to recognize that the old urban legend that the 
NDP cares about seniors is just that. It’s a legend. It’s not true. 
It’s a falsehood. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, seniors are on fixed incomes. Seniors on 
fixed incomes are paying high property taxes, the highest that 
they’ve ever seen. Seniors who have needs like the rest of us — 
they have to buy food; they have to buy personal, you know, 
things for their personal lives — are now paying more PST 
(provincial sales tax) on those purchases. It’s gone from 6 per 
cent to 7 per cent. Mr. Deputy Speaker, seniors who worry 
about their health are now seeing waiting lists so long that they 
see and hear of seniors who have died waiting for the health 
care that they require. And they’re not just discouraged; they’re 
frightened. 
 
And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they hear the member from 
Eastview talking about, well if they just lived healthy lives, then 
they’d die quicker. And she said that she’s been misrepresented. 
She said the Saskatchewan Party has misrepresented her. I 
know exactly what the member from Eastview meant. The 
member from Eastview meant that if you live a healthy life, 
hopefully when you come to the end of that life, you won’t have 
a long illness — I think that’s what she meant — and your time 
for needing the health care system will be shorter. 
 
But I say to you, Deputy Speaker, she has no scientific basis on 
which to make to make that claim. Healthy people at some 
point in their lives will become ill, and we have no guarantees 
over whether that illness will be long or short. And my 
colleague from Martensville discussed his parents. My own 
father . . . No one lived a healthier life than my father. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you knew my father. He was a hard worker; he was a 
healthy eater; he didn’t partake of bad habits. And he contracted 
Alzheimer’s when he was in his 80s and he needed a lot of 
assistance. And he had a strong heart. He lasted for a long time, 
and it was hard on our family. 
 
There is no guarantee, I say to the member of Eastview, that 
because you live a healthy life that you’re going to die quick. 
We all hope that but, Mr. Speaker, there’s no guarantees. And it 
is an affront to the senior citizens of Saskatchewan that the 
member from Eastview would be so callous and to be so 
inconsiderate to say that, if you just live healthy, you’ll die 
quicker and you won’t need long-term health care. 
 
That is disgusting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that member 
should apologize to the seniors of this province, as should the 
NDP apologize to the seniors of this province for bringing 
down the most hard-hearted budget that senior citizens and the 
people of Saskatchewan have seen in many, many a decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support this amendment or this 
motion. The amendment put forward by the member from 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

Eastview just adds to the urban legend. It’s not truthful, it does 
not reflect health care in this province. 
 
And therefore I would encourage all members to support my 
colleague’s motion and to recognize the amendment for the 
urban legend that it is. I thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy, Deputy 
Chair, or Chair of . . . I have a speech that I was planning on 
giving. But I think given what I’ve heard today, I’d like to take 
a slightly different tack because it seems that the temperature 
and the anxiety on this issue seems to be raised. And maybe it’s 
intentional; maybe it’s not. 
 
But I don’t think anybody in this House has cornered the market 
on compassion for seniors. I don’t think the opposition is 
necessarily out to get seniors. I don’t think that the government 
is out to get seniors. I know members on that side of the House 
whose heritage it is to honour and revere seniors. I married into 
that heritage and I know that senior citizens in that culture and 
in that heritage hold a very important view. 
 
You know, some might view it as negative in some ways, but 
realistically when you’ve reached that age that you can speak 
with wisdom and the children and the grandchildren and 
generally the great-grandchildren actually listen to the seniors, 
and honour and respect them . . . oh. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Why is the member for 
Arm River on his feet? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The member for Arm 
River has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Arm River. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your Speaker’s 
gallery are several gentlemen that I would like to introduce. 
They’re here looking to invest in rural Saskatchewan. They’ve 
been touring the area around Wynyard and they believe that this 
is a very good place to invest. They plan on — if the investment 
goes through — of providing 100-plus jobs, plus exporting 
some of the material that they’re going to be making here back 
to the Jilin Province. And the Jilin Province I believe is our 
sister province in Saskatchewan which is very good 
connections. 
 
I would like to introduce Eugene Frank; he’s the spokesperson 
for the group. There’s Simon Lim; he’s marketing investment. 
There’s Simon Hu, operator . . . manager of operations. Andy 
Lim, he’s in administration; and George Kecala in marketing 

director. 
 
I would apologize maybe if I was mispronounced an odd name, 
but I would hope that all members here will join me in 
welcoming them and I hope that they will find, I know they will 
find Saskatchewan an excellent place to invest. And I know that 
my constituency office is assisting them and I hope that the 
government on their side in Agriculture will help them in any 
way. I know that they have several meetings with them coming 
up. 
 
So with that I would like to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): —  Why is the hon. member 
for Saskatoon Massey Place on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The Minister of Industry 
has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): —  I recognize the hon. 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 
like to join with the member opposite in welcoming these 
gentlemen to the legislature today as Minister of Industry and 
Resources and to agree with the member opposite that we do 
have many excellent opportunities for investment in our 
province. 
 
We welcome investment and our Department of Industry and 
Resources would be very pleased to provide any information 
that we have about programs. We have several programs to 
assist manufacturers and processors, for example, and we’re 
glad to see the interest in our province. And I just want to also 
welcome these individuals and wish them much success in 
pursuing opportunities in our province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Effect of Budget on Seniors 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. As I was saying, I do believe that there are members 
on both sides of the House that really respect senior citizens. I 
referred to some members on the opposition and their culture. I 
know members on our side, we have members of First Nations 
individuals and they honour and revere their elders. And in that 
community, people who have attained a certain age are very 
much respected. And I know we have actual religious ministers 
and they minister to seniors and have probably attended many 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

and overseen many funerals as well and supported. We’ve got 
people within the medical facility, the medical community that, 
regarding a nurse, that have worked with seniors. And so I don’t 
think that anyone in this House has cornered the market on 
being supportive of seniors. 
 
I do want to say that it is important that when we take a step 
back and cooler heads prevail, that we look at the budgeting 
process as a matter of choices. We want to come up with a 
process that will meet all of the diverse needs through all of the 
expectations, right from the birth of a child to pre-school to K to 
12 (kindergarten to grade 12) education, and to . . . they want to 
go on to university or to SIAST and then to have a good 
economic career here. And then in retirement years, that you 
actually have good, stable funding and good, stable housing in a 
safe community and utility rates that are affordable, an 
affordable place to live. And that when you come to the end of 
your earthly life, that you will be supported and that you will be 
ensured that you will be respected. 
 
And I think it was, it was obvious to me when I heard it, and I 
think to most members, that what the member for Eastview was 
talking about was what, you know, Socrates and Plato were 
talking about — the good death. And it’s not that you would 
want to hasten death, it would not . . . not that you would want 
to bring it on more quickly or get into the aspect of euthanasia, 
but that when your time comes, that you can have a fairly quick 
and fairly painless death. And I think that’s something that all 
members would want to have. 
 
And I don’t, in my reading of the comments and the situation 
afterwards, there was no expectation or no intention to try to 
encourage people to move along or that it’s somehow a solution 
to any kind of budgetary process. I don’t think that that is 
something that should be encouraged in this House. This is . . . 
it’s a very respectful place. It’s something that we’re very 
fortunate to be able to serve our members here, and I think 
sometimes we need to step back a little bit from the rhetoric and 
move forward. I know that passions sometimes get high, in 
particular after an election or the term just before the election. 
 
But I think we need . . . It’s time to turn the page, from my 
perspective, Mr. Speaker. I know that my own grandfather . . . 
I’ll tell a couple of stories about my own personal background. 
My grandfather passed away in his early 90s and, you know, he 
had a rough life. In some cases he made some good choices, 
made some bad choices, but generally he was fairly healthy 
through all of his years. It wasn’t until, wasn’t till he was 
something like 92 that he started to have some serious medical 
problems. And at that point then he went into the hospital and 
was fully supported. 
 
(12:00) 
 
My other grandfather on my other side, I mean, he passed away 
before I was born but, you know, he was a no-nonsense person 
and knew the value of a dollar. In fact my father tells the story 
that the year that the Highways department decided to keep the 
roads open in the wintertime . . . and he thought that was the 
biggest waste of money. Why in the world would you need to 
have the highways open in the wintertime? Now that’s the 
background that I come from, Mr. Speaker, very much knowing 
where the dollars are. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the motion that the opposition has put 
forward, and then the amendment that the member for Eastview 
has, supported by the member for Regina Wascana Plains has 
put forward, is really . . . it deals with the same issue, but it’s a 
different perspective on it. You know, on one aspect, one could 
say that there’s so much more that we should be doing for 
everyone with regards to health care. As has been said in the 
budget debate, this government and this budget will be adding 
$160 million or 6.3 per cent to the health budget. 
 
Now as most people know, most of that, most of the health care 
budget, or a lion’s share disproportionate, is consumed by 
people in their senior years. People who are 30 years old 
generally . . . you know, they might break their arm, but that 
isn’t very expensive fix. The expensive fixes are, you know, the 
heart surgery or the cancer surgery or the knee replacements — 
those sorts of things. And that generally happens later on at the 
end of the life. So this $160 million will largely go toward the 
seniors. You know, that’s where most of the money goes. 
 
Now for myself, a family of five, that $160 million is equivalent 
to $800 per family additional, year over year. And this increase, 
by the way, is to the base. I know that the federal government 
announced $2 billion. That generally is . . . about 60 to $70 
million is Saskatchewan’s portion. But that 60 to $70 million is 
not built into the base. That is just a basic dollar amount. And 
next year, if they don’t come up with another $2 billion, we 
actually are . . . have a 60 to $70 million hole in our budget that 
we have to worry about. 
 
The other aspect that . . . The federal government talked about 
equalization payments. But most people don’t realize . . . is the 
changes to, the federal changes . . . and this goes back 15 years 
on the drug patent legislation. Used to be that, you know, when 
the patent ran out, that there’d be generic drugs. Now with the 
federal changes, that patent is extended, and the drugs 
companies have found a loophole. They twist it around, add a 
few little ingredients, don’t change what it does, and they can 
apply for a new patent. So there’s quite a bit of responsibility on 
the federal government to step forward in health care. 
 
Our portion of health care funding in this province has gone up 
to 44 per cent, and 44 per cent is not sustainable, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, in the long term. We’re going to need more federal 
funding. I know that our Minister of Health and the federal 
Minister of Health are meeting. I know the Prime Minister and 
our Premier has met on equalization. There’s some financial 
difficulties that need to be addressed. 
 
Now I know that the opposition has talked about their motion 
— and I see my time is coming to an end — but it seems to me 
that the opposition is deliberately misunderstanding some of the 
things that this government is doing. And I know there’s 
political reasons to do that, but I would hope that they would 
honestly take another look, join us in trying to build a better 
province and a better health care system. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Members, that concludes 
the debate portion of the 75-minute timed debate. We now enter 
comment and question time. I recognize the hon. member for 
Cannington. 
 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to direct my question to the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
The proposal has been made by the government that long-term 
care facilities will be closed. My question to the minister is in 
relationship to those facilities. Will this mean that beds will be 
closed in facilities that have 100 per cent utilizations? If that is 
the case, where will those seniors be placed? Will they be 
retained in their own communities? Will they be shuffled off to 
the other end of the province where they know absolutely no 
one? 
 
And if the member says that they will not be closing beds in 
100 per cent, will she guarantee that? And will she support any 
motions to maintain the beds in those facilities that have a 95 
per cent-plus utilization rate? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The hon. member for 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — I can’t speak for the Minister of Health. This is 
private members’ day, so the question is more in the privy of 
the minister. My own knowledge is there is no long-term care 
plan . . . no long-term care bed closure plan. And the districts, 
as far as I understand, have got their global budgets. They’re 
now in the planning stages, and they will determine how they 
spend their money within their regions. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the member for Cannington. Mr. Speaker, my 
question . . . after the long, verbose statements made by both the 
member from Cannington and the member from Martensville, 
talking about all shortcomings they see in this provincial budget 
and all the negativity they portray about this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, I have two questions. The first, do they support, do 
they support the initiatives for home care in the upcoming 
budget? And in fact . . . or in the budget, pardon me, Mr. 
Speaker. And do they support assisting seniors remaining in 
their own homes longer so that they can have a better quality of 
life, rather than being placed in nursing homes, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the member 
for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 
we support is that seniors have the best quality care that they 
need in this province, Mr. Speaker, for their quality of life, 
whether it be home care in their own homes or in long-term 
care facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The budget proposals that this government has put forward is 
simply downloading the responsibility onto the district boards, 
forcing them to make the cuts, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
unacceptable. People should have the opportunity to stay in 
their own homes, and yet home care within the districts is 
underfunded, Mr. Speaker. People should be able to be in 
long-term care if they need it, and that’s being underfunded, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

So this government is failing the seniors of this province, both 
in long-term care and in home care, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
unacceptable to the seniors of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Why is the hon. member 
for Cypress Hills on his feet? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The hon. member for 
Cypress Hills has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cypress Hills. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for obliging 
me at this late moment. I’d like to take this opportunity to 
introduce a group of students from the Cabri School. This is the 
third student group we’ve had in the legislature from Cypress 
Hills in the last few days, and we’re very glad to welcome this 
particular group: 12 students, they’re in grade 8 at Cabri, and 
they’re accompanied by teachers John Irving and Denise 
Andreas, and they’ve got some chaperones and drivers, I’m 
sure, with them as well: Shari Jackson, Roxanne Knittel, and I 
guess it’s Angie Olson, and Erin McKinlop. 
 
And I’d like to welcome them personally. I appreciate having 
this group from Cabri in my time in the legislature; this is the 
first time Cabri’s been to the school that I recall. And through 
you and everybody else, I’d like to show them our appreciation 
for their visit. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Carrot River Valley. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Effect of Budget on Seniors 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a question of the 
member for Saskatoon Eastview. In the past number of years 
I’ve been involved . . . in my political life I’ve been involved 
with justice and justice issues, and have actually spent a good 
part of my time in her constituency doing public meetings. 
 
Whenever I ask seniors if they feel comfortable and safe in their 
own community, almost to a person they’ll say no they do not. I 
want to ask the member why this government has broken all of 
its promises and especially as they relate to seniors; and why 
have they not . . . have failed to live up to their promise to 
provide more police officers for Saskatoon and all of the 
province so that seniors and all citizens of Saskatchewan could 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

at least feel safe in their own community? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the member 
for Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was 
campaigning in the ’98 election I visited many, many seniors in 
their homes, and what they told me was their top priority . . . 
was that they wanted access to health services close in their 
community. 
 
So what has happened in Eastview is the first in the province. A 
seniors’ primary health centre is now in Eastview, so seniors 
can access their health services really close to home. In one 
complex, they can actually go in their housecoat and slippers 
down to access primary health care services. There’s a lab tech 
there. There’s a primary health care nurse. Other services come 
there, through there, including doctors. 
 
This is what the seniors in Eastview told me when I was 
campaigning that that was their top priority. They wanted to see 
those services close to home, and that’s what we have done as a 
government. We have provided those services and primary 
health care to the seniors in Eastview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I still have three 
minutes of my speech . . . it was cut off, the time, but I’ll forgo 
that. 
 
My question is to the member for Martensville. Why did he 
vote against $2.5 million for higher priority surgeries? Why did 
he vote against $2 million for the purchase of a new MRI? Why 
did he vote against $1.8 million for diagnostic testing for 
capacity? Why did he vote against $6.6 million for cancer 
agency? And why did he vote against $2 million to expand 
renal dialysis? Why did he vote against $16 million for the drug 
plan, a 10 per cent increase? Why did he vote against $1 
million, $2 million annualized for a Fetal Alcohol Spectrum 
Disorder provincial plan? 
 
I would ask that member, why did he vote against all of these 
measures that are listed in the budget, many of them which are 
directed towards seniors, if not directed specifically, but are 
utilized largely by seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the member 
from Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had a government 
that presented a budget. This budget was presented by a 
government that said they would provide the lowest utility rates 
for seniors in the country. They haven’t done that. That’s 
shameful. I would not support a government and anything they 
do when it comes down to breaking that particular promise. 
 
They promised there would be more long-term care beds. They 

haven’t kept that, Mr. Speaker. How can I support a budget 
from a government that doesn’t keep its promises? Mr. Speaker, 
they said they would shorten the long-term waiting lists. We 
have in this province the longest waiting lists in Canada. Why 
would I support a budget created by a government that would 
tell an untruth about that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They said there would be no sales tax. The Premier stood up, 
and he said there was no stomach for it. He said no, no. How 
could I support a budget from a Premier that would say there 
was no stomach for a tax increase, and then he increases the tax 
by 1 per cent, Mr. Speaker? 
 
He said that there was going to be attention paid to the 
education portion on . . . of education on the property tax. It’s 
not in the budget. How could I support a budget that is wrong 
on that area, as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is also for the member from Martensville, and it would 
simply be, was the elections in October of last year . . . have 
they been fulfilled and has this been justified? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. Somebody was home; we were just 
waiting for the light to go on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, virtually all of the promises that this NDP group 
and their leader, the Premier, made in that last election have 
been broken — virtually all of them. I have no doubt that 
they’re all going to be broken. 
 
Utility rates, broken; long-term care beds, broken; longest 
waiting lists, broken; no sales tax, broken; attention to be paid 
toward the education portion of the property tax, broken; taking 
care of our agricultural problems, broken. 
 
Increased fees, those were put in place. 
 
Children, give an opportunity for youth to stay in the province, 
broken. Safety for our youth, safety for our seniors, those 200 
police officers — broken. Time after time after time, every 
promise we’ve found in the NDP’s list of promises have been 
broken, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Dewdney. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
member from Martensville. Is he in favour of changing drug 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

patent laws to provide and allow for cheaper medication for 
seniors and all citizens of the province? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we’re talking 
about finding funds and finding ways to accommodate and to 
finance our health programs, we realize the costs are going up. 
We realize there are all sorts of costs in there. But just today in 
question period, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we discussed the amount 
of money this government lost and held in the Crowns — that 
they lost in the Crowns outside of this province. We’re virtually 
surrounded, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with losses. And they took 
pride in that. They defended that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Time has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I recognize the member 
for Regina Elphinstone. 
 

Motion No. 1 — Government’s Commitment 
to Young People of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy, Deputy 
Speaker, I believe is the term being bandied around here. It’s a 
pleasure today to get up and speak to a motion that says, and I 
quote from the motion which I will be moving at the end of my 
remarks, and I’ll be seconded by the member from Sask Rivers: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the government’s on-going 
commitment to the young people of Saskatchewan and that 
the initiatives in the budget will continue to build a bright 
future for the youth of this province. 
 

Now this wasn’t the most . . . it wasn’t the easiest budget to put 
together, Mr. Speaker, and there was some tough choices made. 
But I think there were some fair choices that accurately 
reflected the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan, and the 
priorities that we brought to the people in the election in the fall 
that was concluded on November 5, which resulted of course in 
an NDP government. 
 
Now one of the top priorities in this budget has been focusing 
on children, youth, and opportunity. This included $1.2 billion 
for education, which was a 3.8 per cent increase over last year. 
It also included $24 million in capital improvements for K to 12 
schools, and $16 million for post-secondary institutions. 
 
Now my seatmate is from Saskatoon Fairview, Mr. Speaker, 
and the good news on high schools for Saskatoon — both on 
the east side and the west side — I know is very welcome news 
in this regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This has also meant increasing the post-secondary graduate tax 
credit to $1,000 over four years. Now this year in the budget, 
we’ve increased the tax credit — the only such tax credit in the 
country, Mr. Speaker, I might add — from $350 to $500. 
 

We’re launching the Young Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan 
program. We’re creating 200 new child care spaces, and we’re 
increasing the child benefit payments for single parents. And 
I’ll have more to say about these each individual items later on, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well we recognize that creating opportunity for young 
people means a healthy province in terms of prenatal to 
postnatal and in terms of the opportunities that people have for 
education and for research in the health care section. 
 
Now this has meant that of course we put $2.7 billion into 
health in this budget which is at 44 per cent . . . which 
represents 44 per cent of all government spending in this 
budget. That’s an increase of $223 million in spending, and 72 
per cent of that global spending increase is going to health care. 
 
Now of the $160 million going to health care, $115 million 
goes to salaries, benefits, medical fees for service to help attract 
and retain qualified health professionals. And today, Mr. 
Speaker, we heard the Health minister speak about how the 
target of 600 health care bursaries has been achieved which is 
tremendous. It includes $46 million in facilities and equipment, 
including $27 million in capital and $19 million in diagnostics, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if we’re . . . We have a commitment in this government to 
take on the challenge of waiting times, and certainly providing 
the resources for diagnostics is critical to that effort. But it’s 
also critical to have the people to run those facilities and, you 
know, certainly our money is where our mouth is on that regard. 
 
We’re also putting forward $6.6 million to the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency, a group that does tremendous work, and I can 
speak to this on a first-hand basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re putting forward $1 million for prevention projects, 
enhanced diagnosis and assessment for fetal alcohol spectrum 
disorder and other cognitive disabilities. Now in terms of the 
investments that we can make in a preventative sense, Mr. 
Speaker, taking on the challenge of FASD (fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder) is so important in terms of getting kids off to 
a good start in life so that the deck isn’t stacked to them, you 
know, right before they come out of the womb. This is so 
important. 
 
Another measure in this budget was 72 more training seats for 
the nursing education program. And of course, you know . . . 
Again, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to provide quality health 
care, you need the people to do it. And we’ve been ramping up 
the number of education seats in the health sector, and this is 
part of that effort. 
 
Additionally, Mr. Speaker, to get back up to the question of 
prevention, we’re also increasing funding to the Kids First 
program for 60 new families to enter the prenatal program and 
to receive support. 
 
Now this works with families from when the mother is pregnant 
— prenatally, again, this enters into the question of FASD and 
prevention efforts there — but working with families that may 
not have that . . . the skills to cope in terms of, you know, 
running a household, how to get the best nutrition during a 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

pregnancy to have a healthy baby, and then the proper 
upbringing of that child unto entry into the K to 12 system. 
 
Now if we can, again, if we can get these kids off to the best 
possible start, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to pay a dividend in 
terms of, in terms of a healthier society, in terms of healthier 
citizens, in terms of more productive citizens, and say, you 
know, there’s a benefit to be gained in terms of better, better 
outcomes for people, better opportunities. But there’s also a 
penalty that we’re going to pay if we don’t make sure that these 
. . . that the appropriate investments are made at this critical age 
— you know, from prenatal to age five — to get these kids off 
to the best possible developing in terms of cognitive gains, in 
terms of just their basic health from nutrition, and in terms of 
growing up to know that they are loved and well supported, Mr. 
Speaker, and that they have a stake in society, and that this is 
something that we can do together. 
 
So health care is also an important part of this effort, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another critical element of our plan to build that . . . to prepare 
Saskatchewan for that next generation is supporting 
communities. 
 
Now in this budget we saw an investment of $295 million to fix 
the roads and to build even better highways. And you know, 
Mr. Speaker, the highways aren’t where we need them to be, 
but I think over the past three years we’ve dedicated a 
substantial commitment to improving them. There have been a 
. . . The roads are much better. And I think the reports on that 
are quite good. We’re not quite where we need to be and that’s 
. . . we’ve got a plan to move forward in the future to increase 
that infrastructure. And it’s important in terms of tourism, in 
terms of the economy, in terms of making that environment 
better for . . . to put the appropriate elements in place for that 
environment that will be conducive to job creation, to a better 
quality of life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in that effort, it includes resurfacing 325 kilometres of 
highways, continuing to twin the Trans-Canada and the 
Yellowhead highways. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the 
twinning efforts, certainly on the No. 1, it’s making those, you 
know, not just . . . it’s not just making the transportation better, 
it’s making those highways more safe. 
 
And one of the first experiences I had with death was in high 
school where I had friends heading out to Brandon and, you 
know, were hit head-on by a car coming westbound just outside 
of Virden, and three of the four kids in the car died. 
 
And you can’t help but think that if that highway had been 
twinned, that wouldn’t have been the problem, that tragedy 
would not have occurred. And I know that tragedy has occurred 
for far too many families, Mr. Speaker. And I think that by 
twinning both on our western border and our eastern border, 
this is not just a good economic investment but it’s a good 
investment in the health and the well-being of our people. 
 
In terms of building safe and vibrant communities, we’re 
investing a further $10 million in revenue-sharing grants for 
municipalities, which is a 13 per cent increase over last year and 
the third $10 million increase in three years. Mr. Speaker, 

obviously our municipalities are vital partners if we’re going to 
build a better Saskatchewan for all our people, and we want to 
make sure that they’ve got the resources appropriate to their 
responsibilities and to make sure that they’ve got the funds to 
bring to bear as we build safe and healthy communities. 
 
And you know again, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan for more in 
the future, but it’s . . . We’re doing what we can with the 
resources we have and we’re backing the priorities of our 
people and we’re putting our money where our mouth is. And 
I’m going to put a little water in my mouth now, Mr. Speaker. 
There we go. 
 
Now of course agriculture is very important to this province 
and, you know, there’s a lot of young people that’d like to get 
into farming, and that’s why this government has committed $1 
billion over four years in provincial support for the agricultural 
policy framework and income support program. Now again, 
those are real dollars, Mr. Speaker. And you know, out of 
scarce resources we’ve made, we’ve backstopped this important 
priority. Real dollars — real dollars, not the hot air variety, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve also invested $12.6 million for affordable housing 
construction under the provincial housing policy framework. 
And coming out of a community like north central, Mr. 
Speaker, in Regina, housing is a critical issue to our 
neighbourhood and to other areas that I represent in the city. 
And this is a program that’s been a long time coming, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m very excited to see that we’re finally going to 
start the dollars flowing this year. 
 
It builds on some important work that has come before, but in 
terms of housing you know you think about the basic needs of 
people — there’s food, shelter, and clothing. And obviously 
shelter is so important if you’re going to be able to provide for 
your family, and if you’re going to give them that good quality 
of life and give them the conditions so that they can take 
advantage of the opportunities that we have in this great 
province of ours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think that that housing initiative is . . . more details are 
coming very soon, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very interested and 
excited to see that go forward — very hopeful. 
 
We’ve also put forward $211 million in job training and job 
creation. And again, this is something where we differ I think 
from the opposition in that we believe we can partner with 
different sectors in society; certainly in terms of economic 
development that we can partner with business, that we can 
partner with First Nations and Aboriginal people, that we can 
partner with the co-operative sector to provide jobs for the 
people and to create wealth and to build on that economic 
progress that I think we have seen in this province. 
 
We’re also putting forward $200,000 which is, you know, no 
small amount of money to launch the Green Team which is a 
summer student employment program focused on 
environmental management and energy conservation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the environment is a huge 
priority for people of that 18- to 35-year-old group and certainly 
from the early grades in school. You think about, you know, 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

how we’re taking care of this planet of ours and what we’re 
going to be doing to maintain it for future generations. And 
young people want to make a contribution to that effort for 
good stewardship, for building a green and prosperous 
economy, for doing things that make sense, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of energy conservation, in terms of green energy 
initiatives. And I really look forward to the opportunity that this 
provides for young people to get in there to make a difference 
and to have their say. 
 
A fourth pillar of this budget, Mr. Speaker, is that of fiscal 
management and accountability. Now we’ve reduced the . . . 
We’ll be reducing the dependence on the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund by 40 per cent from last year in this budget. We’re 
improving our summary financial results by over $380 million 
since 2002-2003. We’re introducing a summary financial plan, 
a consolidated look at all government departments, Crowns, 
agencies, and boards. And we’re introducing a new general 
revenue four-year financial plan that will generate a $42 million 
surplus over the next four years and meet the requirements of 
the provincial balanced budget Act. 
 
Now as somebody who came of age in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, 
as I know . . . or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I know you yourself 
did, you think a lot in politics about fiscal responsibility. And I 
think that’s been a main concern for this government. I think 
we’re building on the legacy that we inherited from the 
Romanow government. And we’re building on the 
reconstruction job we had to do, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
repairing the destruction of the 1980s. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Now some members opposite may differ with that opinion, and 
I understand why that may be the case because of course they 
lined up with the Grant Devine administration. So I think I 
know where they’re coming from. And I won’t give them much 
more attention than they deserve, but we are concerned about 
fiscal management and accountability, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 
striving to ensure that in this budget. 
 
Now something that’s critical to education, to the . . . If you’re 
going to have opportunity, Mr. Speaker, education is important. 
Education is the great leveller in our society. It’s the means by 
which you take advantage of opportunity; it’s the means by 
which you can identify opportunity, Mr. Speaker. So obviously 
education is critical to building a green and prosperous 
economy, to building a better Saskatchewan for our young 
people. 
 
Now we’ve, as I’d said earlier, Mr. Speaker, we backed that up 
with a record investment of $1.2 billion in education and 
training in this budget. And again that’s real dollars. It’s not just 
wish we may, wish we might — that’s cash on the table, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve introduced the graduate tax credit. We’ve increased it to 
$500 this year, and we’re going to increase it to $1,000 by 
2007. And again, Mr. Speaker, this provides an incentive for 
young people to start their career right here, and again the only 
one like it in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The foundation operating grant to school divisions will increase 

by $18 million to $527 million to support high-quality K to 12 
education. Now if we’re going to have good teachers in the 
classroom, if we’re going to have good infrastructure, Mr. 
Speaker, obviously you have to pay for it somehow. And again 
on this side of the House, we’re putting our dollars into the 
budget; we’re putting our dollars into these programs. And I 
guess, Mr. Speaker, our record speaks for itself. It’s the 
second-highest increase in the budget, and we’re going to be 
continuing to build on that. 
 
We’ve added $1 million to CommunityNet to enhance the 
provision of high-speed Internet access for K to 12 students and 
teachers in remote schools. 
 
Now in question period today, the Leader of the Opposition, he 
took a bit of a different approach. He actually mocked the kind 
of access to the information highway that we have here in 
Saskatchewan. And I found this interesting because I’ve heard 
him speak on other occasions about the importance of 
connectivity and things like that. But I guess, I guess anything 
for a cheap laugh, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But CommunityNet is critical if we are going to provide the 
tools to our people to build a 21st century economy, to build a 
21st century education system. And certainly with the large 
province we have, with the far-flung geography, the population 
concentrations . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I appreciate that 
members want to participate in debate, and they will have the 
opportunity as time goes on. But I would ask members to give 
their attention to the member who has the floor. 
 
I recognize the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So given the change 
in heart of the Leader of the Opposition and the apparent 
change in the importance of the Internet, I think that I would 
like to do a little remedial instruction on what CommunityNet is 
and its importance to the province. 
 
Now CommunityNet is a broadband, high-speed, province-wide 
telecommunications network that will provide both virtual 
private networks and province-wide high-speed access to the 
Internet for education, health, and government services at a cost 
similar to the lower . . . the former lower speed network access. 
 
Now in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have, we have access 
to high-speed Internet, the likes of which that we don’t have 
anywhere else in Canada. And why do we have that? Because 
we have SaskTel, a Crown corporation — one of the best 
telecommunications companies in Canada, if not North 
America — working in partnership with communities, with 
schools, with health institutions, with First Nations to make sure 
that we have that vital tool in our people’s hands so that they 
can get access to the information so that they can have that 
rapid communication that is so critical to these modern days. 
 
Additionally, Mr. Speaker, so what does, what does 
CommunityNet do for educational institutions, teachers, 
students, libraries? Well it helps them to search the Internet 
efficiently. It helps them to access shared applications, to 
access, use, and share academic resources from anywhere in the 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

world including high-quality resources developed here in 
Saskatchewan. It helps them to access on-line distance 
education such as the exciting developments we’ve seen in 
Campus Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and to communicate with 
staff and students in other offices or other communities or 
indeed around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it’s, it’s interesting that since we’ve begun this program, 
who’s been connected to CommunityNet, Mr. Speaker? Well 
880 of 880 Saskatchewan schools, including 85 First Nation 
schools have been connected; 30 regional college facilities have 
been connected; 310 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Mr. McCall: — It was 30. The member from Northeast was 
just looking for a little reclarification there. Thirty regional 
college facilities have been connected; 310 of 310 health 
facilities have been connected; 256 of 256 government offices 
have been connected; and 154 of 162 provincial public libraries 
have been connected. You know, we’ve got a little bit of work 
to do there, Mr. Speaker, but we’re certainly coming along. 
 
Now CommunityNet is available in 366 communities, and 
SaskTel offers high-speed Internet service in 237 communities. 
We’re leading the way, Mr. Speaker. And we’re able to do that 
because we on this side have a commitment to public enterprise, 
and it’s, I think, served the people of this province well in terms 
of high-quality services, in terms of well-paying jobs for 
people, in terms of providing a dividend back to the general 
coffers, to general revenues that in other instances, Mr. Speaker, 
goes into the coffers for the stock options and to the high 
money of . . . Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. Now I mention 
CommunityNet because that’s just one area where we are 
leading the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would like to point out some other facts about education 
in Saskatchewan. We have the lowest high school drop-out rate 
in Canada. I think that’s tremendous, Mr. Speaker, because 
again, education is critical if we are going to have . . . if we are 
going to build that better future. 
 
Again, with regards to Campus Saskatchewan, secondary 
students in Saskatchewan can now take 75 different courses 
on-line, with many more being developed for on-line delivery. 
And again, in a province like Saskatchewan, that’s easy to draw 
and fun to say, it’s — with big geography — it’s important that 
we get that access out there. 
 
Now we have, additionally, Mr. Speaker, we have a 
post-secondary sector that serves more than 100,000 students 
and learners through two universities, five federated colleges 
and five affiliated colleges, three Aboriginal institutions, SIAST 
in four campuses, eight regional colleges, Lakeland College, 52 
private vocational schools, and the Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission. And again, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
100,000 people — that’s one in ten in some kind of 
post-secondary education. 
 
And again, Saskatchewan people are committed to learning; 
they’re committed to broadening their horizons in this land of 
the broad horizons for sure, Mr. Speaker, and this . . . you 
know, they’re making good on that every day. 

Now there are many other measures, Mr. Speaker, that are 
important to building that better future for the province, but in 
the interest of sharing some of the time with my seconder, I 
would like to wrap up my comments by saying that you know, 
we have a commitment on this side to try to build that good 
economy, to build that good education and training 
opportunities for our young people, and we’ve put our money 
where our mouth is. And we’ve done that consistently over . . . 
since 1991. And certainly from pre-’82, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve done that in innovative ways like community schools. I, 
myself am a product of Kitchener Community School, a project 
brought in by the Allan Blakeney government under then 
Education minister, Doug McArthur. And you know, it’s . . . I 
guess those are the kind of things I think of when the opposite 
side likes to mock the contribution that a person like Allan 
Blakeney made to this province. And you know in a place like 
north central Regina, Allan Blakeney and the NDP made a 
tremendous contribution to improving the quality of life that we 
have in a community like that. And I guess I don’t understand 
what they mean by the mockery and apparently neither do most 
of the voters in that constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have in this budget the increase to Kids First, which again 
builds . . . that’s . . . you know gets in on that ground floor with 
kids to make sure that they’re able to avail themselves of 
opportunities. We have the increases to K to 12, the increases to 
post-secondary education, and on, Mr. Speaker. There are a 
great number of other opportunities for young people that I 
wish I had the time to talk about today, Mr. Speaker, but in the 
interests of giving my seconder a good crack at the issue, I will 
now move the motion and state that . . . and so move: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the government’s ongoing 
commitment to the young people of Saskatchewan and that 
initiatives in the budget will continue to build a bright 
future for the youth of this province. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Regina Elphinstone-Centre, seconded by the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the government’s ongoing 
commitment to the young people of Saskatchewan and that 
initiatives in the budget will continue to build a bright 
future for the youth in this province. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
speak to this motion and to speak to the multitudes that sit 
before me. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as an educator for the past 30 years, the 
future of young people has been an essential part of my life. 
I’ve been honoured to have been a teacher, a principal, 
internship supervisor, university instructor, and a faculty 
member and program coordinator for Prince Albert SUNTEP 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

(Saskatchewan Urban Native Teacher Education Program) 
centre. In all of those roles the centre of my thinking has been 
children and youth, and so I’m pleased to be able to speak to the 
motion presented by the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
When I first spoke in this House, I talked about the common 
ground that we all share — friendship, family, community, 
respect. The future of our young people is a part of our common 
ground. As combative and confrontational as we sometimes 
pretend to be, we can all agree on this. We all want a good 
future here in this province for our children, our grandchildren, 
and for future generations. 
 
We speak this common ground every day without even noticing 
it in our members’ statements, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 
House. Every day we recognize and celebrate the 
accomplishments of young people. This is our common ground. 
In many ways our members’ statements are more important 
than the theatrics of question period, the confrontation and 
inquisition of question period. Our members’ statements are not 
theatre; they are real stories, our stories, stories about 
accomplishments by the people of this province, and many of 
these stories are about our young people. 
 
As the media, like theatre critics, slide quietly in for question 
period and then out again, looking for controversy, they often 
miss the real stories of this province. 
 
In this session we have acknowledged and celebrated Junior 
Achievement Awards in Saskatoon; the Provincial 4-H Public 
Speaking Awards; the First Nations Winter Games; a youth 
forum on sustainability; the Robin McCallum youth conference; 
the Eston-Holman student exchange; the Kindersley Junior 
Klippers; Tri-Town Thunder winning the Junior B 
championship; Yorkton schools’ fitness awards; a Métis Nation 
hockey tournament in Meadow Lake; the 26th Annual First 
Nations University of Canada Powwow; the achievement of a 
young musician of Eatonia; student artwork on the farm safety 
calendar; a student from Young raising $1,200 for Telemiracle; 
youth action now; the grand opening of the Aboriginal Head 
Start program facility in north central Regina, and two students 
from Churchill High in La Ronge attending the World Summit 
on the Information Society. 
 
(12:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our members’ statements, we celebrate the 
young people of this province over and over, and we applaud on 
both sides of this House. And, Mr. Speaker, when students visit 
the Assembly, we are genuinely delighted to see them. We 
crane our necks to get a look and we applaud them. And so 
when it comes to youth, we stand on common ground in this 
Assembly. We all want to celebrate youth and we all want a 
good future for young people here in this province. 
 
As I have gone door to door in rural areas of my constituency, I 
meet many parents whose children are at the U of S or SIAST 
or have landed jobs in the city. Some have sons and daughters 
who want to stay on the farm in spite of drought and BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy), and some have daughters 
and sons who have left the province for training, employment, 
for quick bucks in the oil sands. 

There will always be young people who choose to leave this 
province, for a while or for good. This was true when I was 
young; this is true today. But now more than ever there is a 
need for all of us to do more to give young people a future here. 
This is a priority that I have, that this government has; a priority 
shared with other provinces as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year the Canada West Foundation 
conducted a comprehensive poll of 3,200 citizens across 
Western Canada from Manitoba to BC (British Columbia). The 
poll asked people to indicate their top five topics in terms of 
government priority. Among westerners overall, health care was 
at the top of the list. Number two on the list was retaining 
young people. In Saskatchewan, 79.2 per cent of the 
respondents placed youth in the top five. No surprise really. But 
here’s the interesting part: in Manitoba retaining youth was also 
at the top at 77.5 per cent, and in Alberta, retaining youth was 
also in the top five at 61 per cent. Even in Alberta this is a 
concern and a priority. 
 
So there is common ground here in this Assembly and in the 
West, a common purpose to keep our young people here and 
make Saskatchewan a good home for future generations. Good 
work has been done, but we all recognize that there is much 
more to do. 
 
We have the second highest minimum wage in Canada next to 
Manitoba. We’re in fourth place in terms of youth employment 
ages 15 to 24. We have had the lowest high school dropout rate 
in Canada. Our high school completion rate at 84 per cent is 
higher than the national average of 81 per cent. In 
Saskatchewan there are 27 undergraduate students per 1,000 
people compared to 24 nationally. This is good, but it’s not 
enough. We can do better and we will, as a government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have the highest proportion of young 
people in the country right here in Saskatchewan. Many of them 
are Métis and First Nation. When I’ve gone door to door on the 
four First Nations in my constituency I met so many young 
people, bright, humorous, thoughtful, all with hope for a good 
life, a good future here where we live. 
 
Some have completed high school. Some are considering 
SUNTEP (Saskatchewan Urban Native Teacher Education 
Program) or ITEP (Indian Teacher Education Program) or 
ISWEP (Indian Social Worker Education Program) or the 
Aboriginal nursing program or SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College). Some simply want good employment and 
the training that will take them there. 
 
And so we have a great challenge ahead of us with exciting 
possibilities. Most of our young people stay in this province and 
take up productive lives. But what can we do to make sure that 
more young people have a future in this province, good jobs, 
and a good quality of life? I look forward to this challenge in 
the months to come and I see it as a collective process. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, many years ago I took a teaching position 
in Ile-a-la-Crosse. And there, with my students, we pioneered 
what I’ve called collective theatre or collective creation. The 
students and I would circle up and talk about the issues that 
mattered in their lives. They would share their ideas and 
eventually choose a topic for the next play that they would 



April 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

create. They would then explore those ideas through 
improvisation, through storytelling, and various techniques. 
And in the end, they would create a play. 
 
These plays were performed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member opposite, the member 
opposite has just broken the second and third commandments of 
heckling. 
 
The plays that we created were performed all over the North, in 
Cree and English. We used what we called an oral script, which 
involved the play evolving and changing from performance to 
performance. It was always a work-in-progress, always a 
work-in-progress. 
 
And so plays were created like Sakitawak Kayas, Napew, and 
Scrip Van Winkle and on and on. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as an educator of 30 years I have learned 
so much from young people and still do. But one of my greatest 
learnings has involved this idea of a work-in-progress, of a 
collective process, of trusting in the ideas and creativity of 
others, of inviting those ideas and of creating a time and place 
to make them happen. I believe this government has built a 
foundation for such a process. 
 
Our 2004 budget includes $1.2 billion for education — a 3.8 per 
cent increase from last year. It will fund 200 more child care 
spaces in this province, and at the other end of the spectrum it 
will provide another $16 million for post-secondary institutions 
and another 24 million in capital improvements for K to 12 
schools, including a project in Ile-a-la-Crosse involving a 
school and hospital complex. This complex will replace the 
school where I learned about collective theatre and the hospital 
where my daughters were born. 
 
This government will advance the SchoolPLUS initiative across 
the province. Nearly half of our school divisions will be 
involved. Mr. Speaker, I have visited many schools and 
classrooms over the years and I’ve spent many, many hours in 
community schools. In the best of those schools there is a real 
sense of family, of community. There is humour and caring and 
a wonderful balance of individual attention and working 
together, and the community is ever present and involved. 
 
I can remember walking into Queen Mary Community School 
in Prince Albert one day and it occurred to me as I walked 
down the hallway . . . Well the first thing I noticed, of course, 
was that the signs on the doors, the names of the teachers were 
all familiar to me because they were all graduates of the 
SUNTEP program, SUNTEP teachers, and so a few of us used 
to call that hallway SUNTEP street. 
 
But the other thing I noticed was that there were various adults I 
was meeting in the hallway. And if you didn’t know them, you 
wouldn’t be sure whether it was a teacher or an administrator or 
a social worker or a counsellor or a parent or a parent volunteer. 
This is what SchoolPLUS is all about. The presence of parents, 
human service providers, and community members in the 
school, all contributing to the learning and well-being of our 
young people. A sense of working together, a collective process 
at work. 
 

I would add that within SchoolPLUS are many smaller initiatives, 
one example being the Community-Teacher Engagement Fund 
in support of small local projects that support students’ 
well-being and school success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my belief . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my 
belief that meeting the needs of young people lies not only in 
major initiatives. It will result from small but significant 
initiatives as well. Many small initiatives often add up to more 
than a few grand ones. For example, CareerStart will provide 
for nearly 10,000 youth opportunities. The post-secondary tax 
credit will increase from $350 to $1,000 over the next four 
years. Green Team summer opportunities, summer employment 
opportunities, will be created for young people interested in 
energy management and energy conservation. Young 
Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan will be launched to encourage 
and support young people as they set up small businesses in this 
province. This program will target 150 youth. 
 
There are many more initiatives that will continue under this 
government. All of these initiatives and more are part of this 
government’s youth strategy. They are, I would argue, part of a 
work-in-progress — not that much different from the collective 
work I spoke of earlier. 
 
I say again to the members on both sides of this House, and to 
those who watch these debates, contribute your ideas. And as 
we work together and share ideas, there will be more initiatives 
in the months and years to come. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a common purpose in this 
government to focus on the young people in this province. We 
are doing this through our continued support of public 
education in this province — another 45 million this year. We 
are doing this through a number of creative initiatives that we 
can build on, and we are doing this in other significant ways as 
well. 
 
Our increased dollars to health care demonstrate our 
commitment to public, not-for-profit health care in 
Saskatchewan. While the Fraser Institute and its political 
proteges try bit by bit to break down the people’s trust in public 
health care, this government and this party will continue its role 
as a steward of public health care in this province. 
 
We will continue to lead the way in health care reform in this 
country, and by so doing we will leave a legacy for the young 
people of this province. This year’s budget, as difficult as it is, 
is plain proof of that commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I will take the opportunity to 
acknowledge some people in the health care field. My mother 
has been in health care for the past week and a half and has 
received wonderful health care at the Pasqua Hospital here in 
Regina. And so I would like to use this as an opportunity to 
thank the nurses, the doctors, and all of the staff at Pasqua 
Hospital for the wonderful care that they’ve given my mother in 
the hospital there after having a hip replacement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — And I would also like to thank all of the 
people who work at the Assiniboia Union Hospital for the work 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2004 

that they’re . . . for the contribution they’re giving to my 
mother’s recuperation at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — My mother is a strong believer in public 
health care, and an even stronger believer now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a green and prosperous 
economy is another commitment of this government. It too will 
involve and invite a collective process of ideas building on 
ideas in the course of this government’s term. 
 
Nothing can be a greater legacy for our young people than to 
safeguard and protect our environment. Everything — our 
economy, our recreation, our health, our sense of well-being — 
everything depends on how well we take care of our soil, air, 
forests, and water. We should remember this on Earth Day, 
which was yesterday, and we should remember this every day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, our budget this year 
has enshrined our Crown corporations. These are important to 
the people of Saskatchewan. They employ over 9,000 people. 
They present the lowest package of utilities in this country, but 
more importantly they are a part of our heritage and our very 
way of thinking. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they also contribute 
to individuals and communities and particularly young people 
right across this province. 
 
SaskTel has numerous initiatives that it contributes to: career 
fairs, technology fairs and science camps, summer hire 
program, co-operative education, job shadows, technology for 
women, take your kids to work, work placements, high school 
partnerships, computers for schools, school earth program, 
balloon program — numerous initiatives from SaskTel. They 
also make a great effort to hire young people and to hire 
Aboriginal people. 
 
We’re approaching the evening of the Aboriginal Youth 
Achievement Awards in just a few days, at which time 
Aboriginal youth right across this province will be recognized 
with the assistance of SaskTel. 
 
Post-secondary scholarships are provided by SaskPower, Sask 
Water, SaskEnergy, and SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). All of our Crown corporations actively recruit youth 
and particularly Aboriginal youth for current, future, and 
summer jobs. 
 
And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I grew up beneath Bonzo 
Peak in the very south of this province. And there was no 
greater . . . 
 
(13:00) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. It now being past 1 o’clock, 
this House stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. Monday. I ask all 
hon. members . . . 1:30 p.m. on Monday. I ask all hon. members 
to have a pleasant weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:00. 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................717 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................717 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................717 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................717 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................717 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................717 
  Clerk Assistant ..........................................................................................................................................................................718 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................718 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................718 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................718 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Prototype Vehicle 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................718 
 2004 Snowbirds 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................718 
 Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal Presentations 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................719 
 Valley Trails Wildlife Supper 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................719 
 2004 Saskatchewan Literacy Awards 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................719 
 Melfort Constituency Provincial Hockey Championships 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................720 
 United Way Tribute Luncheon 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................720 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Commitments Made During Election Campaign 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................720 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................720 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................724 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................725 
 Ethanol Industry Projects 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................721 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................722 
 Facilities for Universities 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................724 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................725 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................726 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................738 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Health Care Bursaries 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................726 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................727 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 38 — The Credit Reporting Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................727 
 Bill No. 39 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................727 
 Bill No. 40 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................727 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Effect of Budget on Seniors 
  Heppner .............................................................................................................................................................................728, 739 



 

  D’Autremont .....................................................................................................................................................................730, 738 
  Junor ..................................................................................................................................................................................731, 738 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................733 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................734 
  Addley ................................................................................................................................................................................736, 739 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................738 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................738 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................739 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Government’s Commitment to Young People of Saskatchewan 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................740 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................743 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 




