















































Hansard: May 19, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 42A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 19, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1231 
 May 19, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents from the 
communities of Climax and Frontier concerning their worry 
about changes that have been proposed to the health centre 
there. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It gives me great pleasure to present this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again on behalf of people from the Foam Lake constituency 
who are really concerned about the future of their long-term 
care facility. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Foam Lake Jubilee 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Kuroki, and Foam Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of residents of the Estevan 
constituency who are very concerned about the future of health 
care in this province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Mainprize Manor & 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Midale, Macoun, 
Estevan, Halbrite, Weyburn, and Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about their health care and the 
future closure of facilities and beds. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and Colgate. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to reduction of services to the Davidson, 
Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at their current level 
of service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by citizens from Elbow, Regina, and Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from constituents opposed to possible reductions of health care 
services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and the ambulance service is 
maintained at the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2004 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens of west 
central Saskatchewan concerned with the loss of ambulance 
service. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Luseland and Salvador. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present demanding the government reverse its 
decision to cut funding to the Claybank Brick Plant. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Avonlea, 
Truax, and Rouleau. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the Claybank Brick Plant; 
 
A petition concerning Grasslands Health Centre; 
 
A petition concerning Border Health Centre in Climax; 
 
A petition concerning the Foam Lake Jubilee Home; 
 
A petition concerning the Herbert Nursing Home; 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 63, 97, 106, 145, 160, and 169. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many communication 
directors and/or communication officers are employed at 
each regional health authority, and what is the breakdown 
for wages and expenses for each of them? 
 

And I also give notice on day no. 47 I shall ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many communication 
directors and communications officers are employed 
within your department, and what is the total amount for 
their wage and expense? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 
legislature two representatives of the Saskatchewan Council for 
International Cooperation, SCIC, as well as representatives 
from a number of SCIC member agencies. With us today, Mr. 
Speaker, are Ms. Lori Latta, SCIC coordinator, and Ms. Trish 
Paton, SCIC overseas program coordinator, and other SCIC 
staff and board members. 
 
SCIC is joined today by representatives of the following 
agencies: the Baptist Union of Western Canada; Canadian 
Catholic Organization for Development and Peace; Canadian 
Co-operative Association; Canadian Crossroads International; 
Foster Parents Plan; health international and their guests from 
Kenya; Oxfam Canada; Save the Children Canada; SIM 
(Serving in Mission) Canada; Wycliffe Bible Translators; 
World Relief of Canada; the Salvation Army. Also joining the 
council are representatives from two associate member 
agencies, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) International and Fair Trade. 
 
The council is an umbrella NGO (non-governmental 
organization) representing 33 local development assistance 
organizations in our province. For 30 years SCIC has 
administered the province’s development assistance program, 
known as the matching grants-in-aid program. Mr. Speaker, 30 
years ago this Assembly passed an all-party unanimous motion 
recommending the creation of the matching grants-in-aid 
program. The Government of Saskatchewan is a proud partner 
in this program. It is the strong Saskatchewan spirit of 
generosity and social responsibility that has supported the 
program in its efforts far and wide over the past 30 years, and it 
is this spirit we celebrate today. 
 
Today is also the SCIC member agencies’ annual NGO 
information day at the legislature, and this year’s events will be 
the special 30th anniversary celebration. The special words of 
welcome, Mr. Speaker, take place at 5:30 today in room 218 
and all members are invited to attend. They are, of course, 
invited earlier than that. 
 
On behalf of the government I extend my best wishes to SCIC, 
all its member agencies. May your excellent work continue to 
provide help and hope around the world. 
 



May 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the large delegation that we 
have representing SCIC, which is the Saskatchewan Council for 
International Cooperation. 
 
Particularly I would like to welcome Lori Latta and Trish Paton 
here today, as well as the representatives from at least 12 
member organizations that are here for their day to meet with 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and discuss the 
fine work that they are doing. 
 
As representatives of NGOs, I think it’s quite notable that the 
public money that follows charitable donations to their causes 
are a way that the public funds can have the same priority that 
people place in supporting these organizations because the 
grants are matching. 
 
I want to thank, on behalf of the official opposition, all of these 
people for the fine work they do to make our world a better 
place to live in. I think oftentimes we neglect to adequately 
thank those who, on a voluntary basis, raise funds to help 
people that are less fortunate than ourselves. 
 
And so I would ask all members to join in welcoming the 
delegation from SCIC to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the rest of the members of the House, in 
the Speaker’s gallery which is very appropriate, a former 
Speaker of the House and now a constituent of Saskatoon 
Eastview, Herman Rolfes. 
 
Mr. Rolfes has been a Speaker of the House, an MLA for part 
of the riding that I now represent, and a member of cabinet for 
many years of distinguished service. He now continues to serve 
the community of Saskatoon. And I’d like everyone to welcome 
him here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sorry to 
trouble you again, but I also have a fine delegation of students 
here from Rosetown, Saskatchewan. The grade 8 class have 
made their annual pilgrimage to Regina and they are present 
with us in the east gallery. There are 49 students from the 
Rosetown High School sitting in that gallery, Mr. Speaker. And 
they are accompanied by teachers Karen Brodzki, Ken Boyd, 
and Richard Berezowski. And they’re also accompanied by 
some parents who have taken the day to come down to Regina 
with them. The parents include Sheila Hare, Colleen Mann, 
Kari Prodahl, Susan Hodges, Tim Askin, Dianne Wiebe, and 
Brian Champion. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would also tell you that I’m on my best 
behaviour today because one of the parents is Susan Hodges, 
who is also the reporter for the Rosetown Eagle and keeps a 
close eye on me. So I’d like to welcome Susan, the other 
parents, the teachers, and particularly the grade 8 students who 
I’ll have a chance to meet with later, to this Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know it’s not 
every day we’re able to welcome Canadian champions into the 
Assembly, but it is my pleasure to do so this afternoon. 
 
Earlier this month The Regina Squids youth men water polo 
team went to Ottawa for the Speedo 2004 National Youth 
Men’s National Club Championships. Mr. Speaker, this team 
made up of young men born in 1986 or later, went to Ottawa as 
the eighth seeded team and they came home as gold medal 
champions. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, they went undefeated throughout 
the championship and on May 9 beat the defending champions 
and top-seeded squad from Dollard-des-Ormeaux, Quebec, by 
the score of 6 to 4. In that championship game, Mr. Speaker, 
Kevin Graham scored three goals to bring his tournament 
leading total to an amazing 26 in 7 games. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Brad Ward scored twice and Jon Bastian 
scored once in contributing to the Squids’ overall team effort in 
that championship game and the result of that effort is 
something we can be extremely proud of. 
 
I’m pleased to say that this gold medal champion team had 
lunch with the minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation and 
the Premier today. And I was able to catch up with them over at 
the Premier’s office for some photos and some talk with the 
Premier. I would . . . As well at that point, Mr. Speaker, they 
presented the Premier with a gold medal. They brought back so 
much gold they had one to share with the Premier — so many 
gold medals. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I would ask these individuals . . . I 
would like to introduce them to you and through you to the 
House, so I would ask these individuals to rise as I call their 
name. 
 
We’ll start with the goalie, Matt Sinclair. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Andrew Dickson, Jon Bastian, Steve 
Kruzeniski, Lucas Tetreault, Greg Korpan, Kevin Graham, and 
Alex Brazill. 
 
There are three members of the team, Mr. Speaker, who could 
not be with us today, and I would like to acknowledge their 
efforts and success as well: Lars Yunker, Igor Zdravkovic, and 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2004 

Brad Ward. Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce the 
team manager, Jim Graham; parent and assistant manager, Paul 
Korpan; and the most valuable coach of this championship 
tournament, the coach of the Regina Squids, Mike Mortin. 
 
(13:45) 
 
I invite all hon. members to welcome the Regina Squids, the 
Speedo 2004 Youth Men’s Canadian Club Championship gold 
medallists, to the Assembly today and ask them to join me in 
congratulating this team on being such great ambassadors of our 
province, and on a job very well done. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
take this opportunity to introduce to you and to all colleagues 
here, John and Shirley Patmore from Lloydminster. They’re 
here today representing the Canadian Co-operative Association. 
That association, along with the Co-operative Development 
Foundation, work with local communities in Canada and around 
the world to try and better lives through co-operative effort. 
 
John and Shirley are retired from their jobs as a farmer and an 
accountant respectively. In fact, Shirley remains the president of 
the Lloydminster and District Co-op. 
 
And since 1985, they’ve been very keenly interested in the 
work taken around the world and work in development, and 
they’ve been in six different countries including Asia, Africa, 
and Central America. I ask all my colleagues here to 
congratulate the Patmores for the great work that they are 
doing, and to welcome them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
my colleague from Saskatoon Eastview in welcoming Mr. 
Herman Rolfes to the legislature today. When I first got 
involved in politics the first campaign that I campaigned for 
was Mr. Rolfes, and the first executive I sat on was Herman’s. 
And I was the youth rep on his executive, which wasn’t that 
long ago, I must remind people. 
 
But Mr. Rolfes was a model MLA and a very good mentor. And 
he represented his beliefs with passion and with strong beliefs 
in the issue, even if he was occasionally in the minority. You 
always knew where Mr. Rolfes stood. And I just wanted to say 
that if there was any blame in my conduct, it’s mine. And if 
there’s any credit, Mr. Rolfes and . . . Herman and Myrna share 
in that. 
 
And I would ask all members to welcome Mr. Rolfes to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce through you and to you to the members of the 
Assembly, 11 grade 6 to 9 students from Countryside School by 
Saltcoats, and their teacher Evan Penner. I hope they enjoy their 
trip into Regina today and their tour of the legislature. And I’ll 
be meeting with them at 2:30. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, as someone who has 
done a bit of work with and for SCIC, I would like to as well 
welcome our guests today and to add a special welcome to one 
person in particular. Mr. Speaker, every year SCIC presents 
Global Citizen Awards to citizens who have made outstanding 
contributions to global education in this province. 
 
This year my friend and constituent, Christine Zyler, received a 
Global Citizen Award. And while she could not be here today, I 
want to acknowledge and recognize her achievements, along 
with Karen Timoshuk, Christine Lwanga, and Elaine McNeil, 
who works with SIAST and is with us here today. 
 
I ask Elaine to stand, and I ask members to welcome her and 
show her their appreciation for her work in this province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to especially welcome 
the members of HELP (Health, Education & Livelihood Project 
Inc.) International that are here today. Mr. Speaker, HELP 
International is a Saskatchewan agency showing how people in 
this province can undertake to improve understanding locally 
and livelihoods internationally. HELP is very active in waste 
reduction, economic recycling, and environment preservation in 
some of the poorest slums in Kenya. 
 
And visiting us today are representatives of HELP, four of 
whom are from Kenya: Gladys Mumbi; Julius Misandu; 
Professor Samuel Sinei, who is Deputy Vice Chancellor of 
Jomo Kenyatta, University of Science and Technology; and 
Hon. Dr. Esther Keino, member of the parliament of the 
Republic of Kenya. And accompanying them is Rodney 
Sidloski, who is from my constituency, Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
I’ve known Rodney for many years and I’d like to thank him 
for his tireless effort in the causes that he believes in and his 
work with HELP International. 
 
And I’d like all members to welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 
 



May 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well there have been many wonderful introductions of many 
wonderful people from across our province. And not to be 
outdone, I’d like to as well . . . Some of you will have heard the 
announcement this past Monday of the Department of 
Highways Orange Zone Challenge. We have our contestant 
winners with us today. And I’ll be saying a little bit more about 
that later on after question period. 
 
But I would like to introduce to all of my colleagues in the 
legislature, the five winners of the challenge and very, very 
talented young people. I got to have lunch with them and visit 
with them a bit just an hour or so ago. 
 
They’re seated up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and if I could 
I’d ask them to rise as I introduce them. First of all, the mayor 
of the SRC (student representative council), that’s the proper 
terminology by the way, is Morgan Pryce — Morgan, if you 
just stand up and give a little wave — Joel Tiefenbach, Brad 
Lafrance, Chris Simmie, and Nathan Lariviere, all from 
Winston Knoll Collegiate. Please join me in welcoming them to 
our Assembly here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the other members of the legislature, I’d like to also 
introduce some of the people in your gallery, specifically, Gary 
Williams. I’ve had the privilege of having him in our home for 
coffee some time ago. Gary works with Wycliffe, with 
pre-literate people groups in approximately 70 countries. The 
linguists develop alphabets from these unwritten languages, 
obtain permission from the governments of these countries to 
print a variety of materials in these languages, and help them 
through the literacy-based development programs. 
 
Gary Williams from Dalmeny has worked as a member of 
Wycliffe for 31 years, first as a linguist in the country of 
Burkina Faso with a pre-literate people group there and more 
recently, as Saskatchewan representative for Wycliffe. Randy 
Easthouse, a Wycliffe member worker with literacy-based 
development programs, has come here from Alberta today. And 
I would ask that you join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From May 24 to 29, 
the Cathedral Village Arts Festival will host a week of 
activities, music, and celebration in the heart of Regina. This 
festival features the best in dance, theatre, literary arts, music, 
visual arts, and one of the largest craft sales in Saskatchewan. 
 
When the festival first started in 1992, the street fair had 20 
craft tables set up around the Cathedral Neighbourhood Centre. 

This year the street fair will feature over 225 craft tables set up 
on 13th Avenue from Angus to Athol Street. 
 
On Monday the festival will kick off with a picnic in Les 
Sherman Park at 12 noon. I understand it will be very warm and 
sunny — not to jinx anything, Mr. Speaker. There will be a 
barbecue, a kite fest, children’s games, crafts, and music, and I 
couldn’t think of a better way to spend Victoria Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is fitting that this festival takes place in the 
Cathedral Village. This community truly does have the 
characteristics of a village: tight knit, diverse performers, 
artists, small-business people, activists, school children, and 
volunteers. Anyone walking down 13th Avenue these days 
cannot only see it, but they will feel the sense of community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in thanking 
everyone involved in the Cathedral Village Arts Festival for 
their endless hours of dedication to organizing and hosting this 
event, and I invite everyone to come on down to the village for 
a good time, good food, and great entertainment. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

National Missing Children’s Day 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. American 
author/lecturer Marian Wright Edelman said, “If we don’t stand 
up for children, then we don’t stand for much.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, Tuesday, May 25 is National Missing Children’s 
Day, a day that was first honoured in the United States in 1983. 
Here in Canada the provincial chapters of Child Find recognize 
that this day and the month of May with their Green Ribbon of 
Hope Campaign. This year marks the 13th annual such 
campaign in Saskatchewan. 
 
It saddens me to know that thousands of children go missing in 
Canada every year, Mr. Speaker. Many of these children may 
be runaways, fleeing from horrendous or intolerable 
circumstances in their personal lives and, Mr. Speaker, there are 
those children who have truly gone missing. Through the hard 
work and dedicated efforts of numerous agencies such as 
provincial chapters of Child Find, provincial and national law 
enforcement agencies, and the local groups and organizations, 
there are reunions between guardians and their children. 
 
I ask all members of the House to recognize Tuesday, May 25 
as National Missing Children’s Day, with special mention going 
out to all those agencies and organizations here in 
Saskatchewan who have dedicated their efforts to not only 
keeping our children safe but also helping to reunite missing 
children with their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we here in this House may not agree on a lot of 
issues, but there cannot and there must not be any 
disagreements on the protection of our greatest gift — our 
children, the most vulnerable of our society. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Canada Council for the Arts Award Winner 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, each year the Canada 
Council for the Arts awards two Molson prizes of $50,000 each 
to distinguished Canadians for their outstanding contribution to 
the cultural and intellectual life of Canada. 
 
I am proud to share this year’s recipient in the arts is Maria 
Campbell, a renowned Métis author, playwright, filmmaker, 
and professor at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Campbell began her career in 1973 when she 
published her autobiography, Halfbreed. This book has since 
become a literary classic and continues to be one of the most 
widely taught texts in Canadian literature. Ms. Campbell has 
written, directed, and produced numerous plays and produced 
the first weekly Aboriginal television series, My Partners, My 
People. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Campbell has been inducted into the 
Saskatchewan Theatre Hall of Fame. She’s a sought-after guest 
speaker all over the world. She is currently finishing her M.A. 
(Master of Arts) in Native Studies at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Campbell’s contribution to Canadian and 
Aboriginal literature has had a significant impact on the cultural 
evolution of Canada. The jury was unanimous in its choice of 
Maria Campbell for the 2004 Molson Prize in the arts, noting 
her status as a teacher, mentor, and inspiration to Aboriginal 
people and all Canadians is unparalleled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing 
Maria Campbell, her outstanding achievements, and in 
congratulating her on winning this prestigious award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

2004 Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the Swift 
Current business community honoured its top businesses of the 
year at the sixth annual Swift Current Business Excellence 
Awards. I was fortunate enough to have the opportunity to 
attend last night’s banquet where there were approximately 260 
people at the Legion Hall in Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the business people in Swift Current and in the 
district take much pride in their work, and it’s evident in the 
fact that there were 46 nominees in eight different categories, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The winners this year are: Bob L’Heureux Agencies for 
community involvement; Gerry and Darrin Treen and the Treen 
family of Treen Packers Ltd. — they received the heritage 
award; the new business award went to Quilt’s ’n Treasures 
Ltd.; Ron Schultz and his wife, Luanne, and the staff at PDQ 

Autobody won the customer service award for businesses under 
10 employees; and Soulstis Grower Direct was presented with 
the young entrepreneur award. 
 
I’d like to make special mention of Thrifty Foods — they 
picked up two awards last night. Thrifty Foods won the 
business choice award and the customer service award for a 
business with 10 employees and over. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the top award, the business of the 
year award, was presented to Ryan Tynning and the staff at 
Swift Plumbing & Heating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to 
congratulate the winners and all of the nominees, and especially 
the Chamber of Commerce who hosted a very successful sixth 
annual Business Excellence Awards. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
Youth Assembly 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Last week the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
executives were in Prince Albert to pass along their knowledge 
as well as to learn from their future replacements at the third 
annual Youth Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each of the province’s 75 First Nations sent one 
male and one female delegate to attend the Assembly. These 
included the Black Lake, Birch Narrows, Canoe Lake Cree, 
Clearwater River Dene, English River, Flying Dust, 
Fond-Du-Lac, Island Lake, Makwa Sahgaiehcan, and the 
Waterhen Lake First Nations, all from the constituency of 
Athabasca and Meadow Lake and Cumberland, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:00) 
 
This conference is extremely important in educating youth 
about the politics and leadership. Over the three days various 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) chiefs 
covered topics including the treaty governance process, gaming, 
veteran affairs, and housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, First Nations make up the largest, fastest growing 
sector of the population in Saskatchewan. Because of that rapid 
growth, many more members of the Saskatchewan legislature 
will soon be from First Nations or Aboriginal cultures. It is 
important to teach these young people to get involved in 
leadership positions in this province, while at the same time 
maintaining their language, identity, and culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the FSIN and all the 
First Nations youth who got involved in this conference for 
taking a leadership role in their communities. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Opening of Outlook’s Skytrail 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday 
was a red-letter day for the community of Outlook, in the 
Rosetown-Elrose constituency. Hundreds of people, including 
the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, the Minister of 
Health, and Gail and myself attended various events centred 
around the grand opening of the Skytrail, which is Canada’s 
longest pedestrian bridge. 
 
This bridge was originally constructed in the early part of the 
last century as a railway bridge for the Canadian Pacific 
Railroad. However, a train has not used this spectacular 
crossing of the South Saskatchewan River since 1987. The 
Skytrail, which was officially opened last Saturday by Her 
Honour, the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, has been 
incorporated into the Trans Canada Trail which crosses 
Saskatchewan and in fact the entire country. 
 
Congratulations to the community-minded people of Outlook 
and area who raised money and volunteered hundreds of hours 
to undertake the project. These volunteers were recognized 
throughout the day and at an evening banquet where proceeds 
from the ticket sales were earmarked for the community’s new 
integrated health centre, which has been approved after being 
on the drawing board for quite some time, and for which the 
community is very successfully raising their portion of the 
funds. 
 
So, when you go holidaying this summer looking for interesting 
sites right here in Saskatchewan, be sure to walk the absolutely 
spectacular skywalk in the great town of Outlook. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Governor General’s Canadian Leadership Conference 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Monday night I 
attended the farewell dinner for the Saskatchewan tour group in 
the 2004 Governor General’s Canadian Leadership Conference. 
 
As an alumnus of the 1995 conference, I was excited to hear 
how this year’s tour group enjoyed their experience in 
Saskatchewan. My tour was of the Maritime provinces and it 
was a life-altering experience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Governor General’s Leadership Conference 
happens every four years and it has a different theme each time. 
This year’s theme was Diversity in Leadership. Each province 
sends 16 participants to the conference who are then divided up 
and sent in teams to other provinces. Participants are from 
business, government, community, and labour. Each team meets 
with groups, individuals, and companies that reflect the theme 
of the tour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2004 Saskatchewan Tour members were from 

Quebec, Ontario, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and British 
Columbia and were extremely pleased — and impressed — 
with their visit to Saskatchewan. The tour Chair said that the 
magic of Saskatchewan came alive for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even though Saskatchewan had not been the first 
choice for some of the members of the group, once seeing all 
we had to offer, they said that our province is now dear to their 
hearts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are Canada’s future leaders and I was 
privileged to meet them and compare our experiences. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I was more than proud to hear their glowing praise for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Staffing Resources in Health Care 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question is for 
the Premier. On the first page of last week’s election platform 
the Premier promised, and I quote, “more nurses and health care 
professionals.” But yesterday the Minister of Health announced 
the NDP’s real plan — to fire nurses, close hospital, and cut 
beds. But then just minutes later, Mr. Speaker, the Premier tried 
to deny that obvious fact as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the Premier would explain today, how does 
firing 250 nurses and health care professionals help to retain 
and recruit nurses and health care professionals in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there’s an old saying in 
rowing circles. It goes something like this: only the guy who’s 
not rowing rocks the boat. And I think that across the way we 
have a bunch of people who aren’t rowing. They’re not pulling 
and working around building our health care system in this 
province. I ask them to do that. They can do it by voting for our 
budget that provides dollars for health care. They can do it by 
working with us as we look at how we can provide services 
right across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite raises questions around the 
people who are involved in the health care system whose jobs 
will be changed. We will be working with all of those people to 
make sure that they get a position in the health care system, and 
that’s the plan that we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, there’s another old saying in 
the rowing circles: if you only got one oar in the water, you 
keep going in circles. 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the head of the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses is having trouble believing the Premier these 
days. And it’s not hard to understand . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order, order. The 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, during the election the 
Premier promised to hire more nurses. Now he’s firing nurses, 
and the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses is saying that the worst 
is yet to come. The Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association say the NDP (New Democratic Party) already lose 
200 nurses per year due to out-migration. The Canadian 
Institute of Health Information says Saskatchewan has the 
lowest nurse retention rate in the country, and Saskatchewan 
Health reports that there are 203 nursing vacancies in 
Saskatchewan right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain how his new plan to fire 
nurses and close beds will shorten waiting lists, will lighten the 
load on overcrowded nursing stations and emergency rooms, 
how it will improve health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we 
have the left oar in and the right oar in, and we’re going straight 
ahead with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working with 
the nursing profession around providing more nursing training 
places. Also we’ve been working around retention issues. 
We’ve been working to try to make sure that we have 
appropriate workplaces for people. All of these things are things 
that we have to do together with the professionals. And we’re 
going to continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a goal of providing good health care for 
individuals in Saskatchewan. We have that goal. We’re working 
hard toward that goal with all of the people within the system 
and with all the citizens of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Health 
announced there would be fewer nurses after this action taken 
by the NDP government. He announced there would be many 
fewer nurses in the province of Saskatchewan. The Premier 
then denied it later in question period. And later today, someone 
over there should explain what the truth is. Will there be . . . 
will this result in fewer nurses in the province of Saskatchewan 
or not? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Minister of Health have been 
saying they plan to consult with affected communities before 

any changes are made in the health system. But like everything 
else the NDP says, it’s not true; they didn’t consult with 
anybody in these 12 communities. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party, as you know, has introduced a motion 
calling for the Standing Committee on Human Services to hold 
public consultations in every community that’s been affected 
before, before the health cuts are made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister make good on his commitment, 
on the Premier’s commitment, to consult with these 
communities before the cuts are made? Will he support this 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working in the 
province, as I indicated before, to support the training of nurses, 
the hiring of nurses, the retaining of nurses within the health 
care system. There are some changes that will happen for some 
of the staff as it relates to the 12 affected communities that were 
talked about yesterday, and we will be working with those 
professionals to have them continue to participate in our health 
care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to work with communities, and we 
continue to listen to the kinds of things that are there. The 
member from Cypress introduced some of his members, or 
some of his constituents who are here and concerned about one 
of the particular areas. I was pleased to meet with them. I’ve 
met with some of the other groups. 
 
I know that the regional health authorities have been working 
on many challenging issues around preparing their budgets, but 
I know that they will continue to talk with communities because 
this is not an easy task, but we have to do it together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is right. He has 
met with some select groups, and maybe it even helped. And 
that’s precisely the point. Will he now meet with all of these 
communities before they make cuts in those communities, Mr. 
Speaker? That’s precisely the point. Will he also meet with the 
communities affected by yesterday’s announcements? Will they 
hold consultations in those communities before the cuts are 
made? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the government and the opposition together 
agreed on new rules for this Assembly, on a committee process 
that would go out and hold public . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — When that occurred, the NDP member for Regina 
South said: 
 

The government’s recent experiences in making provision 
for public presentation and discussion on the Fyke 



May 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

Commission has been very positive. The ability to more 
routinely facilitate citizen input on policy will strengthen 
the process of democracy and government in our province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if it was true about Fyke, it’s certainly true about 
these decisions. Will the Premier direct his members to support 
our motion for wide, public consultation in the affected 
communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve clearly had some 
challenges around implementing the new rules, and I won’t say 
anything further than that. But I think when we got a new leader 
on the opposition there were some changes that were not 
following previous agreements. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I would say is that I would like to quote 
a comment made by our learned journalist who comes here 
every day. And he said this, today’s paper. He said: 
 

Even Opposition health critic Rod Gantefoer — while 
bombastic during question period — acknowledged that 
“some of these adjustments just recognize” the change in 
health care utilization in some communities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is one of our challenges, to recognize the 
change in some health care communities and we’re going to 
continue to do that. If we can save $1 million on a facility, 
we’re going to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the facilities we’re 
talking about today, there are waiting lists for these facilities, 
Mr. Speaker. These facilities are busy. And what could be more 
reasonable, what could be more reasonable than going out to 
these communities to meet with them and discuss the future of 
health care in those communities and the surrounding area and 
the impact the closures will have, by the way, in urban 
Saskatchewan? What would be more reasonable than going out 
and doing it through the legislative committee of this House? 
 
The minister referenced the fact that he himself met with 
various delegations that our members have brought forward and 
said they listened. So if it was good in that case, why wouldn’t 
it be good in the case of Herbert and Cupar and Foam Lake and 
Weyburn? Will the Premier direct his members to vote for our 
resolution and send this committee out for a consultation before 
these cuts are made? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a simple question for 
the Leader of the Opposition. It’s a very simple question. Why 
did that new leader change the agreement and vote to have 
Health estimates done in the whole . . . in the Finance 
committee rather than in the Health committee? The . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. I 
recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a simple question 
that I asked the member who is the Leader of the Opposition, 
and I request his response. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Health Care Services 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, every town and rural community 
in Saskatchewan is fighting for survival because of the attacks 
of this NDP government on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Last night I asked the Minister of Health if he realized how vital 
it was to have a . . . for a community to have a health care 
centre. I asked him how his government, the Department of 
Health, and the Department of Rural Revitalization worked 
together to have a solid vision for growing our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: which departments of 
your government has met with town officials in Foam Lake to 
find out how the closures of the health facility in Foam Lake is 
going to affect that town? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the issues around dealing 
with all of the towns in this province relate to . . . how do we 
provide services that provide a good, solid base for economic 
development? 
 
And as I explained to the member opposite last evening, what I 
often see and I know what our government sees is that health 
care is one of those legs on a three-legged stool. The other one 
is education. The other was the communication, highways, 
SaskTel, those kinds of things. Those are all important that you 
provide some stability in communities. 
 
We know that from work that we’ve done right across the 
province . . . and that’s part of why, even in very challenging 
times for our budgets, we were able to put together a budget 
like this. Not every community was totally able to escape some 
of the changes that are made because changes are happening in 
these communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the mayor and the 
people of Foam Lake are going to be delighted to hear the 
Minister of Health talking about a three-legged stool instead of 
a health centre in Foam Lake. 
 
Foam Lake mayor, Bob Johnson, is fed up with the NDP’s 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2004 

never-ending cuts to health services in his community. 
Yesterday this NDP government decided to cut four acute care 
beds, 11 long-term care beds, and one respite bed from the 
health centre. This is the same facility that has been 
downgraded several times over the past few years such that 
emergency services are only available 9 to 5, five days a week. 
Mayor Johnson says, and I quote, “We don’t know what 
direction to turn . . . (any more and) I . . . tell you we’re as mad 
as hell.” 

 
Mayor Johnson believes the NDP have abandoned the 
community. Again I quote, “Unfortunately, it seems that we’re 
always at the brunt of the cuts being made.” Mr. Speaker, Foam 
Lake’s health services have been cut and cut . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Would the 
member repeat her question, please. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Health services have been cut and cut and cut 
without public consultation. Enough is enough. Will the 
minister commit today to consult with the people of Foam Lake 
and area before these changes are made? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member raises some 
concerns about the four acute care beds in that community. It’s 
my understanding they haven’t been used since 2002, and they 
have had some challenges around staffing. But these are 
facilities that aren’t used. 
 
What I would say to the member opposite and to all people of 
this province, there have been increasing demands that have 
been highlighted by the members opposite around some very 
technical, highly skilled kinds of services that we need in our 
province, and those things continue to come up again and again. 
We have to balance the kind of access to the best medical 
technology we can get, whether it’s MRIs (magnetic resonance 
imaging), CTs (computerized tomography), or all of the very 
various surgical specialties or the medicine people — with 
access across the province. And that’s the fine balance that we 
have to do in this whole exercise around a budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working very carefully and diligently with 
that, and we are trying to work with everybody in the province 
as we do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Herbert and area 
are losing their hospital with no consultation with this 
government. In fact, the mayor of Herbert said he felt 
blindsided by this announcement and that there was no 
community consultation whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Herbert put together a brief that 
they wanted to present to the Minister of Health. But before 
they could do that, their hospital was closed. Will the Premier 
listen to the people of Herbert? Will he support our motion to 
hold a public hearing in Herbert before their hospital is actually 
closed? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the brief from the town of 
Herbert was forwarded to me approximately a week ago, and so 
I did see that particular brief. I know that the officials and the 
people from the Cypress Regional Health Authority have been 
in regular discussion with the people in Herbert as it relates to 
some of the utilization issues and some of the organization 
issues of the facilities in that particular community. 
 
This is an ongoing discussion, and what we have to try to do is 
work with the kinds of resources that we have, look at the kinds 
of changes that can be made. Last night we heard, as the 
member asked the questions, that in this particular facility it’s 
about $1 million saving on an annual basis to consolidate the 
two health care facilities in that community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP committed to spending $23 million to provide 135 
long-term care beds in the new Tatagwa View facility in 
Weyburn. This new facility is not even open yet, and the NDP 
are already cutting 12 beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we already have a shortage of beds in the 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, as well as surrounding 
constituencies. Just yesterday I was contacted by a family 
looking for a long-term care bed for their mother. There is not a 
bed available in Weyburn, Estevan or Carlyle. The only answer 
for this family is that their mother be sent out of the area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did the NDP even bother to consult with the 
people of Weyburn before their decision? And, Mr. Speaker, 
how can the minister justify closing beds in Weyburn when we 
already have a shortage? How can the minister justify breaking 
the commitment of $23 million to provide 135 long-term care 
beds in Weyburn? And can the minister tell the people of 
Weyburn where they are supposed to go to provide care for 
their loved ones? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been a real challenge to 
build this project in Weyburn because I’ve had not a whole lot 
of co-operation from the member of Weyburn. And so we are 
proceeding with this particular project. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what has happened in this community is that 
there were discussions around reorganization of how they 
provide . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I recognize the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the Sun Country Health 



May 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

Region, there were discussions about how to provide mental 
health services which have traditionally been provided in the 
city of Weyburn. And as those discussions went forward, there 
were some possibilities of having them provided in the city of 
Estevan because they had space and . . . But working with the 
people of the community, of the community of Weyburn, they 
decided that an appropriate way to deal with this was to put 12 
of the mental health beds in the new facility that was being 
built. This is a suggestion that has come from the workers and 
from others who are there. We think it’s a good idea. 
 
Obviously, the Cypress or the Sun Country Health Region . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday, the NDP government also made cuts in my 
constituency. 
 
The long-term care facility in Davidson has 40 beds, 36 of those 
are full. And yesterday, the NDP decided to cut those beds to 
30. Since the facility opened, 35 to 40 beds have always been in 
use. Essentially, Mr. Speaker, the NDP now has created a 
waiting list for long-term care in the facility. 
 
And how did the residents in that home, how did the people in 
the surrounding community hear about them cuts? How did the 
people who’s going to lose jobs hear that? They heard it on the 
radio, Mr. Speaker. They heard it on the radio. This government 
didn’t have the respect, the common decency to hold a public 
meeting to let them know what was happening in their facility. 
 
Will the minister commit today to hold a public consultation 
before he cuts beds, before he cuts jobs in the town of 
Davidson? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the tasks that you 
have on the government side is to try to make choices in 
sometimes some very challenging areas. And we know that we 
have dramatic increase in expenses in many of the specialty 
kind of work that we do. We also know that we have to provide 
long-term care across the province. 
 
In the Davidson facility that the member asks the question 
about, there are 10 rooms that are in this old wing which are not 
up to code. They don’t have their own individual bathrooms, 
and they’re in a situation where they’re not wheelchair 
accessible. Mr. Speaker, the plan is to phase these out so that 
we can just use the newer ones that were built more recently. 
And that is what we are doing throughout the whole health care 
system . . . is making changes as we renew the system and 
renew the facilities and make them better for all Saskatchewan 
citizens. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Cupar were also 
expecting the NDP to listen to them before health services are 
consolidated and long-term beds are closed, but that didn’t 
happen. In fact, Mayor Val Orb didn’t even get the details of 
the announcement until my office faxed them to her. She said 
and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I wish we could have sat down and talked about it before it 
was announced publicly. I thought there would be more 
consultation, but I guess that’s not going to happen. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Cupar want to be listened to before 
their health services are consolidated and long-term beds are 
closed. Will the minister allow that to happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in communities right across 
the province, there have been discussions about the kinds of 
services that are to be provided. 
 
I know that in the community of Cupar there have been 
concerns that were raised about the facility and about how they 
should try to do some other things there. And in fact, the 
member who’s raised the question today was explaining how 
this all worked last night. And so if people care to, they can 
read Hansard last night and get a very good explanation about a 
community that’s working on these things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ended up in bringing forward this information 
on the basis of trying to let the province know which 
communities were going to have changes that would take effect 
in those communities. We did that yesterday, Mr. Speaker, so 
that we could effectively calm the waters and allow people to 
move forward. And that’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to continue to work to make sure we have the best 
care for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Commitments Made During Election Campaign 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier 
today. Last September, the Premier made the first of what 
would become a long and still growing list of broken NDP 
election promises. 
 
The Premier said that Saskatchewan has today and will continue 
to have in the future the lowest cost bundle of utility services in 
Canada. Well, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t true then, and this 
morning the NDP had to admit that it’s not true today. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what makes this latest broken NDP election 
promise unique is that the Premier broke this election promise 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2004 

even before the election was called. Mr. Speaker, if the Premier 
breaks election promises even before he calls the election, how 
will the people of Saskatchewan be able to trust any promise 
this Premier makes thereafter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
When the Premier made his announcement last September 
about the New Democratic Party’s vision for our Crown sector 
in the province of Saskatchewan, he indicated at the time that, 
and it was provided, that the information was based upon the 
information that came out of the 2003 budget, Mr. Speaker. 
And the information from the 2003 budget were statistics from 
2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we tabled with the public this morning was 
our utility rate bundle in comparison to other jurisdictions for 
the fiscal year 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for the minister to blame 
the Premier’s election promise on the information contained in 
the budget is to transfer blame to the Department of Finance. 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, we can’t trust the figures from the 
Department of Finance on this promise or some of the other 
materials the department provides as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the biggest problem with this particular broken 
NDP election promise is that the promise of the lowest cost 
package of utility services was unnecessary and irresponsible in 
the first place. 
 
The Speaker: — Sorry. Order please, members. I’d like to be 
able to hear the question, even if it’s only 15 feet, but I want to 
be able to hear it. The member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the promise initially was 
unnecessary and it was clearly irresponsible because when the 
NDP stays out of the way, our Crown Corporations already do a 
good job of providing high-quality services at competitive 
prices to Saskatchewan families right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan — not the lowest cost utility services, but very 
competitive costs nevertheless. 
 
Will the Premier admit, Mr. Speaker, that he was relying on 
inaccurate information last fall when he said that Saskatchewan 
has the lowest cost bundle of utility services? And will the 
Premier admit it was an irresponsible ploy to curry favour with 
the electorate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for the Crown 
Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what’s so interesting 

about the member’s question was that he said that the Premier’s 
commitment to the people of this province was unnecessary. 
Well then I have to ask the members opposite, why was it 
necessary for the then leader of the opposition, the member 
from Rosetown, to indicate that not only would they commit to 
the NDP’s promise, but they would improve upon the NDP’s 
promise? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what we have here is a case of the 
opposition is still upset that in the last provincial election the 
people of this province became very focussed upon the future of 
their publicly owned Crown corporations. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, they believe that the members opposite were about to 
privatize those Crown corporations because of the actions of the 
now leader of the Saskatchewan Party when, day in and day 
out, what he did was undermine the service and the work of the 
people that work in our Crown corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Highways and 
Transportation. 
 

Winners of the Orange Zone Challenge 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I recognize the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 
transportation system is a key contributor to both economic and 
social development in the province. Because the transportation 
system is so important, we invest a lot of money — in fact 
about $300 million this year alone — to upgrade and maintain 
it. That means that every summer there’s a lot of construction 
activity on our highway system. 
 
But in addition to providing an efficient transportation system, 
we are very concerned about safety, Mr. Speaker. Now just 
imagine for a minute that you had a job where cars, trucks, and 
buses passed you on a regular basis at fairly high speeds quite 
often. Obviously you can understand the need to educate people 
about the risks and the rules of road . . . of the road, I should 
say, in construction zones. 
 
To protect the safety of employees of the department, the road 
building industry, and the general public, Saskatchewan 
Highways and Transportation introduced the Orange Zone 
Challenge. The purpose of this contest is to take a proactive 
approach to safety by providing the opportunity to have 
advertising developed by younger, newer drivers for younger, 
newer drivers that encourages people to slow down in the 
orange zone. It also provides an invaluable opportunity for 
students to gain real world experience that will help to enhance 
their careers after their schooling is complete. 
 
The first contest was run last year as a pilot project in 



May 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

conjunction with Regina’s Campbell Collegiate. This year the 
contest was open to high school students across our province, 
and Monday I had the chance to announce this year’s winners. 
We received 20 entries from throughout Saskatchewan. While 
the tremendous creativity and imagination of Saskatchewan’s 
youth was clearly evident in all the submissions, the work of 
five talented young people stood out. 
 
This year’s winners are five students from Winston Knoll 
Collegiate right here in Regina and they were with us as I’ve 
introduced them earlier today, Mr. Speaker. They are Morgan 
Pryce, who is also mayor of the student council, Joel 
Tiefenbach, Brad Lafrance, Chris Simmie, and Nathan 
Lariviere. In recognition of their efforts IBM (International 
Business Machines) Canada has donated a new laptop computer 
to Winston Knoll on their behalf. And, Mr. Speaker, the Orange 
Zone Challenge campaign is all about raising awareness and 
these students have done a great job at that. 
 
But I would encourage you, Mr. Speaker, and all members of 
the Assembly not to take my word for it; you will be able to see 
and hear the results of their creativity on TV and on radio 
beginning this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members in the Assembly to join with me 
in welcoming Morgan, Joel, Brad, Chris, and Nathan, and 
congratulating them on winning this year’s Orange Zone 
Challenge. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
safety of our construction workers, and all workers for that 
matter, is a concern and a responsibility for all of us. It must be 
particularly intimidating for our road construction workers who 
must concentrate on their job working with large equipment 
while traffic is rushing by. 
 
So we applaud the government’s initiative for the Orange Zone 
Challenge. And we applaud all the young people who met that 
challenge. And on behalf of the Official Opposition, 
congratulations and welcome to the winners — welcome to 
Morgan, Joel, Brad, Chris, and Nathan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney, 
the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 324 through 331 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 324 to 331 inclusive 
have been submitted. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and convert for debates returnable questions no. 332 through 
349 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 332 through to 349 have been 
converted to orders for return debatable. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the Standing Committee on the Economy and the Standing 
Committee on Human Services I move the House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I take that motion I would . . . Why is 
the member from Indian Head-Milestone on his feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave to 
introduce a guest? 
 
The Speaker: — Has the member got leave for introducing 
guests? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you and to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce Ray 
Beck, sitting in the east gallery. Ray and I go back many, many 
years. We’ve played on many sports teams together — hockey, 
and a few other teams, but we also played against each other 
and I found it was a lot easier to play with Ray than against Ray 
in most of the different sporting competitions we were in. 
 
Ray comes from Lang, Saskatchewan and I’m not sure if he’s in 
town today, because I saw his son Blair earlier in town with a 
group from Carnduff, as Blair is teaching in Carnduff now. 
 
Ray runs an outfitting company in the fall season for fowl, for 
hunters coming up, mainly from the States, and shows them 
around the southern part of our province and does a great job of 
it. So I’d like all members to welcome Ray to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until next Wednesday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:37. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1232 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1233 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1235 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1235 
 National Missing Children’s Day 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1235 
 Canada Council for the Arts Award Winner 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1236 
 2004 Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1236 
 Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Youth Assembly 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1236 
 Opening of Outlook’s Skytrail 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1237 
 Governor General’s Canadian Leadership Conference 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Staffing Resources in Health Care 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1238 
 Health Care Services 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1239 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1239 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1241 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1241 
 Commitments Made During Election Campaign 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1241 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1242 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Winners of the Orange Zone Challenge 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1242 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
 
 



 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1243 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




