















































Hansard: April 06, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 14A  TUESDAY, APRIL 6, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 397 
 April 6, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
stand on behalf of constituents from the Cypress Hills area to 
present a petition related to crop insurance premium increases 
again this year. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
communities of Portreeve and Abbey as well as Lancer. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from residents of the Rosetown-Elrose constituency concerning 
recent changes to the crop insurance program that result in a 
large premium increase for insured farmers while overall 
coverage is reduced. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Rosetown, Lucky Lake, and Beechy. 
 
And I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
today in the House with a petition from citizens of southwest 
Saskatchewan that are concerned about the deplorable condition 
of Highway 43. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Gravelbourg, 
Bateman, Edam, and Mossbank. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition of 
citizens opposed to possible reductions of services at Davidson, 
Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at the current level 
of service at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, 
emergency, and doctor services available, as well as lab, 
public health, home care, long-term care services available 
to users from the Davidson, Imperial area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Bladworth, Davidson, Regina, 
and Kenaston. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the poor cellular telephone 
coverage in their area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the regions 
encompassing the constituency of Biggar. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 47, 50, 63, 65, 69, and no. 72. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 19 ask the government the following question: 

 
To the Highways minister: when will the section of 
Highway 15 from the junction of 20 east to the junction of 
6 be resurfaced or repaved? 
 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is my distinct pleasure today to introduce to you and through 
you to the rest of this Assembly, 65 grade 8 students from St. 
Angela Merici School, who have occupied the west gallery. 
 
St. Angela Merici School is in the northwest corner of my 
constituency, Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. And I’m very pleased 
that they’re here today accompanied by Ms. Wendy Gervais, 
Mr. Kozine, and Mr. Chabot. And I look forward to meeting 
with this class later in the afternoon for some photos, a bit of 
discussion, and some drinks. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and all the members of this House, to 
join me in showing a warm welcome to these students from 
grade 8 at St. Angela Merici. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
number of guests sitting in the east gallery as well as in your 
gallery. These guests are SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) students who find themselves 
in quite an awkward position through absolutely no fault of 
their own, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re here to see the proceedings and hopefully see some 
solution and movement towards the dispute with SIAST 
instructors. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
too want to join with members in this House in welcoming 
SIAST students who are here. This is a very difficult time for 
them. And I can assure you that all members are certainly 
appreciative of their efforts in making their cause known and 
their position known. And I would welcome them here on 
behalf of the government members as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the House, I would like to introduce two of my 
constituents. More importantly, two friends. And maybe even 
before that, more importantly, two customers when I was a 
machinery salesman. In the east gallery today I would like to 
introduce Scott Morvik and his mother, Kathy Morvik, from the 
community of Eastend. 
 
Scott’s been very involved politically over the years but we’ve 
developed a very close working relationship. Our offices are 
right next door to each other in the community, and I’d like to 

welcome them here today. Scott is the young man of whom I 
spoke in my Throne Speech, who suffered a neurological 
problem and was forced to go to Calgary for an MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) in 24 hours. He’s here today to take 
advantage of a medical opportunity that’s been made available 
to him. 
 
I’d like to have the whole Assembly welcome Scott and his 
mother here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure and an honour for me to be able to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, members of 
Sons of Scotland, Camp Balmoral No. 177, seated in your 
gallery. 
 
They are present today in honour of Tartan Day and to hear a 
fine Scottish colleague of mine make a statement about the 
importance and the celebratory nature of such a memorable 
occasion. 
 
As I introduce them, if they could just stand and give a bit of a 
wave that would be great: Bob Nichols, the chief; Jack Young, 
past chief, with his wife, Carol Young; Norma Trim, past chief 
with husband, Bill Trim; Wilma Matheson, past chief, her 
spouse, Bill Matheson, who is also a past chief. I’m sorry, 
Wilma Matheson, past chief; and Bill and Wanda Matheson. 
And I knew that very well, Mr. Speaker, because I also know 
their son, Danny, who was here piping with the band this 
morning which echoed through the building and had many 
people come out to witness the piping. 
 
Also Howard Love and John MacLeod. Members will 
recognize John as a friend, but not too often have we had a 
chance to see him dressed in the Scottish kilt and all. 
 
So we ask all members to join with us in giving us a warm 
welcome to the Sons of Scotland, Camp Balmoral, members 
#177. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a constituent 
of mine who is sitting in your gallery, Jennifer Wilcock. 
 
Jennifer is a U of R (University of Regina) student in the 
Faculty of Education and majoring in honours English. And 
Jennifer is now seeking some summer employment and I’ll be 
talking to her after the Assembly, after question period. 
 
So I would ask members of the Assembly to please welcome 
Jennifer to her legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased and honoured 
to introduce to you and through you to the legislature, Dr. 
Deborah Parker-Loewen, who is in the Speaker’s gallery. She is 
the Children’s Advocate for the province of Saskatchewan, an 
officer of this legislature, who does valuable work for the 
children of this province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with the Minister 
of Justice in welcoming Ms. Parker-Loewen and her staff who 
have joined us this afternoon. As you know, Ms. 
Parker-Loewen has just come out with a report regarding 
children and mental health in the province. And we certainly 
welcome her and thank her for the work that she has done in 
this regard. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to join with my colleagues in recognizing some of our 
guests here today — the Mathesons. 
 
Bill will remember many years ago — many, many years ago 
now — in a small town, Woodrow, Saskatchewan, when we 
could peer across the street at each other because Bill’s mother 
was my neighbour, and I must tell members of the Legislative 
Assembly she was one of most generous ladies come 
Halloween Eve. She helped to celebrate very well and there was 
always lots at Mrs. Matheson’s place. So welcome, Bill. Talk to 
you later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Tartan Day 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in 1992 in this Assembly, a 
private member’s Bill was passed that provided a day of official 
appreciation for the Scottish clans in Saskatchewan, and I’m 
happy to report that today is Tartan Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tartan Day was established to acknowledge the 
Scots of Saskatchewan and their notable accomplishments. One 
such fellow was Tommy Douglas. And if you look at the roll 
call of members who have served this Assembly since 1905, 
you will see MacDonalds, McInnises, McIntyres, McIntoshes, 
and so on. I, and others in this Chamber, are proud to add to that 
roll. 

And I’m also especially proud today, Mr. Speaker, to be 
wearing a fine tie of the Wilson tartan, the tartan of the clan of 
my grandmother, Olive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier today we welcomed the Sons of Scotland 
Benevolent Association to the legislature to celebrate Tartan 
Day with pipes and drums. And if you didn’t see it, you 
certainly heard it, Mr. Speaker. And we welcome them again to 
these proceedings. The Sons of Scotland have been in existence 
in Canada since 1876 and they do a bonny job of preserving and 
promoting Scottish culture in Canada. They’re proudly Scottish 
and proudly Canadian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we today recognize the ongoing contributions and 
influence that our Scottish citizens have had on our province. It 
is worth mentioning that even our first premier was named 
Scott. And curling, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s official sport 
— that too was brought to us by the Scots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Sons of Scotland Benevolent 
Association and congratulate them all — them and all 
Saskatchewan citizens of Scottish heritage. In the words of 
Robbie Burns on this day and all days, “may we be blessed with 
health and peace and sweet content.” Slainté, m’hath, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, today, April 6, is Tartan Day in 
Saskatchewan and I ask all members of the House to join me in 
sending out our best wishes to those who are of Scottish descent 
and, of course, those who wish they were of Scottish descent, 
and that would include all of the others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many members of this House will know it was 
the former member from Kindersley, Bill Boyd, who introduced 
the private member’s Bill more than a decade ago to officially 
recognize the many contributions of the Scottish settlers that 
came to our great province to start a new life for themselves and 
their families. In fact at that time, Saskatchewan was one of 
three provinces who had chosen to officially mark April 6 as 
Tartan Day, a day that was chosen by the Federation of Scottish 
Clans in Nova Scotia. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Now some might say that Mr. Boyd had an ulterior motive for 
doing this, not only being a politician, but of Scottish descent 
himself. But we all know that there are many of us on both 
sides of the House who can trace our ancestry back to the Scots. 
There are also many of us who are rightly proud and honoured 
to be of Celtic descent and we don’t mind letting others know 
about it either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Earlier today to help mark Tartan Day in Saskatchewan, we had 
the pleasure of listening to the pipes and drums of the Sons of 
Scotland Benevolent Association perform here in the legislative 
rotunda and what a glorious sound they made, Mr. Speaker. 
They stir our very soul. 
 
I ask all members of the House to join me in recognizing Tartan 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

Day in Saskatchewan, and to celebrate the many successes and 
contributions of our Scottish ancestors. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Saskatoon Photographer Wins Five Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 
opportunity to offer congratulations to Shannon Brunner from 
my constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Ms. Brunner, a professional photographer and the owner of NY 
Snaps Inc. in Saskatoon, took home five of the top awards in 
the recent provincial professional photography competition, 
including Photographer of the Year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Photographer of the Year Award goes to the 
professional whose salon entry of four photographs receives the 
highest aggregate score and is judged as most artistic in the 
exhibition. Judges for the competition are professional 
photographers from outside the province. Ms. Brunner also won 
best child portrait, best fine art photo, and the Kodak Gallery 
Award for best portrait and best general portrait. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shannon Brunner is also being recognized for her 
high-quality work outside Saskatchewan. One of her greeting 
cards is a finalist in this year’s North American Greeting Card 
Association competition, a competition that draws over 1,300 
entries from 181 countries worldwide. 
 
It should also be noted, Mr. Speaker, that Shannon Brunner is 
not only a first rate photographer, but she’s also president of the 
Saskatchewan Professional Photographers Association. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in congratulating Ms. 
Brunner on her accomplishments as a photographer, and on her 
contributions to Saskatchewan’s continuing tradition of 
excellence. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Passing of Bill Hodgins 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with regret 
that I stand here today to bid farewell to an outstanding 
Saskatchewan citizen and former constituent of Melfort. 
 
On April 4, 2004, Bill Hodgins passed away in the Regina 
General Hospital at 77 years of age. Bill was born in Birch Hills 
on February 16, 1927 and grew up on the family farm. He 
farmed in Domremy, Saskatchewan from 1952 to ’65. Then he 
opened Bill Hodgins Auction Centre in Melfort, a very 
successful and dynamic auction service, which he later sold to 
his son, Grant Hodgins, who is a former member of this 
Assembly. 
 
Bill semi-retired for a few years but then got the itch to open 
another auction centre in Regina in 2000, on Highway 6 just 

immediately at the north end of the city. 
 
Those of us who knew Bill knew that he couldn’t sit still. He 
worked enthusiastically until his passing. He loved to travel and 
worked extremely hard to find the time to travel. On one of 
these trips he came back with the brainstorm of starting Billy’s 
Barn in Melfort as a part of the grounds at the auction centre, 
and it was a very engaging and expensive hobby of his. 
 
He was also an avid follower of Saskatchewan politics. Mr. 
Speaker, Bill Hodgins was much more than a constituent and a 
supporter. He was a man who was a mentor and a friend and 
whose word was his bond. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition and all members of this 
Assembly, I would ask that we convey our deepest and most 
heartfelt condolences to the Hodgins family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

International Order of the Daughters of the Empire 
90th Provincial Meeting 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend I 
and the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow had the pleasure and 
honour of attending the IODE’s (International Order of the 
Daughters of the Empire) 90th provincial annual meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first Saskatchewan chapter of the IODE was 
founded in Battleford in 1909. Since then, the women of IODE 
have voluntarily given their time, commitment, and support to 
helping the less fortunate. 
 
In Saskatchewan there are 11 IODE chapters with a total 
membership of 156 women. Through educational, social 
service, and citizen programs, IODE members work to improve 
the quality of life for Saskatchewan women, children, and 
families. Their contributions range from scholarships and 
bursaries to music festival awards and donations for many kinds 
of activities in schools and camps throughout the province. 
Civics is also a very important part of their agenda and their 
desire to contribute to civil society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of IODE spend many hours performing 
community service work and fundraising activities. They are 
homemakers, teachers, secretaries, nurses, retired women, 
lawyers, and businesswomen, and they go about their work in a 
very quiet and modest fashion. 
 
I believe that it’s important we recognize the impact their work 
has had on improving the quality of life for those most in need. 
 
I ask all members to join me in acknowledging the IODE’s 90 
years of community involvement, and I thank its members for 
their dedication to the people of this province. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
the 14th day of the strike affecting SIAST, and thousands of 
students are worried about losing credit for their year’s work. 
 
Many students have course requirements to complete and 
should be writing their final exams right now, but instead they 
watch as their instructors walk the picket lines and they worry 
about their finances for an extended school year. The strike is 
very disappointing for both students and parents, and they hope, 
as do members of the official opposition, that an agreement will 
be reached in the near future. 
 
In today’s Leader-Post, the Learning minister is quoted as 
saying that: 
 

. . . setbacks are part of the process that sometimes occurs 
in contract negotiations. 

 
And he’s right. But only an irresponsible employer would delay 
negotiating until the contract has expired, putting the workers in 
a legal strike position that disrupts services. Only an 
irresponsible government would jeopardize students completing 
their course requirements for the year because it refused to give 
the negotiating team a mandate to do its job. 
 
How did contract negotiations break down? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s apparent that this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government has given the SIAST instructors the same empty 
promises it gave to the rest of the province. The NDP promises 
this and delivers that. And soon everyone in our province will 
suffer for the mismanagement of this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Canadian Blind Sports Association 
National Goalball Championships 

 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very pleased to 
attend the awards banquet for the Cameco Canadian Blind 
Sports Association National Goalball Championships. The 
Saskatchewan Blind Sports Association hosted the 
championship in Saskatoon just this past weekend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SBSA (Saskatchewan Blind Sports 
Association) is a volunteer-based, not-for-profit organization 
that facilitates provincial, national, and international sports 
opportunities for Saskatchewan residents who are legally blind 
or visually impaired. 
 
Goalball is a team sport that has three characteristics 
distinguishing it from ball games played by sighted people. The 
ball is audible when in motion so players can track it by sound. 
The court has tactile markings so players can orient themselves 
by touch. And finally, eyeshades are worn to completely limit 
the sight of all players. 

Mr. Speaker, this national championship was partly in 
preparation for the Paralympic Games being held in Athens this 
coming summer, where the Canadian women’s team will be 
defending the gold medal they currently hold. And I’m pleased 
to say that one of the players on that Canadian women’s team 
will be Amy Alsop from Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating Amy for being chosen to represent her country at 
the Athens games, as well as in congratulating all the 
participants of the national goalball championships. 
 
I also want to thank the volunteers, organizers, and sponsors of 
the championships, especially Cameco, for providing this 
opportunity for Canadian and Saskatchewan athletes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Reaction to Decisions Made in Budget 
 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let me get this straight. The NDP is 
keeping the parks closed to save $100,000, but then they 
realized they sent out thousands of campground guides that are 
now incorrect because the NDP are keeping the parks closed, to 
save $100,000. So now the minister says the government will 
have to spend thousands of dollars to print an amendment to the 
book, and run possibly more advertising to correct the 
campground guides which are now inaccurate, because the NDP 
closed the parks to save $100,000. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, 
here’s an idea; how about keep the parks open? Will he make 
that commitment today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
know that we’ve tabled a very challenging budget that asked all 
departments to make the most of their budgets. We have our 
goals for our government and they are very clear. We set out a 
clear agenda. 
 
I do want to say though that within Environment the decisions 
we made were not taken easily or made lightly. But we are 
talking to people about this issue. It’s one that seems to have 
resonated with people, and we’re getting that feedback, and 
we’re talking to stakeholders and that’s very important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s not dissimilar 
to what the minister said yesterday. The minister said, quite 
happily, that people were talking now about the parks in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and he went on to say that the 
government was going to be listening to what they had to say, 
but they had no intention of responding to what it is that people 
had to say. 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

In fact, here’s a quote — here’s a quote — here’s what he said: 
 

What we really want to do is make sure people have the 
idea that we’re listening. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what he said.  And there it is. The NDP 
want to make sure that people have the idea that they’re 
listening, have the idea that they care about the issues they are 
raising. Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier: what is the 
point of listening if you’ve said you’re going to ignore what you 
hear? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we are listening and we will 
continue to listen to people. We want to hear the good ideas that 
people have. The goal before us is to save the money to keep 
our parks open this summer. And it’s very important that we 
have a strong and vibrant parks system. This is a key part to our 
parks. And so Mr. Speaker, we will continue to listen to the 
people, and I will speak with people and get their feedback and 
add that all into the mix. And we’ll have a wonderful season 
this summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister, if he’s changing 
his position from yesterday, he should say so. If he’s now 
saying that they’re prepared to listen, and potentially change the 
decision, he should say that because yesterday he was clear, he 
said they were going to be listening to the people of the 
province. But he ruled out making any changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that explains much of the Premier’s election platform. The 
Premier wants people to have the idea that he’s interested in 
their issues. He wants them to have the idea that he may cut 
taxes. And that’s what he said during the campaign. He wanted 
people to believe they had the idea that they would cut taxes 
when all along he was planning on raising taxes. 
 
So that’s the question to the Premier. Isn’t that the case, isn’t 
that the plan of this NDP government, that people would have 
the idea that he cares about this province, that he wants to 
reduce taxes, when all along his plans are exactly the opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, by virtue of the Throne 
Speech delivered in this House, by virtue of the budget now 
under debate in the House, the people of Saskatchewan can see 
very, very clearly the vision and the direction of this 
government. 
 
It is a vision and a direction, Mr. Speaker, that is in tune with 
the desires and the direction of the people of Saskatchewan. It is 
a direction which says we are going to build a green and 
prosperous economy; we are going to provide the best quality 
public health care that we can; and we are going to open this 
province up for its future generations, Mr. Speaker. That is the 

direction, that is the commitment, and that is what you’re seeing 
today, and the people of Saskatchewan are seeing today, in this 
Throne Speech and in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s true I think that the 
Premier also wanted people in the last election to have the idea 
that he had any commitment at all to health care in this 
province. It doesn’t matter that the NDP in Saskatchewan have 
presided over the longest waiting lists in the province; it 
apparently doesn’t matter that they’re prepared to close more 
beds — in fact, long-term care beds — so long as people have 
the idea that the NDP is committed to health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 28 days that Premier travelled the province 
and looked people in the eye and made promises he apparently 
had no intention of keeping. When, when can the people of this 
province expect that Premier to start telling the truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition and the opposition members want to rerun the 
election of last year. I’m very willing to rerun that election any 
day of the week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition says today again, as they tried to 
do in the campaign by using name calling and all of that kind of 
diversionary technique . . . Mr. Speaker, right before us we have 
a budget and a Throne Speech under debate with a positive 
direction and a positive future for Saskatchewan and its people. 
What we do not have, what we do not have in this legislature, 
Mr. Speaker, is any kind of a contribution of substance from the 
opposition. 
 
What we get day after day after day is the spend more, spend 
more, spend more, tax less, tax less, tax less opposition. It’s the 
same thing we’ve heard for the last three and four years in this 
House, Mr. Speaker. I invite the Leader of the Opposition, if he 
has positive ideas — whether it be in health or in environment 
— if he would just stand on his feet and share at least one of 
those ideas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, well the Premier now has a 
choice. The Premier can, for example, if he’s true to his word, 
support the legislation brought forward by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast on whistleblowers legislation. He can 
accept our suggestion that he cancel and stop ridiculous ads like 
this to the federal government on equalization and keep the 
parks open in the province of Saskatchewan. He can do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last election the Premier also wanted seniors 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

to believe that, to have the idea that he cared about them, and 
we see this budget close long-term care beds. We see this 
budget increase the fees for things like hearing aids. He wants 
people to have the idea that he cares about seniors, the idea that 
he’ll reduce taxes. I ask the Premier again this question, when 
can Saskatchewan people expect him to start telling the truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
waves around here today the copy of an ad by which we are 
informing the people of Saskatchewan of one of the most 
significant issues facing this province and that’s the matter of 
equalization, waves that around and they criticize it, Mr. 
Speaker. They criticize it. 
 
Well maybe he wants to explain about the public dollars that are 
funding the ads that he’s running these days and what 
contribution to public policy those are providing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a government yes, Mr. Speaker, that has ideas about the 
future of this province and this is a government that is taking 
those ideas and turning them into reality with constructive, 
sometimes difficult, and sometimes tough decision-making, but 
with constructive decision-making that will take this province 
forward, that will make this province ready for its next 
generation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if those ads achieve their aim, Mr. 
Speaker, if those ads achieve their aim, it will do more to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if those ads achieve their aim, they 
will result in the end of this government, Mr. Speaker, and the 
cancellation of that budget. I can think of no other greater 
service we could do for the province of Saskatchewan than that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every summer the Premier loads up his bus with 
all of the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 
they travel rural Saskatchewan because they’d like rural 
Saskatchewan to believe . . . to have the idea that they care. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, we see them close rural service 
centres. We see higher crop insurance premiums from this 
government; we see no move on rural tax issue; higher costs for 
farm fuel. He wants them to have the idea that . . . that he cares 
but his actions, Mr. Speaker, belie . . . or his words belie the 
fact. Once again to the Premier of this province, is it his 
intention just to have people believe that he cares, to have the 
idea that he cares, or will he start being straight with the 
taxpayers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, he talks about ideas. Here’s 
an idea of support for rural Saskatchewan: the Department of 
Agriculture’s budget in this budget, in this budget under debate, 
has had the second largest increase percentage of any 
department in government, Mr. Speaker. That is a commitment 
to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In this budget we are debating expenditures in the highways and 
roadways of Saskatchewan at record levels again, Mr. Speaker. 
In this budget, we are debating the new revenue-sharing dollars 
that go to the small villages and towns of rural Saskatchewan, 
to the rural municipalities of rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s taking an idea in some very tough budgetary times and 
turning it into a reality for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he talks about the ads and the intention of 
those ads. Clearly he has identified his ads that are running are 
clearly partisan ads. That’s clearly what he’s identified in this 
House. And I’d ask the Leader of the Opposition how he can 
justify using public dollars to run that kind of a partisan 
campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier neglects to say that for 10 years in a row they cut the 
Ag budget and finally put a little more back in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you least expect it, a couple of NDP MLAs 
actually tell the truth. The Finance minister says the NDP kept 
its plan to raise taxes secret during the election because tax 
increases are unpopular. And now the Environment minister 
says the NDP wants to make sure people have the idea they’re 
listening, even though they aren’t. 
 
Today the mayor of Melville, Mr. Speaker, is speaking out 
about an NDP plan to cut services in Melville’s brand new 
hospital. Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of Health really listening? 
Or does he just want people of Melville to think that they’re 
listening? Will the minister make a clear commitment today that 
no services will be cut at Melville’s brand new hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered many 
questions about the budget that we’re bringing forward this 
year. There’s no, no hiding the fact that there are going to be 
some changes and some reforms and some things that need to 
be done. 
 
All of the RHAs (regional health authority) received their 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

budget amounts last week on Wednesday. They are now 
working through in their regions what kinds of things they can 
do, what kinds of things that they will be changing. And we will 
get that information in the next two to three weeks and work at 
how we can provide a Saskatchewan-wide perspective. 
 
That’s exactly what I said. And that’s what I have to say again 
today. They’re looking at everything that’s being done, and 
that’s how this process works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — What a track record, Mr. Speaker. They 
build a brand new hospital in Melville for the election to try and 
save a seat for themselves, and one year later they’re already 
cutting services and beds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Melville, Wilf 
Rieger, said he received a letter from the Sunrise Health Region 
warning that service cuts may be on the way at Melville’s 
hospital. Now it’s hard to imagine even the NDP government, 
as incompetent and alienated from the truth as the NDP, would 
build that new hospital and then turn around and make these 
cuts instantly; unless maybe of course, as I said, it’s election 
year out there one year ago and it was an election ploy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all Mayor Rieger and the people of Melville want 
the NDP to do is reintroduce themselves to the concept of 
telling the truth. Will the minister assure the people of Melville 
that no services at the Melville hospital will be cut this year? 
Will the minister make that commitment, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s curious that the member 
opposite should talk about saving seats given the history of how 
he got back into this legislature. And we all, we all know about 
that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are working on a health budget which has 
a $160 million increase; the largest increase in the budgets of 
any of the departments in government. And our job is to make 
sure we use all those dollars in the most effective way possible. 
 
Melville has a very good facility which is providing good 
services for that area and for the whole eastern side of 
Saskatchewan. And I know that the people who are working 
and planning will make sure that everything is being used to 
their best use possible. That’s what we all have to do in every 
part of our province because that’s how Saskatchewan people 
do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

enlighten the Health minister. I got back here by getting about 
650 more votes than his candidate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my next 
question is for the minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. The 
Premier went around this province last summer . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
next question is for the minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. 
The Premier went around the province last summer pretending 
to listen to the concerns of rural municipalities. The RMs (rural 
municipality) were telling the NDP in the clearest of language, 
education tax relief was their number one priority. And the 
Premier told RMs he was listening. Then the NDP brought in a 
budget that is absolutely nothing to relieve the property tax 
burden on RMs while at the same time raising the PST 
(provincial sales tax) by $135 million. Mr. Speaker, raising the 
PST drives up the costs for every municipality in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question: how much new tax revenue will the 
NDP collect from rural municipalities this year as a result of the 
Premier’s decision to not handle education tax on property, 
rather change and raise the PST by 1 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think all members are aware that in this budget there’s $28 
million for municipalities and school boards to help take 
pressure off the property tax increases. 
 
I understand what the member is saying. I certainly hear this 
from rural municipalities about concern for their particular 
sector in terms of the . . . what they see to be their share of the 
burden for paying for education. I can tell the member that we 
are working through a number of options to deal with that, but 
this budget contains solid, solid options including $28 million 
more for municipalities and school boards to help offset those 
pressures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s my 
understanding, Mr. Speaker, that that $28 million will last till 
about August. Then school divisions are on their own, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it looks like the Environment minister was being 
honest yesterday when he said the NDP wants to make sure 
people have the idea that they’re listening, even though they 
aren’t. The Premier wants people to think the NDP are listening 
to their concerns about health care in Melville, even though 
they actually aren’t. And the Premier wants rural taxpayers to 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

think the NDP will take action to reduce property taxes, even 
though this NDP government has actually decided to increase 
taxes and charge municipalities more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier promise to reduce property 
tax burden on RMs during the election and not deal with it, and 
then raise the PST and drive up costs for municipalities across 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, let’s make sure that we 
understand very clearly what we are discussing; that was a 
question about how we fund education. That is the discussion 
that legislators must turn their attention to: how do we fund 
education? 
 
Now the members opposite stood in this House and for . . . 
almost every single day until the budget came down, introduced 
petitions saying, whatever you do, don’t introduce the sales tax 
on restaurant meals which was a core component of the 
Boughen report. Now they come up and they stand up in this 
House, as does the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood who 
said in his local paper, whatever you do, you got to implement 
that Boughen Commission report. 
 
Which is it? It can’t be both. The issue that we have in front of 
us is how we find an appropriate amount of money to make sure 
that the school system provides the best possible services 
available. That’s what this government is committed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

Policy Regarding Volume Discount for Beer Sales 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is one 
question in this province, and that question is about the 
credibility and the honesty of this Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister responsible for 
Saskatchewan liquor and gaming corporation. Today the private 
beer sale vendors in Saskatchewan are finding out about another 
secret, hidden tax increase in the NDP’s budget. That’s because 
on last Wednesday, budget day, the NDP revoked the discount 
vendors receive on packaged beer sales. That means, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the NDP government just picked the pocket of 
most hotel and tavern owners in Saskatchewan, especially those 
in urban Saskatchewan. 
 
We spoke to two hotel owners in Moose Jaw this morning, and 
they estimated the NDP’s tax grab will mean between 60 and 
$70,000 off of their bottom line. Another hotel owner in 
Estevan estimates it’s going to cost him $200,000, Mr. Speaker. 
Why is the NDP picking the pockets of Saskatchewan hotel and 
tavern owners that are struggling to survive in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 

Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to first advise 
the House that the discount policy with respect to beer has been 
changed. It has not been revoked as the member just said. It has 
been changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to also tell the House, Mr. Speaker, there are six 
provinces in this country who give no discount to beer 
purchases by hotels. I want to tell the House and that member, 
Mr. Speaker, that the policy of this government will give a 
discount to purchases of beer for off-sale on the first $100,000 
in purchases of beer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is true that we’re not going to be discounting above $100,000. 
Six provinces have no discount at all, Mr. Speaker, but we are 
dealing with large-volume beer sellers who make good money 
selling beer. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that although this 
will transfer $5 million for health and education and highways, 
Mr. Speaker, the hoteliers have gained $35.9 million in VLT 
(video lottery terminal) fees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, hotel owners and tavern 
owners across Saskatchewan are outraged about this hidden tax 
increase — and not a single word of consultation with them, 
Mr. Speaker. And the NDP revoked the discount last 
Wednesday on budget day. That means, Mr. Speaker, hotels, 
taverns, restaurant owners who have over $100,000 in beer 
sales a year will no longer receive the volume discount between 
$1.10 and $1.65 a dozen. And that will mean dozens of small 
businesses will have to lose hundreds of thousands of dollars 
this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP raise taxes, shorten summer, break most 
of its election promises — it’s enough to drive you to drink, but 
even then the government makes money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister immediately re-establish the 
volume discount on beer sales and sit down with the hoteliers 
and the tavern owners and other private beer sale vendors 
before making changes to the discount structure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the contradiction is apparent 
in the member’s very question. The member just said this would 
drive small businesses out of business. Yet, Mr. Speaker, we 
heard already that this applies to large businesses, not small, 
because there is no change for small businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
There is no change for 240 hoteliers largely in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because they receive a discount on 
the first $100,000 in their purchases. 
 
The member is correct only when he says there are some quite 
large businesses who will not receive a discount, as they do not 
in other provinces as well, Mr. Speaker. And we are transferring 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

those funds, Mr. Speaker, to health, education, and highways. 
 
And I want to add, Mr. Speaker, that the off-sale community in 
Saskatchewan has in recent years benefited to the tune of $35.9 
million new money from VLTs and now has the right to sell 
spirits as well, Mr. Speaker. They are not suffering. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the benefit of the liquor 
sales across Saskatchewan has been mainly for the government 
in the fact that they’ve increased the taxation by an additional 3 
per cent on the liquor consumption tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the government was to rescind their discount 
policy — what they have just done — they would receive 
virtually the same amount of money back because of the liquor 
consumption tax and the PST charges on the additional charges 
over the cost from the Liquor Board store, and it would 
maintain jobs and keep those businesses going in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government sit down with their partners 
in the liquor industry, the private vendors, and negotiate a 
mutually satisfactory deal rather than just pretending to listen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one minute we hear 
from the opposition that we’re attacking rural Saskatchewan; 
the next minute they get up and complain because we have a 
policy that protects the smaller businesses in rural 
Saskatchewan but takes back $5 million from the largest 
businesses to put money into health, education, and highways, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what that member just said, Mr. Speaker, is not true. It is 
not true that if you gave the $5 million back to those large 
businesses that you would still have that money for health care, 
education, and transportation. Mr. Speaker, you would not. 
 
We made a choice that the discount, which as I said is not even 
offered in six provinces, would be kept for smaller businesses, 
not the largest businesses, and that that extra revenue, Mr. 
Speaker, would go to support health, education, and highways, 
Mr. Speaker — things that benefit rural Saskatchewan. And I’m 
surprised at the contrary, contradictory positions being taken by 
the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Commitments Made During Election Campaign 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province are 
surprised that this government is just wanting to give them the 
idea that they’re listening. We’re surprised, Mr. Speaker, that 

this Premier, who had campaigned for 28 days, looked people 
dead in the eye and made promises he had no intention of 
keeping. 
 
He wants us to have the idea that he’s cutting taxes, the idea 
that he won’t fire government workers, the idea that we’ll have 
the lowest utility rates when none of it is true. The idea that the 
budget is balanced; he wants us to have that. The idea that there 
may be an ethanol plant in Belle Plaine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this Premier tells you good morning, you better 
check your watch because the bottom line is this Premier 
continues to break promises to the people of the province. And 
he ought to stand up, he ought to stand up for the people of the 
province and explain how he could look them dead in the eye 
and make promises and continue to make promises he has no 
intention of keeping. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will look the citizens of 
Saskatchewan in the eye and present to them the Throne Speech 
vision, the budget vision, the platform that we built this on, any 
day of any week, any hour of any day. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me just say this. The formation of public 
policy in this legislature is not going to be achieved by cute 
one-liners. It’s going to be achieved by men and women 
struggling with the tough and difficult, sometimes the tough and 
difficult decisions that we have to make, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this province, this legislature and its people, would be aided 
by an opposition who instead of daily commuting to the House 
and just complaining about, complaining about a level of 
taxation and yet saying we need to spend more money with no 
new ideas, Mr. Speaker, we need an opposition that will for 
once come forward with a new idea — a new approach to health 
care, a new approach to the environment, a new approach to 
dealing with some of the real challenges of our province. 
 
And let’s just stop fighting the November election and get on 
with governing on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day, I wish to put on record that I earlier today have tabled a 
report from the child’s advocate dated April 2004. 
 
Why is the member from Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Melfort has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce four very special guests who are here today in the 
gallery opposite. They’re members of Bill Hodgins’s family: 
Mr. Ken Hodgins, Donna Hodgins, Rankin Hodgins, and 
Daphne Hodgins. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were here to observe the statement about the 
condolences of the Hodgins family on the passing of their 
friend and family member, Bill. And they also will be travelling 
with many of us, I’m sure, up to Melfort on Saturday for the 
funeral for Mr. Bill Hodgins at 2 o’clock. 
 
We would like to ask the Assembly to welcome these guests in 
our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 59 through 62 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 59, 60, 61, and 62 
have been submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen, that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney, 
the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon as I 
enter the budget debate I’d first like to congratulate you on your 
election as Speaker. It’s a rare opportunity to have a Speaker 
re-elected anywhere in the Commonwealth and I understand 
this is the first time in our province’s history. And I’d also like 
to thank the member for Regina Wascana Plains for putting her 
name forward and standing as a candidate for that position as 
well. 
 
I would also like to take this opportunity, as it’s my first time 
speaking since the election, to welcome all the members on 
both sides of the House back to this Assembly. I think that there 
is no greater call that any citizen can put forward than to serve 
the people of this province. And I thank each and every one of 
you for putting your names forward and thank you on behalf of 
your constituents and all of us. 

Mr. Speaker, today we are dealing with a budget that the people 
of Saskatchewan will judge. Mr. Speaker, they will judge this 
budget based on the choices that the people of this province 
know and understand had to be made. 
 
This is a difficult budget that needed to make . . . that forced the 
government to make difficult choices. But we had to respond to 
the key priorities of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, and the 
Saskatchewan people told us fundamentally on every doorstep 
in this province that health care and education were their 
priorities. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget responds to those 
priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a budget about choice. It’s a budget 
about moving forward with the people of Saskatchewan’s 
priorities in mind. Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that builds for 
our future, that puts our young people first, and puts our 
priorities clear and in the forefront for people to judge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time this budget preserves for us the 
most affordable cost of living in the country. Mr. Speaker, when 
comparing the 10 cities across Canada, including the city of 
Saskatoon, Saskatoon again delivers the most affordable 
package of taxes and cost of living for a two-income family 
making $50,000 in the entire country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget preserves Saskatchewan as a true place 
of opportunity for young people to raise a family, to build a 
business, to find a job, where their income can buy them things 
that it can’t in other places in Canada, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
budget — although difficult choices had to be made — that 
builds for a future economic base, that will build our province 
from beyond its current parameters to an even brighter future. 
And, Mr. Speaker, for all these reasons, for all these reasons, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Sutherland has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 
want to draw attention to the person that’s sitting in your 
gallery. Her name is Joanne Harpauer-Dignean, and she has 
been working as my legislative intern, part of the Saskatchewan 
legislative internship program. She’s one of the young, 
up-and-coming young people that are working hard. And this is 
the first opportunity I’ve had a chance to introduce her in the 
House. And our time is coming to an end as of next week, and 
then she’ll be working with, I think, the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
So I’d ask all hon. members to welcome Joanne to the 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, this 
budget preserves for Saskatchewan people that a two-income 
family of $50,000 still is living in the most affordable province 
in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, on that $50,000 in Saskatchewan 
you can afford to buy a home, you can afford to raise your 
children, you can afford to do many things you can’t do in other 
parts of this country. 
 
And we have to keep that in mind, Mr. Speaker. This is also a 
province that has put priorities forward for those who are less 
fortunate. This is a province that sets its priorities, trying to 
ensure that in all cases the amount of money in your 
pocketbook doesn’t determine the level of services you get in 
health care or in education. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a budget about people and for people. 
And for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I think it should be 
abundantly clear that I will support the Throne Speech and the 
budget speech, Mr. Speaker, and not the amendment made by 
the opposition. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 
rise again on behalf of the good people of Saskatoon Northwest 
and speak to a motion before this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health yesterday quoted several 
books that I should read. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to return the 
favour. The book, Mr. Speaker, is called, breaking your 
promise. It’s written by the member from Riversdale and the 
NDP, printed and paid for by the people of Saskatchewan. I will 
also provide a tutor to the minister because I’m sure he’s having 
trouble understanding it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I read the budget, Mr. Speaker, one question 
kept coming again and again — where are the needs of the 
people met in this NDP government budget? Where are the 
people? 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government preaches that the future is wide 
open while continuing to try to lower everyone’s expectations. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, who was it that created this financial disaster? 
Who took a $500 million surplus and turned it into a $1.5 
billion loss? Not the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. How 
many times do the people of this province have to dig into their 
pockets to bail this government out of its mismanagement? 
 
These hard economic times were created by the government 
who, upon its election, set out to grow government like it was 
the 1960s. And grow government, Mr. Speaker, they did. And 
now it’s time to pay the piper, so where does the government 
go? They go to the people of Saskatchewan with increased 
taxes. The very people who elected them to solve the problems 
must once again bail them out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are the people in the NDP tax hikes? An 
increase in PST, a tax hike that has never mentioned in the 
recent election. A tax hike to fund the government economic 
disaster created by this NDP government. A tax hike that drives 
business from our borders and crushes the hopes of our citizens, 
especially our young people. A tax hike that has no end, has no 
plan, and simply continues the NDP legacy of spend like mad 
and tax like crazy. 
 
Every time I listen, Mr. Speaker, to a news conference, I hear 
not only the Premier but all his ministers justifying the tax hikes 
by saying there are only two ways to solve a problem that they 
created: raise taxes or cut programs. 
 
How about a third option, Mr. Speaker, something foreign to 
this government? How about growing the province and the 
economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, under the NDP our pockets 
are wide open, not our province. Mr. Speaker, where are the 
people in this NDP tax hikes? From what I can see, the people 
are continuing to pay for the NDP inability to manage their own 
affairs. 
 
I looked at the NDP budget plan to delay the opening of 
provincial parks and tax the family campfire, and I’ve looked 
for where the people are in this initiative. What I see are 
students that need to be employed in these parks denied one 
month of salary. I encourage them to look elsewhere to fund 
their post-secondary education. 
 
All too often, Mr. Speaker, they look west. The $100,000 saved 
by this NDP initiative will be lost again and again by the 
departure of more and more young people. 
 
The business communities that surround the parks could lose up 
to one-third of their revenue. What will be the cost, Mr. 
Speaker, of the cleanup over the long weekend should 
vandalism occur in these parks? What and where is the logic in 
it? Where are the people in these NDP parks policy? Mr. 
Speaker, the people are leaving. 
 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

The NDP are spending more on health care. My party’s 
commitment to health care is absolute, but we believe the 
answers lie in more than just cutting another cheque. We 
believe that we should listen to our professionals, not fire them 
if they disagree with you. 
 
We have seen in the past weeks a long line of people who have 
gone to the NDP health care system with legitimate needs, 
life-threatening needs. They’ve been left on waiting lists, 
they’ve been ignored, and sadly, the NDP seems to have no 
plan to help them —more studies, more lists, less services, and 
less solutions. The NDP cheer the increase in spending, which 
would make more sense if they could show shorter waiting lists, 
more professionals, a growing number of nurses, if they were 
showing an increase in the number of people coming to this 
province versus leaving this province. 
 
We could agree if the NDP showed any ability to achieve 
results. Ah, Mr. Speaker, results — a concept not familiar with 
this government. The people want results, Mr. Speaker, not 
excuses. 
 
They would have the people of Saskatchewan believe that we’re 
the only province that has BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy), droughts, forest fires. No, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
the only province that is losing population — 25,000 since this 
administration took over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is, are the NDP running out of 
excuses because they’ve stopped delivering on results long ago? 
Where are the people in the NDP health care budget, Mr. 
Speaker? The people are waiting. 
 
Let’s look for a moment, Mr. Speaker, at the NDP debt in this 
budget of despair and see if we can find the people in it. When 
the current Premier took over office, the provincial budget 
showed a surplus of some $500 million. Debt was being 
reduced, and there was no fiscal fantasies like the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. Since his time at the reins, we have seen 
massive deficits, a huge increase in the provincial debt, and a 
new mortgage placed on our children’s future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s debt is almost $20 billion. At the 
current level, it looks like it will take about 100 years to pay off 
the debt. Congratulations, Mr. Premier. As our centennial year 
approaches, you have created another legacy — our centennial 
debt —because that’s how long it will take us to pay it back. 
 
But if somehow you could just possibly find a way not to spend 
every cent the people give you, if somehow you could find a 
way to generate a surplus of just $100 million a year and apply 
it to our debt, Mr. Speaker, this would reduce our payback time 
to just 60 years. I won’t see it. I’m not sure if you will, Mr. 
Speaker. But maybe our grandchildren will. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You will. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s an ominous impact of the NDP debt. 
We’re dancing with the devil when it comes to the annual 
interest rate costs. If the interest rate rises just by one half of 1 
per cent in the next year, our interest costs will increase by $100 

million in the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, should this happen — and I pray it doesn’t — how 
will the NDP pay the banks that have been floating them year 
after year? Will they close more hospitals? Will they put more 
seniors on the street? Will they close the parks completely? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a massive threat to the stability of our 
province. The NDP has created a situation where, through tax 
and spend, our ability to fund our most basic services is 
threatened. Mr. Speaker, where are the people in this NDP debt 
plan? The people are frightened. So there we have it, Mr. 
Speaker. When we look at the people in the NDP budget, we 
find that people are paying, that people are leaving, that people 
are waiting, and that people are frightened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the food bank in Saskatoon cannot go into its 
rainy day fund to assist with longer and longer lines of people 
needing emergency assistance. They have no Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. They can only go to this government, who 
let them down. These people are the poorest of our citizens. 
And yet people like Bob Pringle, former Social Services 
ministers have to go to big businesses and citizens more and 
more to make up the deficiencies of this government. What’s in 
this budget, Mr. Speaker, for the single mother, the homeless, 
the seniors, and our Aboriginal youth? They will tell us there’s 
lots in this budget for these groups. And then why, Mr. Speaker, 
are the people crying out, crying out for help? We hear them. 
Why can’t they? 
 
As a member opposite enjoyed pointing out, I’m new to the 
House, and I’m new to the rules of the House. I’m new to the 
language of the House. And I respect those who have been here 
before to try to do their part for our province. However, Mr. 
Speaker, new here but maybe I bring something else over time 
has been lost by the members opposite — a clear view of what 
is happening, unclouded by the thrust of parry or debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has created a ticking time bomb. Our 
debt and the attendant interest are choking out the future of 
every person in the province. The Premier and his group of 
sorcerer apprentices have ignored the path of fiscal prudence 
and piled debt on top of excuses and covered all with a patina of 
fear. 
 
What I find incredible, Mr. Speaker, is this: despite collecting 
more money than ever before, the NDP still can’t balance the 
budget. So in addition to collecting more money than ever 
before and now despite closing hospitals, long-term beds, 
despite a potential increase in electrical rates, despite forgetting 
our less fortunate, despite tax increases, despite rural 
devastation — they still can’t balance the budget. 
 
They appear, Mr. Speaker, to have a voracious appetite for cash 
but no ability to deliver on results. They have taxed and spent 
for the last three years. And what do you have to show for it? 
Waiting lists out of control, continued out-migration, collapsing 
infrastructure, and more people in despair. Mr. Speaker, I 
looked for the people in this budget, and all I’ve seen is an 
out-of-touch government playing games with the future of our 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order for a minute. Why is the member for 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

Saskatchewan Rivers on his feet? 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatchewan Rivers wishes 
to make an introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to introduce 
to you in the west gallery, one of my constituents and a former 
Member of Parliament, Ray Funk. I would ask all of the 
members present to welcome here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION OF APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I look for the 
people in this budget, and all I’ve seen is an out-of-touch 
government, playing games with the future of our province. A 
government that doesn’t see the impact on people of their 
ruinous ways. A government so drunk with power that it would 
do anything, say anything, to remain in power. A government 
with no plan. A government with no control. A government that 
when it awakens from its binge will see a province devastated. 
 
And as they try to come up with something else to blame for 
their inadequacy, what will they hear the people say? The 
people will say it’s time to tell the truth to them, the truth so 
they can assess who it is now that really got them into this mess 
— a mess that now . . . (inaudible) . . . no need to raise taxes 
and cut programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Rosemont said that the 
c.v.’s (curriculum vitae) of the new people on the other side 
would lead you to believe that they should understand 
economics. Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you my economic 
assessment of a company that I have just reviewed. 
 
Some years ago the people brought a new CEO (chief executive 
officer) into the company. The new CEO had $500 million in 
his bank account, but the new CEO immediately hired some 
550 new employees, took the company in a totally new 
direction, in a few short years took the company into $1.5 
billion debt. Then he called a board meeting, and he told the 

board some stories that they wanted to hear. Well right after the 
board meeting, the CEO changed his story, and he raised taxes, 
and he showed a $312 million loss. And he fired 500 of his new 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be another board meeting soon, and we 
will tell the board members the true story, and I’m positive, Mr. 
Speaker, we will have a new CEO in this company very shortly. 
 
On behalf of the people of Saskatoon Northwest, I will not be 
supporting the budget but will be supporting the amendment. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
very pleased to be able to rise in this House and participate in 
the speech in support of the budget. Before I begin, I’d like to 
congratulate the Premier on another successful election 
campaign that his steady leadership has obviously provided. 
And I’m proud to serve under a capable and committed and 
visionary leader such as the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
(14:45) 
 
My congratulations are also extended to the new Leader of the 
Opposition as he takes on his new role, the member for Swift 
Current, and on his re-election to the Assembly, and also my 
best wishes to the former leader of the opposition, the member 
of Rosetown-Elrose, as he pursues his new role in the 
Assembly. 
 
I’d also like to join with other members as we wish our 
esteemed colleague from Yorkton best wishes on a speedy 
recovery with the challenge that he’s facing as well. 
 
Before I begin, I’d also like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, 
on your election to your role, your re-election to your role as the 
Speaker. You have served this Assembly well over the years as 
a private member, both in opposition and in this government 
and also for the last number of years as Speaker. And obviously 
to be re-elected in that role is a great honour to you. 
 
I’d also like to extend to the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains . . . to commend her for taking part in that competition. 
She ran a very good campaign and deserves a lot of kudos. The 
democratic process was served very well by having a contested 
nomination. I’d also like to thank the members for the honour 
of re-electing me as their Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard the speeches of the new 
members, and I was a little intimidated and very impressed. So 
my congratulations go out to all 10 members, both on the 
opposition and on the government. As was said earlier, while I 
was impressed with the speeches, I generally didn’t agree with 
the content of the speeches for the opposition. Now I want to 
assure the new members that while the debate in this House 
may get spirited — I’m sure they haven’t noticed that in the last 
couple weeks — it is generally conducted with the utmost 
respect and dignity for the proceedings. 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

I would also like to thank — I was not able to participate in the 
Speech from the Throne debate — but I’d like to take the 
opportunity to thank the members of Saskatoon Sutherland and 
the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland for their support in 
placing their trust in me to represent them and their concerns in 
this Assembly. It’s a trust that I take seriously, and I welcome 
the opportunity to serve the many fine people of Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland is 
populated by people from many backgrounds, many 
socio-economic groups, and it is truly a diverse and vibrant 
community. The volunteer spirit is strong in the community 
through Sutherland as evidenced by many cultural activities that 
are hosted throughout the year, as well as Harvestfest that is a 
growing festival that happens every fall. 
 
Also I am very honoured to be able to represent the University 
of Saskatchewan which is within the constituency of Sutherland 
and has a long and proud tradition of providing education to 
young people within Saskatchewan, and it is respected 
throughout the nation. The reputation of the U of S (University 
of Saskatchewan) extends past our borders, with U of S 
research resulting in more than 100 new crop varieties and the 
development of many firsts for Canada. U of S research 
produced the first genetically engineered vaccine for animals, 
the first Canadian experiment undertaken aboard a space 
shuttle, and the first comprehensive history of Native residential 
schooling in Canada which set the stage for understanding the 
regressive assimilation policies of the past in order to move 
towards a shared future. 
 
We can all be proud of the contribution of the U of S in 
graduates like Dr. Lee Wilson who is the first Métis student to 
earn a Ph.D (Doctor of Philosophy) from the U of S. Plus Dr. 
Wilson is the 2004 National Aboriginal Achievement Award 
winner in the science and technology award category. 
Congratulations to Dr. Wilson, who is in good company at the 
U of S which has produced two Nobel laureates, Gerhard 
Herzberg and Henry Taube, both in chemistry. I congratulate 
this winning spirit in my constituents. 
 
It’s this spirit which is prominent at Innovation Place on the 
University of Saskatchewan campus in Saskatoon which is also 
in my constituency; that’s a busy place as you know, Mr. 
Speaker. Innovation Place is one of the most successful 
university-related research parks in North America and 
contributes $250 million to the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
This partnership consists of 120 companies employing more 
than 2,000 individuals that is responsible for much of the 
innovation-based development in Saskatoon. This success can 
be attributed in part to the partnerships which developed the 
clusters of knowledge in agriculture, information technology, 
resources, and life sciences. Our government recognizes values 
and encourages public and private partnerships which engage 
expertise under the foundation of this great province. 
 
It is also my great fortune again, Mr. Speaker, to have the 
synchrotron project within my constituency. And yes, Mr. 
Speaker, I know my good fortune. The synchrotron is the 
innovation at the speed of light. It’s the largest Canadian 
research project in over 30 years. And the synchrotron 

establishes Saskatchewan as the leader in scientific research and 
will attract industrial and academic researchers from the entire 
country, indeed from around the world, Mr. Speaker. This 
project would not have been possible, once again, without 
partnerships. I congratulate all the partners of the synchrotron 
which is the result of unprecedented federal, provincial, civic, 
and academic partnerships that will benefit all Canadians. 
 
We will use this resource to help design new drugs, build more 
powerful computer chips, develop new materials for safer 
medical implants, create more effective motor oils, and help 
with the cleanup of mining waste to name but a few of the 
applications of the synchrotron. And I know some members 
hope that it might find a cure for baldness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to thank the members of the 
Muskeg Lake free nation . . . Cree Nation for developing the 
first urban reserve in Canada, designed specifically for 
Aboriginal economic development. This urban reserve is a true 
success story and a model of entrepreneurial spirit, which will 
provide an economic base for future generations. 
 
The Muskeg Lake urban reserve companies include: Aspen 
Development, to develop and sublease businesses on the 
reserve; TopRank, a plumbing and heating company servicing 
First Nations construction in the area; Cattail Holdings Ltd., 
which allows First Nations businesses to be established in an 
urban setting; Cree-Way Gas — which I was fortunate to be at 
the opening — to provide a gas bar and convenience store to 
spur economic development; Creek Investments Ltd., which is a 
leasing arms of Veterans Plaza, and Muskeg Lake land limited, 
to hold lands in the process of treaty land entitlement 
settlement. 
 
These businesses, along with the Muskeg Lake institutions, 
provide over 300 jobs and contribute to the overall economy of 
Saskatoon and its surrounding businesses. My congratulations 
to Muskeg Lake Cree Nation who are Canadian leaders in 
Aboriginal economic development and self-government. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, and probably most importantly, I’d like to 
thank my family — Karen, my wife, and my three sons — for 
the continuing support and encouragement they shower upon 
me each and every day. However, it’s the children and the . . . 
my children and the children of Saskatchewan that I’ll be 
thinking of as I debate this budget. 
 
This is a responsible budget, Mr. Speaker, a budget that will not 
mortgage our children’s future to pay for the spending of today. 
This is a budget that is concerned with being responsible; 
responsible to our residents who depend on the province’s 
quality health care, responsible to our children’s future through 
quality education, and responsible to sustainable environmental 
stewardship of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this Assembly is aware, the residents of 
Saskatchewan are fiercely protective of health care. In fact 
while I was reading the Los Angeles Times recently, I came 
across an article that had the headline that said, “In Canada . . .” 
Pardon me. “In health, Canada tops U.S.” It says: 
 

Our neighbours to the north live longer and pay less for 
care. The reasons why are being debated, but some cite the 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

gap between rich and poor in the U.S. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to quote a couple paragraphs from this 
article into the record. It goes, quote: 
 

Want a health tip? Move to Canada. 
 
An impressive array of data shows that Canadians live 
longer, healthier lives than we do. What’s more, they pay 
roughly half as much per capita as we do ($2,163 versus 
$4,887 in 2001) for the privilege. 
 
Exactly why Canadians fare better is the subject of 
considerable academic debate. Some policy experts say 
it’s Canada’s single-payer, universal health (care) 
coverage . . . 
 
. . . some believe it’s something more fundamental: a 
smaller gap between rich and poor. 

 
. . . “By all measures, Canadians’ health is better”, says 
Dr. Barbara Starfield, a university distinguished professor 
at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. Canadians “do 
better on a whole variety of health outcomes,” she says, 
including life expectancy at various . . . (stages). 
 
. . . “There isn’t a single measure in which the U.S. excels 
in the health arena,” says Dr. Steven Bezruchka, a senior 
lecturer in the School of Public Health at the University of 
Washington in Seattle. “We spend half of the world’s 
healthcare bill, and we are less healthy than all the other 
rich countries.” 

 
. . . “The summary of the evidence has to be that national 
health insurance has improved the health of Canadians and 
is responsible for some of the longer life expectancy” . . . 
 
. . . The bottom line is that Canada is doing something 
right . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, this budget includes . . . This budget is about 
health care. It includes the largest increase in reinvestment in 
health care in a number of years, over 6 per cent. There were 
some challenges that had to be faced. We had to reduce funding 
to several of the departments but it was . . . all the money went 
to health care, education, and agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time is growing short so I will not going to be 
able to get into all of the good news stories that we have talked 
about, the issues with regards to smoking. But I just wanted to 
issue some of . . . refer to some of the comments that the 
members have talked about, about how this budget is not about 
the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a passion for the future. We 
are making these decisions so that we’re ready to go in the next 
term. 
 
Now I would ask the members opposite. Manitoba received 
from Ottawa on average about $1 billion a year. Those are 
rough figures. Saskatchewan receives about $100 million a year 
from Ottawa. Now either the members can say that 
Saskatchewan is doing very well or it’s doing very poorly. But 

according to this we’re either doing well . . . But I don’t think 
we’re doing 10 times better than Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care funding from Ottawa has decreased to 
16 per cent of health care budgets over the last 10 years. The 
premiers have gotten together and have asked the federal 
government to start to increase that to 25 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party feels betrayed. We’ve heard 
over the last two weeks the word betrayed many, many times. 
They say the Sask Party has been betrayed. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 
think what they feel is they feel that they’ve been betrayed by 
the electorate. They feel that they’ve been robbed during the 
election, that somehow the voters just got it wrong. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re misunderstood. 
 
Mr. Addley: — That they’re misunderstood, as some members 
are saying. Now, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP is the problem, why 
did the Sask Party decide to change the leader? If it’s all the 
fault of the people on this side somehow hoodwinking the 
public and everything is so rosy there, why would they feel the 
need shortly after the election to change the leader? 
 
Now I do find it ironic that the member for Swift Current has 
become their new leader. Because I’ve sat with the Sask Party 
for the last four years and the Saskatchewan Party is neither 
swift, nor current. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Reform Party leader, Stephen Harper 
has been eviscerated recently — well actually over the last year 
or so — for referring to the culture of despair in Atlantic 
Canada. Well the last two weeks I think he got it wrong. I think 
the culture of despair is on the opposition side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health has referred to some 
surveys concerning health care. Now what you hear . . . when 
you hear the members opposite talk about health care, they are 
saying that it is a horrendous system; it is not working for 
people. Well I’ve referred to an article in the Los Angeles 
Times. The Minister of Health has referred to the surveys that 
are conducted and this goes right to the heart of what the Sask 
Party is saying. They’re saying health care is terrible. 
 
Now if you survey the public, their opinion of health care is 
generally fairly positive. But if you actually asked them, have 
you had a contact with the health care system, their satisfaction 
goes through the roof. It’s in the 90 per cent range. So what that 
. . . The conclusion is most people think the health care is pretty 
good, but they think that they just were the lucky ones to get 
through with the good service. And that goes to what the Sask 
Party’s been trying to do is undercut the health care system, 
which is unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud that this government will be 
providing strong tobacco control measures, as was referenced in 
the Throne Speech. There’s an article recently from the New 
York Daily News from March 29 and they’re referring to the 
total ban that was implemented in New York a year ago. And it 
indicates that it is good for the lungs. It’s also good for 
business. And I quote: 
 

A year after the controversial law went into effect, 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

business in restaurants and bars went up 8.7 per cent. 
 

According to the report. This is compared by comparing tax 
receipts, employment, and business openings and closing from 
2002 to 2003. The bottom line is that New York City a year 
later is a healthier place to work, eat, and drink. And 150,000 
people don’t have to go into work every day and be smoked on 
by other people. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened quite carefully from the member 
of Silver Spring. He was quite complimentary to me and I 
appreciate the compliment and I think he’s participated fully in 
his role as the MLA for Silver Spring. 
 
But he seemed to take a lot of credit for a lot of the good things 
that are happening in his constituency; that one, it’s the fastest 
growing constituency. Well for the last four years I’ve been 
able to say that. And when I knock on doors and people said, 
you know, what is the NDP doing, I say, well look around; this 
is the NDP plan of prosperity working for you. And all I can 
say to the member for Silver Spring is, when I turned it over to 
him it was in good shape. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — And I’m going to keep an eye on him that he 
keeps representing the public there. 
 
Now the second thing I would suggest to him is that he was part 
of a parent group that was lobbying me as their member for a 
northeast collegiate in Silver Spring. And I attended quite a few 
meetings, answered a lot of e-mails, a lot of letters, a lot of 
phone calls. And I was a bit of a pain to the minister of 
Education and then the Minister of Learning in lobbying for a 
northeast collegiate. 
 
Now what the member needs to point out . . . And the Minister 
of Finance as he reminded me, yes I was a bit of a pain. But 
fortunately that’s over with because in this budget there’s 
money for building a northeast collegiate. 
 
Now the member for Silver Spring was a member of that parent 
group lobbying for a school. He became the MLA for Silver 
Spring. This budget contains the money, the action required to 
build the school for his constituents. 
 
I challenge the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. Will he 
vote for this budget? Will he vote for his school being built in 
his community, or will he vote against the school in his 
community? That is a very important question that needs to be 
answered by the member for Saskatoon Silver Spring. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a bit of a slogan that I refer to this 
place because the way the opposition tells it is somehow we 
stole the election with 45 per cent of the vote, with 30 seats. I 
refer to this as . . . (inaudible) . . . majority. This is a majority 
government. Our popular vote increased quite a bit. The popular 
vote of the opposition decreased by quite a bit. 
 
When you look at the pluralities that the members on this side 
of the House won by, they were quite large and quite 

comfortable. Now the members on the opposite side — you can 
start looking around — there’s probably about a half a dozen, 
that 1,000 votes strategically distributed would win six more 
seats for the government. 
 
So my suggestion would be that the results flatter the 
opposition. Twenty-eight seats with the low popular vote that 
they received flatters them. And I think most of them know that. 
You know, I’ve referred to one member as landslide . . . I 
shouldn’t say that, but I won’t refer to the person’s name. But I 
think that they’re quite fortunate with the number of seats that 
they did receive. 
 
I suspect that they, on Thursday next week, some of them may 
be voting for the budget because they want to build a school in 
their community, or they’ll be strategically away because they 
don’t want to have another election. Because if we have another 
election, there could be another four or five or six seats over 
here. 
 
Now it is interesting that on Tartan Day, myself as a Scot is 
speaking in support of a very frugal and forward-looking 
budget. And I am quite confident that over the next three years, 
four years of our mandate, that you’ll see these investments 
paying off in health care, education, and agriculture. 
 
Now just in reference to the election, it is interesting that we 
have had . . . You know there were three leaders in the election, 
one of which was referring to our Premier as a liar and a 
hypocrite. Now our leader did not. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member to be more 
judicious in his use of language in this Assembly and be 
respectful to all members. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Well I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I know you did 
not direct me to that. There were certain comments that were 
made in the election that, if they were made in this Assembly, 
would not be parliamentary, which I will not repeat, I might 
add. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I just made a statement with 
respect to use of language in the House and that applies not 
only to members who are speaking but to the members who also 
may be hollering across the street. And I respectfully request 
the member not to make statements of that type. 
 
Member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And perhaps I’ll 
move off of that point because it seems to be a very sore point 
for the opposition. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to hear of all the good things 
that are going on in this budget. As I said, health care spending 
has increased by 6.3 per cent, by $160 million; education has 
increased by 3.8 per cent or $45 million; the municipal 
revenue-sharing grant is increased by $10 million, a third 
consecutive year. We are focusing on children, youth, and 
opportunity. We do have sound fiscal management and 
accountability. And we are supporting our communities through 
highways and we are fixing the roads. 
 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this budget does recognize education as I 
indicated, and it is the greatest investment in our province’s 
future. 
 
Okay, there I found it. Anyway I think I’ve come up with a 
theme song for the opposition’s policy review after hearing the 
last two weeks . . . I don’t know, and I know the member, the 
member for Swift Current who’s had the, I think it was a guitar 
museum wasn’t it, or the country museum . . . and that’s The 
Eagles’ “Get Over It”. And I’d just like to read into the record, 
and I won’t sing in Cree, and I won’t sing any songs but I will 
quote from their theme song: 
 

They point their crooked little fingers at . . . (everyone) 
else 

spend all their time feelin’ sorry for themselves 
Victim of this, victim of that . . . 
 
Get over it 
Get over it 
All this whinin’ and cryin’ and pitchin’ a fit 
Get over it, get over it 
 
You say you haven’t been the same since you had your 

little crash 
But you might feel better if . . . (I) gave you some cash 
The more I think about it, Old Billy was right . . . 
 
You’re making the most of your losing’ streak 
Some call it sick, but I call it weak . . . 
 
Get over it 
Get over it 
It’s got to stop sometime, so why don’t you quit 
Get over it, get over it. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that was a little bit tongue-in-cheek. But it 
does seem that the opposition has just not gotten over the fact 
that they lost in the election. And I do want to say that I am 
proud to serve with the Premier in a caucus that consistently 
confronts the challenges of our province and never shirks from 
the responsibility entrusted in us by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon, we’re quite fortunate to have 
Yann Martel, the author of Life of Pi, being the writer in 
residence at the Saskatoon library. Basically, in a nutshell, what 
Life of Pi is about is a young boy that moves from India to 
Canada and en route the boat sinks and he’s left in a lifeboat 
with a very large tiger. In fact it’s very similar to the Assembly 
here; we’re sort of trapped here while the House is sitting and 
there’s a tiger and we’re basically trying to survive. Maybe I’ll 
write a story about that some day. 
 
But the conclusion is that there’s two stories in Life of Pi. 
There’s the several hundred stories . . . several hundred pages 
within the story and then there’s a two-page report at the end. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s two stories in this Assembly. There’s 
the negative doom and gloom story that is put forward by the 
opposition that asks for more money to be spent on this, more 
tax cuts here, not balancing the books, no consequences for 
their actions, and then there’s the very rigorous, confident, 

optimistic, positive story on the government side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time is coming to a close. I’m very proud to 
support the 2004-2005 provincial budget. As I’ve outlined, I 
believe this budget is a thoughtful work that carefully balances 
the desire of our government to be socially responsible with the 
realities of being fiscally responsible. I will be voting in favour 
of the budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I notice in the last few days the 
difficulty that you’ve had in controlling certain members with 
their lack of parliamentary language. And I want you to know, 
Mr. Speaker, that as difficult as it may be for the Speaker, it is 
equally as difficult for members of the opposition to try and 
control their language when they’re trying to properly develop 
terminology in describing certain comments that are made by 
members of the government. 
 
And I follow this budget speech, and I follow the statements 
that were made during the election by the Premier, with some 
considerable interest and had some difficulty in trying to 
reconcile the various statements that were made, Mr. Speaker. 
And I notice, Mr. Speaker, that in the American government 
there is similar problems with politicians and their use of 
language. And I was wondering perhaps, Mr. Speaker, if some 
of the members opposite had been looking at various US 
(United States) presidents to develop their speaking style and 
how they handle statements that they were going on to have 
difficulty with. 
 
I noted that President Nixon, when he was dealing with the 
Watergate Crisis, made a number of statements that he later on 
had considerable problems with. And that president handled 
those statements by having his press secretary make 
announcements that those particular statements were no longer 
operative. And I thought, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps the Premier 
would simply state that the promises that he made during the 
election were no longer operative. But the reality, Mr. Speaker, 
is that our Premier is somewhat more creative and I think he 
went on and he looked at the methodology used by Bill Clinton. 
 
Bill Clinton was a very creative president and he made a 
statement that caused him a lot of problems. He stated that he 
did not have sexual relations with that girl, with Monica 
Lewinski. And what he did to try to avoid that problem later on, 
Mr. Speaker, was he used a different definition of sexual 
relations. And I thought that was very creative on his part and I 
think that our Premier has learned from that methodology. 
 
What he’s done is simply restates his election promises and 
then states we are doing them in a reasonable manner, which is 
sort of his simple way of restating the same things and saying 
that he can do something different on it now. 
 
What he’s doing is saying things like we will lower taxes in a 
responsible manner, which really means, I’m going to raise the 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

taxes. We are going to maintain the PST in a responsible 
manner, which means, we are going to raise the taxes. We will 
protect and maintain the civil service, which really means, we 
are going to lay off or terminate some 500 employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier has done a very good job of using the 
Clintonesque method of dealing with the truth and dealing with 
electoral statements made during the election, and this method 
of saying, I’m going to do this in a realistic way or I want to do 
this in a responsible manner. 
 
And I’m wondering today, Mr. Speaker, if the people and the 
good citizens of Saskatoon Riversdale were allowed to vote 
again today, would they like to have the opportunity of voting 
for the Premier in the same responsible way that he’s treating 
them? And perhaps that responsible method of treating the 
voters might be by voting for the Saskatchewan Party and 
maybe those people would like to be given that opportunity 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it defies logic and is an insult to the intelligence of 
the voters of this province to talk about a Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund in any kind of positive sense. The Provincial Auditor, the 
media, the public know far better than to try and believe that 
kind of a ruse and it’s not an acceptable way of presenting 
anything to the public any more. 
 
I was surprised to see the member from Moose Jaw North stand 
up and say, the fiscal stabilization’s account we’re transferring 
from this to that account while the reality, Mr. Speaker, is 
they’re not transferring from one account to the other. They’re 
taking from one overdrawn credit card to another overdrawn 
credit card, and the debt that we are leaving the grandchildren 
that we will have will be somewhat in excess of $12,000 per 
person based on the population of about a million people. So it 
doesn’t matter whether you’re getting a cash advance from this 
credit card or a cash advance from that credit card, Mr. Speaker, 
the fiscal stabilization is not there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing that I find incredibly offensive about 
this budget speech is the method of saying, we’re only going to 
read partway down the financial statement and then we’re going 
to talk about it being balanced before we bring in all of the 
expenses and all of the interest charges and everything else . . . 
(inaudible) . . . It’s just like going to your bank for a loan as a 
business person and saying, this is my gross income, and not 
including any of your expenses. 
 
That type of businessman would be thrown out by the bank 
manager and would not be allowed to set foot in the bank. This 
type of policy is what this government is trying to perpetrate on 
the members of the public. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not an 
acceptable thing to do. 
 
(15:15) 
 
The financial statement of this province, page 12 of it, shows 
the increase in net debt between one year and the next year and 
it’s increasing by hundreds of millions of dollars over the 
period of time. And all you need to do is look at where you are 
at the beginning of the year, the end of the year, and that’s a 
very simple way to look at it, Mr. Speaker. You don’t need to 
talk about fiscal stabilization funds, but the idea of moving 

partway down a financial statement to try and use that as a ruse 
that you are somehow balancing the budget, is not an acceptable 
way of presenting financial information to this province. 
 
The Premier talks about developing a green economy. There is 
nothing, Mr. Speaker, in this budget that talks anywhere about 
what they’re going to do to develop a green economy, and I 
suspect that the mentality that’s used is probably meaning the 
purchase of a used, green Volvo. But there is nothing in here 
that talks anywhere about how they’re going to promote or 
develop the economy. 
 
In fact, the only reference to a green economy is the firing of 
some 200 civil servants out of the Environment department. 
How are they going to develop anything green or responsible 
out of that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a wonderful province. We have enormous 
potential in this province. The tragedy of this budget is that it 
has done nothing to promote and develop this province. People 
continue to leave the province in droves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you a little bit about what happened 
at a recent realtor’s conference in Calgary. The realtors were 
trying to develop a new marketing strategy to bring people into 
the city. And what they were encouraged to do was go after the 
parents of people that they had sold houses to in the last two or 
three years so that those people would be . . . the next market 
would be the parents and the grandparents of the baby boomers 
that are already there. People that would be willing to move out 
of this province, taxpaying people that would move to Calgary 
so that they can be closer to their children and their 
grandchildren. 
 
The effect of that, Mr. Speaker, is that the province of Alberta 
has not just plucked our fruit, they’ve now come back and 
they’re taking the roots out of our ground. The NDP 
government should be ashamed that that is the legacy that they 
are leaving the next generation for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the run-up to this budget speech and during 
this budget speech we heard a number of excuses why there was 
financial difficulty and how they were wrestling with this, with 
this economy. We heard about drought, we heard about forest 
fires, and we heard about BSE. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve lived in this province all my 
life and we’ve had drought in this province and it’s been a 
problem, and it’s been a factor since the 1930s. Let’s develop a 
strategy for it. Let’s develop a safety net. Let’s develop an 
income averaging method so we can do it. Let’s just get on with 
it and develop a long-term strategy. 
 
Let’s develop an income averaging method so we can do it. 
Let’s just get on with it and develop a long-term strategy. Let’s 
stop whining about it, let’s stop complaining about it, let’s get 
over it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have also had forest fires in this 
province. We’ve had forest fires in this province since long 
before people were in this province. Budget for it, plan for it, 
get over it. Mr. Speaker, that is the government, they have an 
obligation to it. There is nothing new, nothing unusual for it, 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

and now the best strategy they have come forward is we’re 
going to let them burn. Well if you think it’s the best thing to do 
to let them burn, let them burn; but develop the strategy, get on 
with it, and stop coming back into this House and using it as an 
excuse because they can’t budget properly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only thing that they had that was any kind of a 
reasonable excuse or a reasonable problem that was 
unforeseeable was the BSE crisis. If they had come forward and 
said we spent $50 million or $80 million on BSE, and that was 
the amount of the real deficit, I suspect the people of this 
province would say yes, fair enough, we’ll live with that, it’s 
understandable, we can work around that. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s not what they’ve done. They’ve come and used 
every other reason under the sun to try and work around what 
their responsibilities are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a plan and a commitment to develop this 
province, and that was the one thing that was sorely lacking in 
this budget. This budget was a series of Band-Aids and a series 
of mop ups to try and deal with other problems that were in this 
budget. In this province we’ve got some magnificent resources 
that we haven’t used. We have forestry. We need to encourage, 
foster, and develop forestry in this province. It’s great 
opportunities for our northern citizens and our First Nations 
people. We need to work to develop roadways, licensing, 
Crown grants. There is enormous potential that has to be 
harnessed and developed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also have significant pulse and cereal 
crops in our agricultural sector. What are we doing to promote 
processing? Is there anything in this budget that develops 
secondary and anything else . . . is there anything there that 
deals with marketing? Is there anywhere that deals with a global 
strategy? There is nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province also has enormous potential for 
irrigation. What has this government done and what have they 
done to build or develop that infrastructure? What they’ve done 
in fact is they’ve gone out and developed a potato industry 
that’s bankrupt, and they’ve also gone back now to the people 
of this province saying one of the reasons we can’t open your 
parks is because we spent the money on SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) — a 
failed venture. 
 
Why don’t they stay out of those things? Let the private sector 
do those things, develop the infrastructure, develop the tax 
regime, develop the regulatory system, and let private sector 
deal with those things. And that’s not what they’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province has substantial oil reserves that have 
not yet been developed because of the hostile attitude of the 
NDP towards business. I heard the Finance minister say earlier 
this week, and I heard him say in his budget speech, that this 
government did not wish to be an impediment to business. What 
a negative thing: we do not wish to be an impediment to 
business. What’s wrong with being a coach? What’s wrong 
with being a cheerleader? Why do they have to say, well we 
don’t think we’ll be a goalie this year? Get off of it. Let’s have 
them, let’s have them promote. Let’s have them try and thank 
the business for coming in here. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of the largest 
suppliers in the world of uranium. What has happened under 
this government? We put it on rail cars. We ship it to Ontario 
for processing and marketing. Where are the jobs in that sector? 
They are all in Chalk River. They are all out of this province. 
None of those jobs are here. We’re drawing it from the ground, 
loading it in a rail car, and shipping the jobs out of here with . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a newly developing diamond 
industry in this province. It is doing well in spite of the NDP. It 
is my hope that they don’t choose to start NDP diamondco or 
any other involvement in the diamond industry because that 
industry will do quite well on its own if they just stay out of it. 
If they want to say thank you, that would be a nice thing to do. 
But otherwise leave it alone. It’ll work by itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we also have significant potash 
facilities. In spite of the fact that the NDP government bought 
all the potash mines and then sold them back and played games 
with it, that is an industry that has recovered and because it’s 
now in the private sector is one of the most successful, 
profitable businesses in North America. And that’s done so now 
that the NDP are leaving that business alone. 
 
And I think they should leave more businesses alone. Develop 
the regulatory scheme. Develop the infrastructure. Let the 
business go on by itself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP say to the Saskatchewan Party: 
what would you do? Well, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Party would take steps to try and grow the province. We would 
take steps to try and ensure that the proper initiatives are there, 
the right education is there for our young people, that we would 
do things so that we don’t see our children leaving. We would 
develop a plan that would keep students here, that would give 
them a positive, cash incentive to stay here. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we hear from the Minister of 
Learning is — and he stands up and he regularly talks about — 
well spend more, tax less. That’s the only two things that that 
side of the House understands . . . is taxation and expenditure 
and the trade-off between them. 
 
What they miss out completely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
most important part of the puzzle, and that is growing the 
economy of this province. There is no excuse why a 
resource-rich province like this should have to have Alberta 
envy. We should all be able to collectively get over it, grow this 
province, develop this province, and let it take its rightful place 
in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — The final thing that this government should do 
and should get over is the incredible waste and mismanagement 
and the lost and failed business ventures: the Broes, the 
SPUDCOs, the vast host of things like the infrastructure. 
 
The ISC (Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan), a 
land titles system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has cost now over 
$100 million — on par with the federal government gun 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

registry on a per capita expenditure — for a system that need 
not have cost us more than a few million dollars because other 
provinces, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were willing to give us their 
system, no charge, just the . . . No, no, we think we can create 
our own. So we went off, created our own, and still this many 
months later still not working, raising the fees, running in a 
deficit. Unfortunately it is too typical of what the NDP 
government has done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the government on the other side, if the 
members opposite want to do something productive, want to 
look to us to do something productive and creative, I invite 
them to look at the Bill that we presented earlier this week on 
whistle-blower legislation. That Bill goes a long ways to protect 
civil servants so that we don’t have to, as opposition, continue 
to receive brown envelopes under the door. I would invite them 
to look carefully at that Bill, make whatever constructive 
changes they feel are necessary so that they can support that 
Bill, and let’s pass something, and let’s do something as a 
House that we can do together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget. I will, 
however, be supporting the amendment. Mr. Speaker, thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much. I’m very 
pleased to get up to enter into this budget debate, although my 
time will be limited and unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
won’t have time to deal with all of the inaccuracies that were 
just recited in the other member’s speech. 
 
But I do want to relate an incident that occurred, where the hon. 
member was present, just last Friday in Saskatoon. And this is 
kind of indicative of the approach that the members opposite 
take because they pretend that nothing positive could ever 
happen in Saskatchewan. And you know, the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast and I were both invited to an event at the 
College of Commerce in Saskatoon last Friday. And I was 
asked to get up and say a few words, which I did. 
 
And one of the things I talked about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
fact — and this is a fact — that Saskatchewan has a program to 
encourage the development of the mining sector, and it has been 
working. 
 
And I want to say to that hon. member and his colleagues who 
get up and say that oh you can’t do business in Saskatchewan 
because the NDP won’t let you. Well I want to say to that 
member and to the House and anybody listening today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there are two areas of mining where Canada is 
the leader in the world — only two. And both of them are 
headquartered in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And they are the uranium industry where 

Saskatchewan has the largest uranium industry in the world, 
and the potash industry where Saskatchewan has the largest 
potash industry in the world. 
 
And this member and his colleagues want to say to the people 
that we don’t have industrial development in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well we can always use more. 
 
But I want to recite a little incident that occurred with the hon. 
member from Southeast and his colleague from Silver Springs 
and the one from Carrot River, and they were all at the same 
meeting I was. I got up at the meeting, and I said, I want to ask 
a question. How many people at this meeting are aware that the 
province of Saskatchewan has a policy that for any gold or base 
metal mine, any new mine that comes into production — this 
policy is about a year and a half old — that there is a 10-year 
royalty holiday? Talk about incenting development. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? None of them put up 
their hands because they did not know. They did not know what 
the policies of the province of Saskatchewan in relation to 
mining even were, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s one example. 
 
So that member gets up, and he suggests that we need 
incentives for mining, but he doesn’t acknowledge the 
incentives we have. He says that we can’t do business in 
Saskatchewan, but he doesn’t acknowledge we have the biggest 
uranium industry and the biggest potash sector. And then he 
says in his speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he says well what 
about the processing of pulse crops. He says we need incentives 
to encourage the processing of pulse crops. Well we do need 
processing of pulse crops, and there’s more that goes on today 
than did ever before, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the reason is 
that Saskatchewan has the lowest tax regime for manufacturing 
and processing in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, including the 
province of Alberta. 
 
(15:30) 
 
So what I want of anybody listening to this to know is that 
when that member and his colleagues continually get up and 
say the government should do this, the government should do 
that, they’re not even aware what the policies of the province of 
Saskatchewan are. 
 
And of course you know the other problem, listening to the 
members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this: that they come 
in day after day and they say two things basically. They say the 
government spends too much, and therefore we have too much 
debt . . . they say in one breath. Then a few minutes later, 
they’ll get up, and they’ll say no, you know the government 
needs to spend more. The government should spend more on 
agriculture. The government should spend more on K to 12 
(kindergarten to grade 12) education so that there’s lower 
property taxes. The government should spend more on crop 
insurance. That’s what they say, and of course everybody’s 
taxes according to them should be lower. 
 
And I say to anybody watching this . . . you know I don’t think 
people are that naive, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they truly 
believe that these people, if they ever were in government — 
God forbid — could actually deliver on what they say because 
what they say is they’re going to spend, spend, spend and cut all 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

the taxes. And somehow they are going to eliminate the debt at 
the same time. It’s a very interesting formula, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Of course the problem is it doesn’t add up. 
 
But I want to say to the people of the province and anyone 
watching this that I’ve never seen a budget debate where the 
opposition didn’t get up and condemn the budget and condemn 
everything that was going on in the province. And it’s the same 
thing every year. But what I’d like the people to know is . . . 
when that member who was just up gets up and says that 
somehow the government is, you know, taking us down the 
road to a lot of increased debt and fiscal difficulty, I want that 
member to explain why it is that since 1995 the province of 
Saskatchewan has had 11 consecutive credit rating upgrades 
from the credit rating agencies in Toronto and New York. 
That’s the reality. 
 
And if the member wants to read the budget document . . . and 
I’m not quite sure that he has because if he had I think he would 
be perhaps more informed than he seems to be. But if he would 
look at the budget document . . . and I would refer him to page 
57 in this regard. And these are the sorts of things that credit 
rating agencies look at. He would know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that in 1994 the debt of the province of Saskatchewan stood at 
65 percent of the gross domestic product — the debt to GDP 
(gross domestic product) ratio — which is what credit rating 
agencies and financial analysts look at. It was 65 per cent; that’s 
what our debt was. 
 
For 2003, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was 33.7 per cent. In other 
words, our economy has grown, and our debt has gone down. 
One of the members says, look at the dollars. I’ll tell the 
member what the dollars are. The dollars are, that at one time in 
1993-94 the debt of the province peaked at over $15 billion, 
with a B. Today the debt of the province is more in the range of 
$12 billion. In case the member doesn’t know that, 12 billion is 
lower than 15 billion. 
 
But I want to say something else to those members opposite. 
When this government came to power, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
after nine years of rule by the Devine Conservatives that were 
supported by those members — when we came to power, the 
interest charges paid on the debt at one point amounted to about 
$861 million. The interest charges paid on the debt last year, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, were $605 million. Most reasonable 
people would say that an approximate $250 million drop in 
interest cost was a good thing and that we were headed in the 
right direction. 
 
Now the opposition of course never will recognize any progress 
being made in the province of Saskatchewan because that’s not 
their job. Their job is to complain on a full-time basis and get 
paid for that at the public expense. And they do it very well. 
They do it very well. They will complain that the debt is too 
high. They will complain that the spending is too high. And 
then they’ll complain that the spending is too low, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I’ve been around this House long enough to hear the members 
opposite complain three years ago, because why? The number 
of public servants had gone up by 500 people — 85 more to fix 
roads, so many more to work in the area of child welfare. And 
members who will hear and people who pay attention to what 

goes on in the legislature will remember that day after day — I 
was the Finance minister, so I remember — they were up 
saying the worst thing in the world that could happen was 500 
more public servants. 
 
Now you listen to them and the worst thing that can happen is 
500 fewer public servants, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And my point is, it doesn’t really matter what is in the budget, it 
doesn’t really matter what is in the budget, this opposition is 
going to complain about it because they never have anything 
positive to say about anything. And I think that’s unfortunate 
because . . . Turning away from the opposition towards 
something more positive, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say 
there are some positive things in the budget. And what are they? 
 
They are these, Mr. Speaker — there are four main priorities in 
the budget. The first is health care, which is very important to 
the people of the province and it receives a 6.6 per cent increase 
which is significant; education, which is very important to the 
people of the province and receives a 3.8 per cent increase; 
highways, where the government has embarked on another 
four-year plan to fix the roads. 
 
And I want to say that three years ago we embarked upon a plan 
to fix the roads, which all of us would acknowledge was long 
overdue, and we have seen much progress in highways. There’s 
still highways that need to be fixed, but we’ve seen progress, 
we’ve seen a lot of work done because we’ve been spending 
record amounts on highway construction, about $300 million 
per year. And that continues with this budget which commits 
$295 million this year for highway spending. And over the 
course of a four-year term it is about $1.2 billion that will be 
spent on highways infrastructure, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
think that’s very significant. 
 
And we also see in this budget, in addition to increases to health 
care, education, highways — which is very relevant by the way 
to rural Saskatchewan where most of those members represent. 
It’s important to rural Saskatchewan, and they should support 
the highways budget instead of just being critical of it because 
we need infrastructure work. 
 
And also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, once again this year we see a 
significant increase to funding for municipalities, and that helps 
the municipal sector in terms of their roads and their sewer and 
water which are very basic services for people. 
 
And one of the things I’d like to say is that what we have seen 
over the last few years has not only been significant progress in 
the area of highways infrastructure, where we’re fixing the 
roads, but also sewer and water because anyone who’s been in 
this House for a while — and some of the members here have 
been, most of them — will remember that a few years ago we 
were really having trouble on the water front. We were having 
trouble with aging sewer and water systems, a lot of boil-water 
advisories. There still are some. 
 
But the point is this: the government, through the Department of 
the Environment in co-operation with municipalities and the 
federal government — because they put money into 
infrastructure, along with the province and the municipalities — 
have been fixing dozens of water systems in Saskatchewan 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

every year. And, you know, we’re tackling this problem fairly 
effectively, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And those are the things that people really care about. They care 
about water and sewer services. They care about their roads. 
They care about their highways. And we’re making positive 
progress on those fronts, and that progress is going to continue. 
 
And I want to say also, in a positive way, that we have a plan. 
Whether or not the opposition wants to admit it, we have a plan 
to grow this economy. And that plan has been making progress. 
And I’m going to, I’m going to talk about it because, to listen to 
these people over there, you get this kind of negative doom and 
gloom image that nothing is happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I’m here to say is that — notwithstanding the total 
lack of co-operation by the federal government, which fines and 
penalizes the province every time we try to develop the oil and 
gas sector — last year there was record drilling in the oil and 
gas sector. And last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was 
something like $1.8 billion private sector investment in the oil 
patch. Over the last five years, there has been $1 billion private 
sector investment in forestry projects. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, now that I think of it, when I was at 
the College of Commerce I asked another question of the 
audience, which included three members of the opposition. I 
said, how many people here are aware that in the last two years, 
two of the world’s largest oriented strand board plants have 
opened in Saskatchewan — namely in Meadow Lake and 
Hudson Bay? And a few of the people in the audience, several 
actually, put up their hands. 
 
But you know what? I don’t believe that all of the members 
opposite put up their hands. I don’t believe they were aware of 
some of the progress that is being made in oil and gas — which 
employs about 23,000 people directly and indirectly in this 
province — in forestry, and in mining. 
 
And I want to say to those members who say that we do not 
develop mining, I already mentioned that we have two of the 
largest industries in the world located in Saskatchewan, the only 
areas where Canada is a leader in the world. But I want to say 
also . . . The member talked about diamond development. I 
want that member to know — when he says that, you know, we 
should stay out of the way — that one of the things we’re asked 
to do by the diamond industry is to meet with them and work 
with them to develop policies that will grow the diamond 
industry. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve been doing that. 
We’ve been meeting the diamond industry. I’ve been to the 
Shore Gold property, looking at the diamond mine and mill that 
they’re trying to establish there. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve been 
to the Fort A La Corne property of Shore Gold and I’ve looked 
at their operation. And I’ve met with them on numerous 
occasions because what we’re going to do, which we’re 
committed to do, is to develop a very, very competitive royalty 
structure for the mining of diamonds in Saskatchewan. 
 

And if the member who just spoke thinks that we shouldn’t be 
meeting and developing policies to assist that industry, I’m 
afraid I have to beg to differ with the member. What any 
government must do is meet with all the sectors of the economy 
in an effort to grow them and that is what we have been doing. 
And I want those members to know, and anybody listening as 
well, that even though they like to get up and say that nothing 
can happen in the economy in Saskatchewan, I want to tell them 
what the private sector says about economic development in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
According to the Conference Board of Canada for the year 
2003, the Saskatchewan economy will have grown by 5.4 per 
cent. That’s not my figure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the 
figure of the Conference Board of Canada. The Bank of 
Montreal projects the Saskatchewan economy will have grown 
by 5 per cent. And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan economy for 2003 will have grown faster than 
any other economy in Canada. 
 
Now do we want to do better? Yes, we want to do better 
because all of Canada experienced a slowdown in 2003. That’s 
a fact. Canada was affected by SARS (severe acute respiratory 
syndrome); it was affected by BSE; it was affected by West 
Nile virus; it was affected somewhat I think by probably the 
Iraq war; it was affected very significantly by a slow turn down 
in the U.S. economy. And of course in Saskatchewan, it was 
affected by two years of severe drought. 
 
I’m always a bit amused when I hear the members opposite get 
upset when we say that drought is going to have an effect on the 
economy. Is there anyone in Saskatchewan that doesn’t know 
that drought has a serious effect on our economy? Just them, 
another member says, and I think that’s true. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the Canadian economy took some 
hits. We took some hits. But you know what, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, our economy is more diversified than it has ever been 
in our history because the oil and gas sector is growing, the 
mining sector is growing, the forestry sector is growing, 
manufacturing and processing is growing. And all of us would 
agree that we have to grow those sectors more. We have to do 
more and that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And I want to say to those members that continually get up and 
they want to divide rural people from urban people. They want 
to say that the budget was . . . did nothing for rural 
Saskatchewan. I want them to know that there was a 5 per cent 
increase budget over budget to the budget of the Department of 
Agriculture this year. I want them to know that the 
municipalities throughout this province in all parts of the 
province are going to get a substantial increase this year. I want 
them to know that we’re fixing the roads throughout the 
province. 
 
I also want them to know that we have over the past year put 
$55 million, I believe is the figure, extra unbudgeted money 
into support for cattle producers. And so we should. That’s 
something that we should do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we’ll continue to use our resources as carefully as we can 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

to build the economy of the province, to move the economy 
forward in a positive way. Not with all the doom and gloom we 
hear from over there but in a realistic, fair, positive way, 
recognizing all of the good things that are happening in our 
province and all of the good people that we have in 
Saskatchewan that don’t have time to sit around and gripe and 
complain endlessly because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re busy 
working to build Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s what most people are doing and we’re going to be 
supporting them by doing that. And I’m sure that other 
members of the opposition will get up and they’ll say that this 
budget is the end of Western civilization as we know it and 
we’re all going to Hades in a handbasket. Because that’s what 
they do. 
 
And I could go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I could talk about 
the young entrepreneurs program that there is for youth in this 
budget. I could talk about the post-secondary graduate tax credit 
that is being implemented to $500 going up to $1,000 over the 
next three years. I could talk about the Green Team jobs for 
young people. I could talk at great length about all of the 
positive things that are being done in this budget. And I’ve only 
had time to touch on some of them. 
 
But I do want to say, just remind people to keep it in 
perspective, that we will always hear and always have heard 
very negative things about everything contained in the budget 
from a government from that opposition party. I’m sure that 
won’t change. 
 
But I want to assure people that on any factual basis, when you 
look at the level of debt and when you look at the level of 
taxation which has been going down in Saskatchewan, we have 
been making considerable progress in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I have every confidence that over the course of 
this term of government we will continue to do so. And this 
budget will contribute positively to that. 
 
So I’m going to rise in my place quite proudly and vote against 
the amendment of the opposition and I’ll be voting in favour of 
this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
. . . Humbly, I stand here and say thank you to the members or 
the constituents of mine from the new constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook and become their voice again in this 
legislature for the problems that this government, this NDP 
government has put upon us in the last four years. 
 
Before I go into the budget speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
would like to take this opportunity to first of all thank the 
Speaker, the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton, on his 
reappointment as the Speaker. I also would like to take this 
opportunity to thank the member from Wascana Plains for 
putting her name forward in this democratic race that we have 
in this province and country. 
 

I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome the five 
members from the NDP side, the new members to this 
Legislative Assembly. I hope that your dreams and aspirations 
as politicians will be fulfilled in some form or another . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And as the member said — shortly. 
We’ll see about that. 
 
I also want to turn to the members on this side of the House, the 
five new members, and say congratulations to them for being 
our representatives in the province of Saskatchewan for their 
constituencies. I know joining the Saskatchewan Party is a 
privilege and a joy. And as time will proceed, we on this side of 
the House will overcome what happened in 2003 and we will 
form the next government and we will start to turn this province 
around so that people in this province have a hope in this 
province, so that they can see a light at the end of the tunnel. 
 
Before I go into the budget speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
would just like to take a few minutes to talk about the new part 
of my constituency. The new constituency ranges from 
Medstead to Rosthern, from Canwood down to the edge of 
North Battleford, and it is a square. It’s a large constituency. I 
know part of that constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, your 
originally home is from there. So you know that constituency 
very well. 
 
That part of the constituency, Mr. Speaker, is basically an 
agricultural constituency. And all the people that live in there 
— after going through the last few years of drought, of BSE, 
problems like that — they understand that the only way they’re 
going to do it is by their own experience and by their own toil. 
 
Because when they look for help from this NDP government, 
they’re not going to get it. It’s been proven for years and years 
they won’t get help from an NDP government. In fact I would 
dare to say that I don’t think agriculture is even on their radar 
screen, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker. 
 
And it’s unfortunate because when you look at Saskatchewan 
years and years ago, how was Saskatchewan built? It was built 
on the toils of agriculture and then that grew with the small 
business. And the two driving wheels of our economy in the 
province of Saskatchewan is, first and foremost, agriculture and 
small business. And so when you look at both those sectors, 
they’re hurting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re hurting real bad. 
And this budget that was delivered here a few days ago by the 
Finance minister does little or gives any help to small business 
or agriculture in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my old constituency of 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood, in those areas I had a lot of the northern 
areas that were in my constituency. And I lost towns and 
villages like Chitek Lake, Leoville, Debden, Big River, Stump 
Lake. Those areas there were more diverse in agriculture and 
they were more towards the forestry area. And I was so glad 
when my leader then give me the portfolio of critic for forestry 
because I enjoyed it. It was part of my constituency. 
 
I still retain a lot of business people in those areas that come to 
me for help. Yes, members from those areas have new leaders 
right now, new MLAs. One is the new member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers; the other one is the member from 
Meadow Lake. But these members still come back to me for 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

help and I don’t know why, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but they do. 
 
I also have gained towns like Hafford, Blaine Lake, Rosthern, 
Laird, Speers, and Leask among others. They look to me as 
their voice to carry on the tradition of an opposition government 
that will bring to this Legislative Assembly their troubles, their 
problems, and present them to this Legislative Assembly. And 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is something that I intend to do. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about my 
campaign team. Because in the last election, 2003, my 
campaign team worked their butts off to see that I got elected. 
 
I would like to thank my campaign Chair, Mr. Frank Zawada 
for the amount of tireless hours that he put into this campaign to 
see that I was elected. I also want to thank members like Jack 
Diesen and David Moe and my president, Les Anderson, for all 
the tireless hours that they put into my campaign, putting up 
signs, setting up meetings. 
 
I also want to thank two ladies: my fundraiser person, and my 
campaign manager, Jody Henderson, for making sure that I was 
at the right place at the right time; that the funds were coming in 
and that the success that I experienced now from that campaign 
as coming out as a victor in that election. 
 
But during that campaign, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to 
relate to the people here today — I know some of you people 
have heard it on the radio, some have not — but during that 
campaign my wife and I were fortunate in one respect and not 
fortunate in another respect, that we were putting signs up in the 
Whitkow area. An area where, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’re 
from so you know exactly where it is, and there was a curve on 
that highway that has caused many accidents. 
 
And that day my wife, Sheila, and I were putting up signs when 
we witnessed an accident right on that curve. A little red vehicle 
rolled in front of us and we were no more than maybe 200 yards 
from that accident. We heard it, we witnessed it, and we did 
what we thought we should do and that was jump in our vehicle 
and run over to that accident. And in there there was two people 
in the car and one person laying on the ground. 
 
And it’s ironic, Mr. Speaker, that we on this side have been 
putting forth petitions about the coverage of . . . cellphone 
coverage and then rural Saskatchewan, like the areas like 
Whitkow, where we couldn’t get cellphone coverage. 
 
Just by the stroke of luck my wife decided she would jump on 
the top of the truck and use my cellphone and, you know 
something, she got through. And she called 911 and we got 
rescue people from North Battleford to come out and they saved 
those people. All three of them today I can report are doing 
well. One of them is from North Battleford and two of them are 
from the North, from Cumberland constituency, one from 
Dillon and one from Patuanak. And I’ve been in contact with 
the two from the North and they’re doing very well, and I’m so 
glad and pleased that happened. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there comes a time for politics 
and there comes a time for common sense. That day my wife 
and I used common sense and it’s a good ending to a story. And 

that was a good story for me during that writ period of the 
election time and that’ll resonate with me for years to come — 
that the 2003 election was something historical for my wife and 
I, to be part of that rescue process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have often said about 
the new part of my constituency is an agricultural constituency, 
and it is. But I find ironic is in this budget is how they’ve turned 
on the farmers, how they’ve turned on rural Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, they’ve turned on urban 
Saskatchewan too but the biggest turn is against rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, we talk in this Legislative 
Assembly day in and day out about that wedge between urban 
and rural Saskatchewan. Well that wedge is getting deeper and 
deeper and deeper. That wedge has to disappear but it’s not 
going to disappear if we see the things that come out of the 
budget like was just presented here in the last week. That wedge 
is getting deeper and deeper and rural Saskatchewan is getting 
hurt and it’s time the hurt stops. 
 
I just want to reflect on some of the things that was in this 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I look at the part that says 
agricultural spending targeted to priority areas. And you know, 
Mr. Speaker, I look at the difficulty the farmers have gone 
through for some years regarding the grain, the drought, and on 
top of that when things are tough this government, all they want 
to do is raise the crop insurance rates. It isn’t bad enough that 
we had BSE on top of the drought. And now the only insurance 
program that is there for the farmers, they’re paying through the 
nose for it. 
 
(16:00) 
 
I mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had many phone calls from 
constituents in my constituency, older farmers that are probably 
50, 55, 60 years old. And those people — pardon me, I said 
older — and those people said, it’s ironic that we’ve worked all 
our lives, toiled on the farm, and now we’re getting close to 
retirement age and everything is gone. 
 
The banker phones up and says, come renew your loans but 
remember, Mr. Farmer, you don’t have any equity. They’ve 
worked all their life and they’ve got nothing. And that’s how 
many farmers feel. 
 
Something has to change. And the only way it’s going to 
change is for a government to come forth that understands rural 
life, that understands agriculture. And that party is on this side, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — We’re the only ones that’s going to change 
that because if agriculture changes, small business changes. 
Then centres like P.A., like Saskatoon, like Regina are going to 
prosper. But it’s got to come from the heart of Saskatchewan 
and the heart of Saskatchewan’s agriculture and small business. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk about what they’ve 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

done to rural Saskatchewan when they closed down the rural 
centres. Where is the people of rural Saskatchewan going to go 
to? 
 
It’s ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Meadow Lake doesn’t 
have a rural centre. There is absolutely nobody, or no centre in 
the northwest corner. The closest is North Battleford. What are 
those people going to do? Where are they going to go to? They 
have no place to go. This is what people in the rural areas are 
trying to say when they say, we’re getting kicked as farmers 
and rural people — and they are. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk about education because 
the Minister of Finance said that a lot of the money in this 
budget is going to go towards health, number one, and 
education, number two. And most people in the province will 
understand that. 
 
But in regards to education, I was flabbergasted when today I 
walked into the Legislative Assembly and on the steps was 
some SIAST students. And they were hurting just like the 
farmers were because their schooling has been interrupted 
because SIAST has gone on strike. 
 
What are these young generation people going to do? They’re 
halfway through the year, some of them just at the end where 
they’re writing exams, and they are forced to put their lives on 
hold. Why is it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when it comes to 
children, we use children as a scapegoat to achieve in this 
province? They don’t have a voice but yet we use them as 
bargaining tools. I feel sorry for those students. 
 
The reason I know that, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, is 
because two gentlemen from Spiritwood are in SIAST going to 
plumbing training. They’ve been there for over a month. They 
spent their tuition. They’re waiting to get the end of the year 
through so that they can get a wage increase. But you know 
something? It’s not going to happen because they’ve gone back 
home. They’ve got a huge bill. They can’t get a wage increase, 
and they’re going to have to wait for another year. Or as my son 
would say because he’s one of them, we’ll go to Alberta 
because there’s no job interruption there and we will go to 
SIAST. The funny thing about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
they’re not coming back. 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to read for the 
record a letter from a young girl from Duck Lake. And this 
lady, this young lady says, “I am from Duck Lake . . .” And 
pardon me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I quote: 
 

I am from Duck Lake, Saskatchewan but I have spent the 
last two years in Jasper, Alberta. Though I was away from 
Saskatchewan, I always referred to it as my home. My 
time in Jasper was meant as a time for me to figure out 
what program I wanted to take as post secondary 
education. Within a few months I decided I would be 
interested in taking an x-ray technician course. I quickly 
applied to SIAST in Saskatoon. Much to my dismay I 
found out that there was a five year waiting list. Five years 
was too long and unnecessary for me to wait. 
 
Since being disappointed by Saskatoon I turned towards 
other learning institutions. I am presently enrolled in Grant 

MacEwan College in Edmonton which gave me a speedy 
acceptance as well as the opportunity for a trouble-free 
transfer to the University of Alberta. My sister is also 
attending the University of Alberta because of the 
unproblematic transfer agreement that is common between 
colleges and universities in Alberta. It is interesting that 
she was an Alberta/Saskatchewan interprovincial college 
but no Saskatchewan institute had a transfer agreement. 
Together with . . . help . . . (from) our parents we . . . (are) 
in Edmonton. We have no plans to move back to 
Saskatchewan. (No plans to move back.) 
 
It is disheartening to know that our home province does 
not offer the academic opportunities that are conducive to 
our educational needs. I would love to move back to 
Saskatchewan but that would be a silly decision if I want 
to get an education I desire. Perhaps it is not a higher 
drinking age that is losing young people to other provinces 
but instead it is inadequate post secondary opportunities. 
Sincerely . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that reinforces a fact that we need to keep our 
young people here. We need to give them jobs. Our young 
people are the future of this province. And I see very little in 
this budget speech that will say that we are helping our young 
people, helping our young people to stay in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The second thing I’d like to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
this orange book that I received, and it says, “A Blueprint For 
The North.” And in there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is some 
very value information that I think the province of 
Saskatchewan, and most importantly our government, the NDP, 
need to look at. They’ve been in power for some 10, 12 years, 
and the frustration in the North is overwhelming and they need 
a change. 
 
And I just want to read a couple of inserts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I quote: 
 

. . . the pouring of people out of the province also is a large 
loss to the revenues needed to help keep the economics of 
the Province in a balanced state. Simply put, the Province 
cannot continue to go down this road. It needs to not only 
retain the current population base, but must put forward 
positive opportunities to attract . . . (young) people who 
will be part of the future of our provincial economic and 
social success. 

 
And you know something, Mr. Speaker? If you read back to our 
platform — the Saskatchewan Party’s platform — our proposal 
was to grow the economy, grow the population, and this is what 
the northern people are saying. So I say to the northern 
members on the opposite side, you have to start listening to 
your own people because they’re saying the same thing that all 
Saskatchewan is. 
 
I also want to bring up shortly, and because my critic area is 
Northern Affairs, is . . . there are four members here from 
roughly northern Saskatchewan. There’s a member from 
Cumberland, from Athabasca, from Saskatchewan Rivers, and 
from Meadow Lake. When this budget was put forth, where 
were they? I know three out of the four are cabinet ministers. 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

How can you stand . . . or how can you sit there and let your 
government destroy the North? 
 
Let’s look at the Department of Environment, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And in there under budget details it shows that there is 
going to be a loss of 200 staff. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
know that in the North it’s hard to find jobs, very hard. And 
now they’re going to take away 200 jobs, 200 jobs in the SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) 
environmental sector. Also that’s just to top it all off; the 
Saskatchewan Environment are going to close offices in 
northern Saskatchewan. And if I look, most of them are from 
the North. 
 
I look at closing the fire bases in Saskatchewan. Where are 
they? They’re all from northern Saskatchewan. How are they 
going to protect the fires up there if they’re going to close the 
fire base centres? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I talked about how the farmers got kicked 
in this budget. Now I’m talking about how the North is getting 
kicked. And it’s ironic; with the four members we have, and 
this is the best they can do for northern Saskatchewan? It’s no 
wonder the members from the North . . . or constituents from 
the North are phoning in and saying, we need to talk to you. We 
need to talk to the Saskatchewan Party because the route that 
we are going with the government today is not right. 
 
I also remember in the Throne Speech, there was some 
opportunity for the North where they said they’re going to build 
the road or finish building the road from La Loche over to the 
Alberta border which will tie up with the road to Fort 
McMurray. 
 
You know something? I was glad because — you know 
something? — to the minister from Northern Affairs, the 
member from Athabasca, that must come as a relief because 
finally that road’s going to get built. I know members have 
phoned me from that area and said, hey we’re finally getting the 
road. But you know something? What they’re happy about, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . that road’s going to be built, and they’re 
finally going to get out of this province and go across the way 
to Alberta to get a job because there is no jobs in northern . . . or 
very few in northern Saskatchewan. And what few there was, 
this government’s taken away. I’m sure the members . . . the 
constituents from northern Saskatchewan are happy with the 
members opposite. 
 
Another thing I want to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
regarding the campgrounds closure, or not closure . . . not 
opening until June 20. Well let’s take, for instance, Chitek 
Lake. Chitek Lake is in the constituency of Meadow Lake right 
now. And right now that’s going to be closed until June 20 — 
June 20. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the May long weekend hits, if you 
don’t come up a couple of days and book a spot or get in there, 
you’re not going to get a spot. And now you know what’s going 
to happen? We’re going to have to go up there and just sit there 
outside the fence because that park is closed down until June 
20. Think about all the jobs, the revenue that that town of 
Chitek Lake is going to lose because they cannot get into the 
park. And that’s just one park, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are 

many parks in Saskatchewan doing the same thing. 
 
And the Minister of Environment, the new Minister of 
Environment stands and said he’s not going to change. Well 
maybe it’s about time he and his members from the NDP party 
start listening to Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
But remember the difficult financial situation that this province 
is in now is because of that government. They put us here, and 
they’re going to have to dig us out. God help them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to speak a lot longer on this, but I 
have to sit down. Other members of my side would like to 
speak. So therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting 
the amendment, but I will definitely not be supporting this 
budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
I am pleased to rise in the Assembly again in response to the 
budget that was delivered last week. This process is certainly 
different from what I’m used to. I’m used to listening and 
listening to all sides and . . . but I will continue on. 
 
Our top priorities are providing public-funded health care and 
education for everyone, not just those who can afford it. This is 
what I heard during the campaign, and this is what I continue to 
hear today. 
 
(16:15) 
 
No question, this was a tough but fiscal responsible budget. But 
by making hard decisions today, we are building a solid future 
for Saskatchewan’s young people. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
young people, particularly the Aboriginal youth, are our future. 
They are here to stay; their home is here on First Nations and 
Métis communities and in urban centres — not in Alberta or 
anywhere else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — As I mentioned in my response to the 
Throne Speech, I am proud to represent the Cumberland 
constituency, one of the largest ridings in Saskatchewan. It has 
a population of nearly 19,000, mostly Cree and Dene people. 
Forty-five per cent of them are under the age of 24, and that 
gives me so much hope and optimism. These are bright young 
people, succeeding despite the many challenges they have to 
face. 
 
I see them excelling in university. I see them excelling in sports. 
The First Nations games are coming up in this coming week, 
and this is where they’ll be profiling some of their talents. 
They’re in jobs. They’re in different professions in my own 
community. I see nurses, community health workers, social 
workers, and the list goes on. And they are proud of their 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

culture. And just this past week we saw one of the largest 
powwows in this province sponsored by the First Nations 
University in Regina here. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government remains committed to 
creating more opportunities for all young people. And I want to 
recognize the contribution that our sport, culture, and recreation 
sectors are making to this vision. And there’s a powerful Cree 
word, in Cree, mītho pimacīsiwin, which means a good life. It 
means so much more than that. It talks about being holistic. 
And that’s what these people who work in these areas have 
done. They have built Saskatchewan. Sport, culture, and 
recreation help develop character, self-esteem, discipline, and 
leadership skills that our young people need for their careers, 
for their future, and for our future. 
 
And as we move into the province’s 100th anniversary, I invite 
all Saskatchewan people — including our young people, the 
First Nations, the Métis people, and the North — to help us 
celebrate our centennial. 2005 is a major milestone in the 
history of our province. And despite the challenges we face 
today, we are a privileged people, and we have much to be 
thankful for. We want 2005 to showcase the same unique spirit 
of co-operation and innovation that built Saskatchewan and that 
will lead the next generation to even greater achievements. 
 
We want to recognize the contributions and the generosity of 
the First Nations people as they welcomed new settlers to their 
lands. We recognize and honour the treaties we signed together 
as First Nations and as new immigrants. I belong to Treaty Six. 
That treaty means we agree to co-exist and to share in all that 
we have. 
 
And this past . . . two days ago I had a visit from the Office of 
the Treaty Commissioner, and he is doing tremendous work in 
building bridges to the future by sharing the true meaning of the 
treaties. These are nation-to-nation agreements, and they are not 
just temporary agreements. They’re here to stay. They’re 
entrenched in the constitution, and the sooner we realize that, 
the sooner we can move forward. 
 
Saskatchewan’s centennial provides us with the opportunity to 
celebrate past achievements and to look ahead. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, youth must be involved in building a bright 
future, and we are doing that. 
 
Through the department’s centennial student program, more 
than 600 jobs will be created this year. Through the Provincial 
Youth Advisory Committee, we are working with youth in 
government decision making, and we are listening. The new 
CareerStart program will prepare youth for career opportunities 
in Saskatchewan and connect youth to jobs. The SchoolPLUS 
model is being expanded to more schools, and we are enhancing 
the post-secondary graduate tax credit. The government’s new 
green initiative will help Saskatchewan students get work 
experience and training in the environment sector. 
 
Our commitment is to make Saskatchewan ready for the next 
generation. To meet the challenge, we are also working with 
our partners in developing a new strategic direction for the 
Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation. We continue to 
believe the community development work is best handled 
outside of government within community organizations and our 

third-party agencies that lead the sectors. 
 
But we must put greater emphasis on developing the core 
leadership skills of the First Nations and Métis youth and those 
of the North. Sports, culture, and recreation have a major role to 
play in building leadership and in continuing to provide a 
quality of life for all people in Saskatchewan. The Department 
of Culture, Youth and Recreation will focus on providing policy 
leadership, strategic communications, effective management, 
stewardship, and accountability of the government’s $60 
million annual investment in sports, culture, and recreation so 
that everyone, including First Nations and Métis youth and 
those of the North, benefit. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of public priorities in health and 
education, we had to make reductions to sport, culture, and 
recreation this year. However we limited the reductions so that 
it would have the least impact on core operations of our partner 
organizations. 
 
In 2004 and ’05, the cultural industry’s development fund will 
receive $300,000; SaskFilm, $900,000; and the film 
employment tax credit, 4.2 million. The Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum will receive 1.7 million. And we will move the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation out of government to 
become a more independent operation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts will receive 425,000; the 
Western Development Museum, 2.4 million; Wanuskewin 
Heritage Park, 500,000; and 100,000 for the Premier’s 
Voluntary Sector Initiative. The Saskatchewan Arts Board will 
receive a $1 million increase for a total of 4.8 million this year. 
And funding to the Saskatchewan Archives Board is up 
351,000, totalling nearly 3.4 million. We will also continue to 
support all program funding through the Community Initiatives 
Fund for a total of 10.3 million in 2004 and ’05. 
 
While our budget is responding to the current fiscal reality in 
Saskatchewan, the Provincial Secretary will continue to 
promote Saskatchewan’s identity, heritage, and the 
achievements of the people of Saskatchewan. And as we 
approach the province’s centennial, there will be opportunities 
for Saskatchewan people to express their pride in the province 
and show their spirit. We will continue working to engage the 
hearts and minds of people of all ages to celebrate the very best 
this province has to offer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by thanking some people that 
helped me a lot the past few weeks and year. I want to thank the 
department staff and also, I believe, some of the best 
constituency workers in the province: Susan Folkersen and 
Anita Jackson in La Ronge. 
 
And I also want to thank the guidance of so many people in my 
home and in my constituency. I’d particularly like to thank 
Allan and Roberta Quandt of La Ronge and so many trappers 
and fishermen and many people, including young people in the 
North, who have shown their support to me in so many ways. 
And I also want to honour and thank my parents. They’ve been 
great role models throughout my life. My father turned 80 last 
weekend and he still fishes and traps. And it’s such a privilege 
to be able to listen to him and get advice from him. And I know 
I’m one of the privileged few that have such a strong family to 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

back me up in these difficult times. And that’s what gives me 
the greatest hope is having parents like that and the large 
extended family that I have and the tremendous support that I’m 
receiving. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
. . . constituency office, Anita Jackson and Susan Folkersen. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (Cree) . . . Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is an honour 
for me to be back in this Assembly to represent the great people 
of the Estevan constituency. My constituency is one of oil 
fields, grain fields, home of Rafferty dam which I challenge the 
members opposite to try and walk across, Boundary dam, 
Boundary dam power station, Shand power station, and the 
Shand Greenhouse just to name a few. 
 
My constituency has expanded to include the very progressive 
town of Radville and its surrounding area. The Radville area 
was previously served by the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy and that member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, represented that 
area very well. And although I know I have very, very tough 
shoes to fill, I will do my best to serve my area along with the 
rest of my constituency to my best capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 I received over 48 per cent of the vote, 
and last fall I received over 51 per cent of the vote. So to the 
people of the Estevan constituency, I say thank you for the 
confidence and trust you have bestowed upon me. 
 
I would at this time like to extend my congratulations to Mr. 
Speaker on his re-election to that role. And I would also like to 
congratulate the member from Regina Wascana Plains for 
letting her name stand for that position. I think she showed a lot 
of courage and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through you I applaud her 
for entering that race. 
 
I would also like to congratulate all members who were 
re-elected. And to the new members on both sides of the House, 
I say congratulations and welcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to extend my best wishes to the 
member from Yorkton. I and every other member of this 
Assembly wish him not only a speedy recovery, but a complete 
recovery. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank my family for 
their love and support. I am proud to have the complete support 
of my family. And we all know — and I am talking about 
members on both sides of this Assembly — we all know about 
the pressures that go along with being elected. We have very, 
very unselfish families and they make huge sacrifices so that we 
can fulfill our positions. 
 
And I appreciate an understanding family that doesn’t put added 

pressure on me because every elected person in this Assembly, 
every MLA’s job as that, will come to an end sooner or later. 
And that is either by our choice or the choice of the electorate. 
So it’s important to do our best to manage our lives to include 
those important to us, because when this is all said and done, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they will be there for us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, unfortunately I lost two of 
my biggest supporters last summer. My dad passed away in 
July, just short of his 86th birthday. He was my number one fan 
and I miss him more than words can ever express. 
 
My mom, bless her heart, lives in Estevan in her own home and 
watches these proceedings faithfully. And I know she’s 
watching now — so mom, I love you. And I would just like to 
thank my parents for the upbringing I had and for the values 
they instilled upon me. And I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that if I ever act untoward and disrespectful toward my fellow 
mankind, it is my doing and it is not something my parents 
should be blamed for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also lost Doug Turnbull last June. Doug 
co-managed my campaign in 1999. He worked loyally and 
tirelessly for me and the Saskatchewan Party. We all miss 
Doug’s advice and guidance, and I was honoured to give the 
eulogy at his funeral at the request of his family. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to thank Ray Walton, 
who managed my campaign last fall. Ray and I were on the 
road for 28 days, and the advice he gave me was immeasurable. 
Under his guidance, our campaign was positive, honourable, 
and honest. So I thank Ray and my entire team. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you are aware, my husband and I — my 
husband Dick and I — own and operate our grain and oilseed 
farm near Macoun. We know first hand the devastation in the 
agriculture industry: high input costs, low commodity prices, 
recent hikes in crop insurance premiums, SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) rate hikes for farm vehicles, high 
education taxes on farm land. And for those involved in the 
cattle industry there was and is the BSE issue. And this was all 
before budget day. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Since budget day we’ve had more bad news from this NDP 
government: cancellation of the farm fuel rebate on retail 
gasoline purchases, a 20 per cent reduction on the rebate on 
bulk farm fuel purchases, cancellation of the conservation cover 
program, and farmers were very disappointed to learn that there 
would be no relief on the education portion of property tax. 
 
This was after reeves and councillors at the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 
told the Premier, and in fact the entire NDP cabinet, that going 
with the status quo would lead to tax revolts. There was also 
closure of 22 rural service centres. The centre in Estevan is one 
that this government chose to close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these centres provided a wealth of knowledge. 
Our agrologist, Colin Beaulieu, was instrumental in providing 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

information and knowledge to those in the area. He is very 
involved in the Estevan community and I, like so many others, 
consider Colin a friend. He’s gone, Mr. Speaker. The crop 
insurance office is gone. In fact, on budget day, March 31, the 
pink slips were delivered to crop insurance personnel at 
approximately 2 p.m. and workers told to go home. 
 
March 31, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the final day that farmers 
could contact the crop insurance office and make changes to 
what crops they wanted to insure and specify the percentage of 
coverage. What a slap in the face for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, not only is this a direct assault on rural 
Saskatchewan, it is an assault on all of Saskatchewan. Because 
if those in the rural communities have money, do you know 
what they do, Mr. Speaker? They go to town and they spend 
that money. I’m reminded of the words of Sir Leonard Tilley. I 
quote: 
 

Destroy the farmer and grass will grow in the streets of 
every city in the nation. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, frankly I’m sick and tired of this old 
NDP government blaming their mismanagement on drought and 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the announcement on budget day of the closure or 
conversion of hospitals is not going to shorten waiting lists. In 
fact, it’ll cause more of a backlog in the system. I would like to 
thank Tracy Grube of Estevan who contacted my office with 
concerns of her father, Dennis Scott. Tracy and her entire 
family have been very courageous and I thank them for making 
the public aware of the severity of these waiting lists. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, since Tracy’s family went public, a 
number of people have contacted the offices of opposition 
MLAs with the hope that they will be shown the respect they 
deserve and their needs dealt with in a timely manner. So again 
I would like to take this time to thank Tracy Grube and her 
folks and wish them all the best. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a reduction in long-term care beds is 
nothing short of kicking our senior citizens and others who need 
this care out of their beds. The government first tried two years 
ago to increase the costs of long-term care by such enormous 
amounts that no one could even afford to stay there. This was 
met with such huge outcry that the NDP government had to 
backpedal on that. Now they’re at it again — preying on the 
vulnerable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I got out my trusted dictionary and I looked up the 
word promise, and here’s how the dictionary describes promise: 
 

A declaration that something will or will not be done or 
given, etc. 
 

Also stated was: 
 

An indication of future excellence or achievement. 
 
Maybe the Premier, the Finance minister, and the others on that 
side have some special NDP dictionary that describes a promise 
as something different, but I think I have listed the true 

meaning. And what the Premier has and is delivering to the 
people of this province is not the promise he made last fall. 
 
He never promised an increase in the PST. He never promised 
hospital closures. He never promised the layoffs of 500 people. 
He never promised a 13 per cent hike in crop insurance 
premiums. And he never promised closure of 22 rural service 
centres. He never promised all the other surprises we’ve been 
dealt. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, he promised the opposite. He said that 
taxes would not go up. Is this NDP Premier a man of his word? 
Mr. Speaker, I say no, he is not. 
 
The NDP Finance minister was questioned by the media on 
January 13 of this year as to whether the government knew 
during the election campaign that taxes would rise. The minister 
responded that it was outrageous but true. But they couldn’t fess 
up during the campaign because it wouldn’t be popular at that 
time. He has also stated on a different occasion that taxes have 
to increase because they didn’t realize the financial situation the 
province was in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the same NDP government, NDP that is 
government now, were also government before the election. 
How could they not know? This is proof that the Premier and 
his government would stoop to any level to retain power. The 
people of this province feel very betrayed when they compare 
the NDP’s glossy campaign document with the budget. 
 
During the campaign there was fearmongering, senior citizens 
being told that if a Saskatchewan Party forms government they 
would have to pay for all their medicines. And incidents such as 
that, and believe me, Mr. Speaker, there are many more 
examples, are the only reason that the NDP are government 
today — fearmongering and, of course, preying on the most 
vulnerable. 
 
This is a disgrace, and how the members opposite can sleep at 
night is more than I’ll ever know. They are clearly without a 
conscience. 
 
In my own constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the 
campaign, the NDP were up to all their old tricks — signs 
destroyed and/or removed, only to have theirs go up in the 
identical spot. This was very evident near the Boundary dam 
power station. I guess the old saying is true, desperate people do 
desperate things. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the NDP seemed to weasel their way into 
the Crown corporations to do a little campaigning. The general 
rule of thumb, at least in my area, is that no campaigning is 
allowed on these sites. We have asked if we could go out there 
and we were told, respectfully, no. And we respected that 
ruling. 
 
But trust the NDP to get in there, and here’s how they did it. 
The minister for SaskPower, who is the member from Regina 
South, decides that he should pay a visit during the campaign, 
and takes the NDP candidate as his guest. And I certainly don’t 
blame the management at the Boundary dam power station. 
Obviously they couldn’t tell the minister that he couldn’t be 
there. 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it didn’t do the NDP 
one ounce of good, because little did the minister know that a 
lot of the employees out there are farmers trying to subsidize 
their income because they can’t make a go of it on the farm. 
 
Last Thursday, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Humboldt 
was responding to the budget, she was speaking of the 
devastation in rural Saskatchewan. The member from Regina 
Rosemont chirped from her seat that sometimes grown-ups 
have to budget. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, perhaps that’s something that this 
government should try. They waste taxpayers’ dollars and then 
go back to those same taxpayers for more money. In the world 
the rest of us live in, the buck stops here. We have no one to 
pass our costs on to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last weekend when I was putting my thoughts on 
paper three of my grandchildren were visiting me at my home. 
And they asked me what I was doing, and I explained it to them 
and I asked them what they thought. And my grandson said, we 
have to grow Saskatchewan. And when I asked him how you do 
that he said, well grandma, we need more population here. And 
his sister piped up and said we need more people and houses. 
And when I asked them what else, they said these people have 
to have jobs; if people have jobs, then they have money and 
they’ll like it here. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these kids aren’t very old. Beau just 
turned nine and Brooke will turn eight next month. But even 
they realize that we have to grow our economy. But I haven’t 
mentioned this to my grandkids, but I will check with them to 
see if they’re interested in giving the Premier some advice. But 
it would have to be done on weekends because they’re in grade 
3 and in grade 2 at school, so maybe we can organize something 
on the weekend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last weekend I spent a lot of time on the phone, 
people calling my home to express their outrage over the 
arrogance of this government. 
 
On Sunday I was at a local shopping mall and every few steps I 
took, I was stopped by people who are just sick over the budget. 
And one person stated to me, he says, you know what, he says, 
there are one group of people that are happy with this budget. 
And he says, they are the ones in the U-Haul business, because, 
he says, they are booked solid by people leaving this province. 
 
Last week the Minister of Environment was responding to 
questions in question period regarding the NDP’s plan to delay 
or cancel summer. He went on to say that we have a wonderful 
park system and we should keep them strong. He also didn’t 
know if it was wise to open parks at the usual time, but he’d 
have to check it out. Why in the world didn’t they do that 
before they made their decision, Mr. Deputy Speaker? He also 
stated that the parks department got an award for increasing 
usage by 11 per cent. Well then why shut them down? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in true NDP fashion they cancelled summer. 
There’s an old saying that if you want to see a short summer, 
borrow some money that’s due in the fall. But you know, the 
NDP have topped that. They just cancelled it. 
 

And believe me, Mr. Speaker, when the parks finally do open 
and people are sitting around their campfires, that they’re now 
going to have to pay for, perhaps having a glass of suds that 
they’re going to have to pay more for, and they’re chatting, I 
can assure the minister that they will not be talking equalization 
payments. Chances are they will be wondering what this NDP 
government is trying to prove, and probably crossing their 
fingers that this government won’t last long. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the NDP Premier and his government 
don’t realize that they have betrayed the people of this province, 
then I offer them my dictionary. I will mark the pages that 
define promise, trust, commitment, and responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, finally I must respond to some comments 
that were made yesterday by the Minister of Health in his 
response to the budget speech. And apparently he was 
dedicating book titles to members on this side of the House. 
And the book title he named for me was, Ring Finger Left 
Hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was involved in a lawn mower accident that 
resulted in my left hand being left in quite a mess. And when he 
was referring to my ring finger on my left hand, I was 
wondering if he was referring to the part of the finger that the 
doctors had to amputate or if he was referring to what the 
doctors managed to save. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that I did have that accident 
but if it had to happen I’m glad it happened back then. Because 
if it happened now I would be on a waiting list and would 
probably end up losing my complete hand or my arm. 
 
I feel that the minister’s remarks were very, very insensitive and 
I would hope that he’d have the decency to make an apology to 
me. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as you have probably gathered, I will not and 
do not support the budget, and I will support the amendment put 
forth by the member from Canora-Pelly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, the 
member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
support of the budget. First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
say that every budget is made, designed, brought in, within a 
context. And there are two contexts that I would like to speak 
briefly about which surround the design and the bringing 
forward of this budget. One is the issue surrounding 
equalization and the other, of course, is the issue of federal 
spending on health and the falling health transfer payments. 
 
If I may, Mr. Speaker, quote from an article written by Thomas 
Courchene who wrote the Courchene report on equalization that 
was in the Globe and Mail on Thursday, March 4, 2004, earlier 
this year. Professor Courchene is a professor of economic and 
financial policy at Queen’s University and senior scholar at the 
Institute for Research on Public Policy. 
 
And he begins his article by setting out what equalization is all 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

about. And I quote: 
 

Canada’s equalization scheme has been called the glue that 
holds Canada together. When the equalization formula is 
revealed to be generating problems, the glue just could 
become unstuck. 
 
Equalization is supposed to work by having the federal 
government top up the revenues of poorer provinces so 
that their per-capita revenues are equal to the average 
per-capita revenues of the five provinces that make up the 
equalization standard (that is British Columbia, 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario and Quebec). 
Equalization’s underlying principle — considered so 
crucial to Canada that it is now constitutionally enshrined 
— is to ensure that citizens of every province have access 
to reasonably comparable public services at reasonably 
comparable tax rates. 
 

(16:45) 
 
Professor Courchene then goes on to describe the particular 
situation with Saskatchewan. And there’s been some discussion 
in this House and a unanimous resolution has been passed. He 
sets it out as follows, quote: 
 

The biggest challenge in making equalization work that 
currently faces Ottawa has to do with the treatment of 
Saskatchewan’s energy revenues. In fiscal year 
2000-2001, Saskatchewan’s energy revenues totalled 
about $1.04-billion. That’s just a little more than $1,000 
per capita. The problem is that these energy revenues 
triggered an even larger decrease in Saskatchewan’s 
equalization entitlements, namely $1.13-billion — a 
tax-back rate on the province’s energy revenues of 108 per 
cent. In other words, under the current arrangements, 
Saskatchewan would not be much worse off if it had no 
energy revenues whatsoever. 
 

And we heard the Minister of Industry and Resources, the hon. 
member from Saskatoon Massey Place, talk about the booming 
mining industry in Saskatchewan and the booming energy 
industry in Saskatchewan which is taxed back by the federal 
government at 108 per cent. 
 

The inequities deepen (he goes on to say) when 
equalization entitlements are compared to revenues on a 
year-to-year basis. Over the 1998-1999 to 2000-2001 
period, energy revenues increased by $668-million, thanks 
to energy rising prices. But this led to energy-related 
equalization offsets of $835-million. This converts to a 
marginal claw-back rate on the province’s energy revenues 
of 125 per cent. 

 
One hundred and twenty-five per cent, Mr. Speaker. Professor 
Courchene goes on to say: 

 
Surely the role of Canada’s equalization program is not to 
expropriate a province’s resource endowments. Yet this is 
precisely what has happened to Saskatchewan’s 
equalization reality. 
 

Professor Courchene goes on to ask, well how did this happen? 

And to answer that question: 
 
The primary reason can be traced back to the early 1980s, 
when Ottawa shifted the formula from an all-provinces 
(national-average) standard to the present five-province 
standard. This took oil-rich Alberta out of the equation — 
and by default, that meant that Saskatchewan would be 
factored in as a relatively rich energy province for most 
energy sources. By the very nature of the equalization 
formula, the province is now subject to higher tax-back 
rates than was the case when Alberta’s energy was 
factored into the formula. 

 
That’s not the only reason, Mr. Speaker. Professor Courchene 
goes on to give the other reason why Saskatchewan is subject to 
the unfair equalization formula that does not apply across the 
rest of the country. There is, quote: 
 

There’s yet another reason for Saskatchewan’s plight, and 
it has to do with the way equalization authorities (who 
report to the federal finance minister) have designed 
artificially inflated tax bases for several of the 
energy-revenue categories . . . 
 
The impact of these artificial tax bases has been to 
increase the equalization offsets for Saskatchewan to an 
even greater degree, leading to a ridiculous situation 
wherein a program intended to make Confederation more 
fair has instead been in effect wholly confiscatory. 

 
Now Professor Courchene doesn’t only set out the problem very 
well, he sets out the solutions. 
 
“How can this situation be remedied?” he asks. Quote: 

 
Two proposals seem appropriate. 
 
The first is a long-term solution: It is simply that the 
continuing dialogue between Ottawa and the provinces 
to rework fiscal arrangements be extended to 
incorporate these tax-back issues, and, indeed, resource 
equalization in general. There is a rather rich literature 
to draw on in this area; most suggests that somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of 25 per cent of resource revenues 
— rather than the 100 per cent as is now the case — 
should be eligible to be factored into equalization 
considerations. 
 
But this approach, while it has much to recommend it, 
will take time. The second proposal can and should be 
implemented immediately. 

 
And I close the quote to say, and this is what the Saskatchewan 
government has demanded. And I may say, Mr. Speaker, in ads 
that deal with a real problem, the problems set forth by 
Professor Courchene, not ads paid for by public money which 
attack health care premiums which don’t exist. 
 
Professor Courchene goes on to say: 
 

Starting with the fiscal year 2001-2002, the earliest year 
for which the equalization books are still open, 
Saskatchewan’s energy revenues should be accorded the 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

same treatment as the energy revenues in Newfoundland 
and Nova Scotia. Specifically, the maximum equalization 
tax-back rate for each Saskatchewan energy-revenue 
category should not exceed 70 per cent. Surely that would 
be more equitable, and more in the spirit of the 
equalization program. 

 
The other context that I wish to raise in connection with this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, is the slow but inexorable decline in 
federal spending on health care, which has declined from 50 
cents on the dollar to 16 cents on the dollar. Every province in 
Canada has protested this — of every political stripe — and 
they’ve all participated in an advertising campaign which I 
guess the members opposite would say is only aimed at one or 
two people and is a waste of the provincial coffers of each one 
of those provinces, including the province of Alberta that’s 
participated in calling for the provincial government . . . or 
federal government to return to something close to an equal 
share in health care spending. 
 
So those are the two contexts in which we deal with this budget, 
Mr. Speaker. One, a province that has been at least in one year 
shortchanged $300 million in equalization and the other, a 
decrease in federal funding to 16 cents on the dollar. And it is in 
that context that this government must address the issues that 
are of importance to the Saskatchewan people — health and 
education. 
 
And I know those issues are important to the members opposite 
because every day at the beginning of the session, Mr. Speaker, 
in question period particularly, they called on this government 
to spend more resources, spend more money in health care. 
Every day they asked that that be done. 
 
And when a budget was brought down, Mr. Speaker, after each 
one of those days, in which we spent more money in health 
care, in which we increased spending in health care by 6.3 per 
cent to a record amount — to 44 cents of our operational 
spending — then the members who’d been calling for increased 
spending in health care said, this government spends too much 
money. 
 
Health care is the number one priority of this government, Mr. 
Speaker. This government is increasing health care spending by 
$160 million, a 6.3 per cent increase. Health care spending as I 
said, Mr. Speaker, counts for almost 44 cents of every dollar the 
government spends on programs and services. This government 
is also increasing education spending by $45 million, a 3.8 per 
cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Within the record $2.7 billion being spent on health care are an 
increase of $223 million in spending. And 72 per cent of that is 
going to health care, 160 million including, including, Mr. 
Speaker: $115 million for salaries, benefits, medical fees for 
service to help attract and retain qualified health professionals; 
$46 million in facilities and equipment including $27 million 
capital and $19 million in diagnostic equipment. And we’ve 
heard the announcement on the new MRI, Mr. Speaker; $6.6 
million more to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency; and $1 
million for prevention projects enhancing diagnosis and 
assessment for fetal alcohol spectrum disorder and other 
cognitive disabilities. Also, Mr. Speaker, there are 72 more 
training seats in the Nursing Education Program and there’s 

funding to the Kids First program for 60 new families to enter 
the prenatal program and receive support. 
 
This is a budget, Mr. Speaker, that focuses on health and 
education, focuses on children and youth and opportunity. A 
budget in which we spent $2.7 billion in health and $1.2 billion 
for education — a 3.8 per cent increase over last year, as I said, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
That includes $24 million in capital improvements for K to 12 
schools and $60 million for post-secondary institutions. It 
involves increasing the post-secondary graduate tax credit to 
$1,000 over four years. In 2004, the tax credit will go up from 
$350 to $500. 
 
It includes launching the Young Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan 
program, creating 200 new child care spaces, and increasing the 
child benefit payments for single parents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is a budget that supports communities. An investment 
of $295 million to fix roads and build better highways, 
resurfacing 325 kilometres of highways, continuing to twin the 
Trans-Canada and the Yellowhead highways, and a further $10 
million in revenue-sharing grants for municipalities — a 13 per 
cent increase over last year. And it also includes, Mr. Speaker, 
$12.6 million for affordable housing construction under the 
provincial housing policy framework. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak just briefly about the justice 
initiatives in the budget. Keeping communities safe is a top 
priority of this government. And we will take measures and we 
will bring legislation into this House to improve community 
safety by introducing new civil remedies to help our community 
and policing partners. Our initiatives will target unlawful 
activities in our communities, and working with our municipal 
and community partners we will send a clear message that such 
activities will not be tolerated in Saskatchewan. When fully 
implemented, four investigators will support the new 
legislation. 
 
The 2004-2005 budget provides $95.4 million to maintain and 
expand policing services, Mr. Speaker. This is an increase of 
$4.6 million, or 5.4 per cent over last year and includes funding 
for five additional police positions to support Aboriginal 
communities. Since 1999, we’ve increased provincial funding 
for police services by $26 million including funding 151 
additional policing positions. 
 
This budget responds, Mr. Speaker, to the Commission on First 
Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform by providing 
$250,000 for the office of the police complaint investigator and 
$126,000 for the expansion of the Aboriginal court worker 
program. 
 
As well, five additional police officers are funded by Aboriginal 
policing. That is nine new police officers provided by the 
provincial government in this budget — the four officers who 
will support the safer communities legislation and initiative, and 
the five additional Aboriginal police officers. 
 
To a certain extent, Mr. Speaker, the criminal justice system is 
similar to acute health care, and to a certain extent, Mr. 
Speaker, it shows a failure to prevent crime. And we need to 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

spend what we are spending in Aboriginal policing in measures 
to improve the safety of our neighbourhoods. We also need to 
address issues at their root. And that is why I am proud — and I 
think the members opposite from some comments they would 
make would be supportive — of the fetal alcohol spectrum 
disorder initiative that this government has begun with this 
budget to identify victims of fetal alcohol syndrome and effect, 
and to assist them and to help them work towards building a life 
that does not involve confrontation with the criminal justice 
system. 
 
That is why I am supportive of the strategies of this government 
that encourage community attachment and school attachment. I 
am particularly proud of the housing strategy that has been 
announced in this budget where we are providing 12.6 million 
new dollars for housing. I am also proud of the $1.5 million 
being added to Kids First and early childhood initiative for 
families facing challenges. 
 
All in all, Mr. Speaker, this budget in health, in education, in 
justice, in addressing the problems of fetal alcohol syndrome, 
addressing the problems of failure of community attachment, 
home attachment, home ownership, in addressing the challenges 
faced by single-parent families, this budget represents a 
fulfillment of the promise of the Throne Speech. 
 
And I spoke in my response to the Throne Speech that I was 
proud to be part of a government that could make tough 
decisions. And there were tough decisions here, Mr. Speaker. 
The sales tax increase of $130 million doesn’t quite cover the 
$160 million increase to health care. But it was a necessary 
decision because, as every member of this House agrees, health 
care needed those resources. So we made tough decisions. But 
they’re governed by compassion. The budget reflects that. 
They’re inspired, as I said in response to the Throne Speech, 
they’re inspired by creativity. 
 
(17:00) 
 
We have a Throne Speech and a budget where tough decisions 
are made, governed by compassion, inspired by creativity. I 
supported the Speech from the Throne. I support the budget, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I look 
forward to speaking on the budget. Mr. Speaker, the budget and 
the Throne Speech was a betrayal to all people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We talk about a rural and urban split in the past few years. But 
with the NDP government bringing down this budget it . . . they 
treated everyone the same. They betrayed everyone — everyone 
in urban centres, everyone in rural centres. They betrayed 
people in the North; they betrayed people in the South; they 
betrayed young and old. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s very disconcerting to the people of 
Saskatchewan to see this budget come down, and especially 
when we look at the campaign that the NDP ran in the last 

provincial election. The Premier and the NDP ran a fraudulent 
campaign and now we see that the Saskatchewan people are 
paying the price in this budget. 
 
People all across this province are now going to be having an 
increase of 1 per cent on the PST which affects everyone in the 
province, every business in the province. And again we see that 
this is another step by the NDP that will drive people out of the 
province instead of attracting people to the province. 
 
What we need is an economic strategy in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, to bring people back to Saskatchewan, encourage 
investment in Saskatchewan, encourage businesses to set up 
their business in Saskatchewan. And all this budget has done 
and this government has done is chase more people away and 
really put up the stop sign at the borders of Saskatchewan, 
where people do not feel that they are welcome in this province 
to set up businesses and to bring their families. 
 
And this is what we need in this province, is a strategy to 
broaden the tax base, to bring more taxpayers in, to have more 
taxes for the government to spend on health care and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government didn’t expect to win the election 
last fall and they are conducting themselves in that same mould. 
Mr. Speaker, before the election, the NDP government were 
just managing decline, just hoping to get to the election and get 
through it. Now with a surprise win by the NDP government 
again, what are they doing? They’re managing decline. That’s 
all they can do. They have no plan for growth in this province, 
no plan for the long-term future of the people of Saskatchewan, 
and of the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget hit hard the people of Biggar 
constituency. Mr. Speaker, in the town of Biggar, the rural 
service centre will be closed and the conservation office will be 
closed. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a serious setback to the 
community of Biggar and the surrounding area. 
 
The rural service centre has been a fixture in Biggar for 
generations, quite frankly. And now not only do we lose two 
employees that, direct employees in the town of Biggar, but we 
also are losing their families and the income that their families 
. . . and jobs and taxes that those people bring to the economy as 
well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Biggar were very concerned to 
see the closure of the rural service centre. And as we know, 
there’s been a closure of 22 different rural services centres 
across the province. And this rural service centre is very 
important to the area, an agriculture area like Biggar 
constituency is, where the local rural service centre provided 
very important service to the farming community — setting up 
meetings, bringing guests in to speak, seminars, and always 
having that office open in Biggar where people could access 
information about government services or the latest problems in 
crop production, disease related. 
 
And the local agrologist, Glenn Barclay, was well liked in the 
province. He and his wife and family lived in Biggar for a 
number of years and he was always on call to go out to farmers’ 
fields and look at crop diseases or help with their farming 
needs. And his services are going to be sadly missed. 



April 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

And the same thing with the conservation officer, one 
conservation officer in the town of Biggar serving a large area. 
The fellow’s name is Doug Lucyshyn, and another person that 
served the area well, and now he and his family will be pulling 
up roots and leaving the province, Mr. Speaker, and moving on 
to other areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now we come to something that is very critical 
now that we’ve seen the loss of our rural service centre and the 
conservation office. But now there’s talk of downsizing of 
hospitals and closures. And just to quote from the government’s 
own news release: 
 

. . . changes in health delivery are required and will 
include further administrative efficiencies, changes in staff 
mix, facility closures or conversions, and reductions in 
long-term care bed numbers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is devastating to the people of Biggar 
constituency and people are very concerned in the Biggar 
constituency. 
 
In the town of Biggar we have a hospital, a special care home, 
of course ambulance and EMT (emergency medical technician) 
service. In the town of Wilkie, health centre with attached 
special care home. Those two communities are in the Heartland 
Regional Health Authority. In the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority, there’s Borden with a health centre, Lang with a 
special care home, and Delisle with a health centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in those communities are very concerned 
about adequate health care, and always seen from the 
government in the past when they close hospitals or the word 
conversions take place that means less service for the people in 
those communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if — and I say if — there was some benefit 
to the province as a whole by moving people out of rural areas 
into health services in the cities, what we could say, well at 
least there’s some improvement. But what we’ve seen in the 
past, Mr. Speaker, when the government has closed hospitals 
and had conversions of facilities, all we seen, all we saw was 
increased waiting lists in the main urban centres, in the 
hospitals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do not see and the people of Biggar 
constituency don’t see the government making any changes to 
improve that situation. All they see is losses back home in their 
area and no improvement in the health care facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the budget was announced there’s been a 
number of calls and inquiries to my office that are concerned 
about the rural service centre, the closure of the conservation 
office. But other cutbacks in agriculture are also very, very 
important, and the elimination of the farm fuel tax on gasoline 
and propane bought at retail outlets, 20 per cent reduction in the 
rebate on bulk farm fuel purchases — Mr. Speaker, this is at a 
time when agriculture is really at a crisis. 
 
We have the serious BSE situation with the border still closed 
to the markets around the world. In our area in particular, it’s 
still the drought area. We’ve had some moisture but it’s going 
to be a dry spring unless we get rain soon. We’ve had the 

government raise our crop insurance premiums and now with 
this budget we’re losing rebate money from the farm fuel 
purchase, the cancellation of livestock and horticultural facility 
initiative programs. 
 
It just goes on and on, Mr. Speaker, the closures and the 
cutbacks, including not only in agriculture but the 12 provincial 
parks will not open till mid-June. And something that really 
affects the health of people and the safety of the people of 
Saskatchewan, they’re also talking about increasing water 
testing fees, Mr. Speaker. So rural Saskatchewan has been hit 
very hard and the people of Biggar constituency has been hit 
very hard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Biggar constituency have asked me 
to bring their concerns to the legislature. And through petitions 
that will be coming soon concerning the loss of the rural service 
centre and the conservation office in Biggar, and also the 
possible closures of health care facilities and conversion of 
health care facilities, Mr. Speaker, the people of Biggar 
constituency are beginning a letter-writing campaign and will 
be signing hundreds of petitions. And I will be more than happy 
to bring them to the legislature and present them to the 
government, and relay the concerns of the . . . Biggar 
constituency has towards these cutbacks in the Biggar 
constituency and rural Saskatchewan in general. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen that the government has betrayed the 
people of Saskatchewan. They have no long-term plan and the 
people of Saskatchewan are very, very concerned. 
 
I’m getting calls all the time at the office, wondering about the 
upcoming non-confidence vote on Thursday. And they’re 
hoping and they’re wishing that this government would fall, so 
that changes can be made to improve this province, instead of 
continuing on the same road that we’re on of decline and 
cutbacks and increased taxes to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget, but I will be 
supporting the amendment brought forward by the member 
from Canora-Pelly. And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Biggar that the debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt that motion? 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:11. 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................397 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................397 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................397 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................397 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................397 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................397 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................397 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................398 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................398 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................398 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................398 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................398 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................398 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................399 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................399 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................399 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................410 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Tartan Day 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................399 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................399 
 Saskatoon Photographer Wins Five Awards 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................400 
 Passing of Bill Hodgins 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................400 
 International Order of the Daughters of the Empire 90th Provincial Meeting 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................400 
 Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................401 
 Canadian Blind Sports Association National Goalball Championships 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................401 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Reaction to Decisions Made in Budget 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................401 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................401 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................402 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................403 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................403 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................404 
 Policy Regarding Volume Discount for Beer Sales 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................405 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................405 
 Commitments Made During Election Campaign 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................406 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................406 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................406 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................407 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................407 



 

  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................408 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................410 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................414 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................417 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................420 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................423 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................430 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


