















































Hansard: April 05, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 13B  MONDAY, APRIL 5, 2004, 7 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 371 
 April 5, 2004 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South, the 
Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It’s my pleasure to resume my remarks 
tonight to talk about the 2004-2005 Saskatchewan provincial 
budget, to talk about what it does for Saskatchewan people, and 
how it helps by investing in the future of our great province. 
 
Tonight I want to focus my remarks on three key areas: those 
are the decisions that we made around the Department of Health 
and the funding for that; the decisions we made to find 
incremental revenue . . . incremental expenditure dollars for the 
Department of Education; and the decisions that we made 
around the revenue sources that were available to this 
government and the choices we made in terms of finding a 
sustainable balance within our budget expenditures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those in our province today who say that 
this budget does not provide enough. I must tell you I hear this 
from just about every one of the members opposite who come 
forward and call for more money on special projects that they 
want to see funded. 
 
I can tell you that I hear this within . . . key stakeholders within 
our own sector of learning who say that they wanted to see 
more money for education. I hear this from people who provide 
health care services who too wish that there was more money 
for health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that I share the sentiment of those 
people who wish that there was more for health care, more for 
education. But I am also with those taxpayers who say that we 
must bring our budget into balance and that we must do so in a 
way that makes sure it is sustainable into the future. 
 
There are a number of things, Mr. Speaker, that our government 
will do that are as a result of the decisions we’ve made within 
our budget. There are a number of things that this government 
will do over its four-year term that are not related to this budget, 
that in fact involve our legislative agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I take a look at where we are going and in 
terms of the priorities that have been laid out in the Throne 
Speech of this province that was introduced a little over a week 

and a half ago — and it has been followed up by the four-year 
plan of this government in its budget and it’s been laid out in 
the performance plans for each of the sectors that’s been 
attached to the budget — I know that the decisions that we 
make in this Assembly during this session will lay a solid 
foundation for this province as we enter our second century in 
2005. 
 
Nowhere, and there is no single group that I think is more 
important that this budget focuses on than our commitment to 
youth and to the agenda which will help move forward the 
issues which will help to make sure that we have a 
well-educated, well-trained group of young people who can 
take their rightful place in the provincial economy of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that this budget, from my 
perspective as the Minister of Learning, does a great deal in 
terms of advancing the initiatives that we have spoken of in the 
Throne Speech and indeed that we spoke of in the provincial 
election campaign — that this budget provides new money for 
training; it provides new money for the K to 12 system; it 
provides money to help keep property taxes down. It provides 
new money to make sure that we can see growth in terms of 
excellence within our research sector and it provides new 
money to make sure that we have continued opportunities at our 
post-secondary institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes, these expansions that we have seen 
within the learning sector, are significant. There is just over $45 
million worth of new spending in this budget that is dedicated 
directly to the learning sector. That includes a 1 per cent 
increase to SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology). That includes 2 per cent increase to our 
universities. That includes new money for funding to the 
College of Medicine to deal with the accreditation issues. That 
provides for additional money to deal with training initiatives 
and it is a budget which provides new resources in the area of 
early childhood development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is every section of this budget that pertains 
to the learning sector that has an increase. I don’t hear the 
members opposite ever talk about that. I never hear them talk 
about it. In fact all I heard today in terms of a reference from 
one of the members opposite was to say that the University of 
Saskatchewan was dissatisfied and that 2 per cent was not 
enough. 
 
I too read these comments by the University of Saskatchewan in 
the paper. The fact that 5.7 million more dollars will go to the 
University of Saskatchewan this year I think speaks highly to 
what this government has pulled together in terms of a budget 
— $5.7 million more new money to the University of 
Saskatchewan. That is a significant, significant increase. That is 
on top of the more than $150 million that annually 
Saskatchewan taxpayers put into that one institution alone. 
 
This budget provides us with new resources for the University 
of Regina. It provides us with new resources in the area of 
research. One of the new changes within this budget has been 
the decision to transfer the Innovation and Science Fund from 
the Department of Industry and Resources over to the 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

Department of Learning. We have done that because we 
understand that there is an integral linkage between the research 
that’s undertaken in our universities and the quality of the 
education that students receive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we went further than that in terms of not simply 
repriorizing it and moving that over so that there’s a closer 
linkage and a better synergy. We went further than that and 
added $2 million more for research into that Innovation and 
Science Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are significant enhancements for our 
university sector. These are significant changes that will 
provide new money to make sure the universities can keep 
tuition rates down, to make sure that there is more money for 
research, and to make sure there’s good, quality education. 
 
The members opposite don’t believe that that is enough. And 
yet they come forward with no plan and no alternative and no 
suggestion and no credibility in the issue in terms of how to 
deal with the funding of our universities and our post-secondary 
education sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that when 
we take a look at where the priorities of this government are, it 
is clearly in three main areas — health care, education, and 
agriculture — because these are the three largest benefactors in 
terms of our spending increases. Yes, those spending increases 
have meant that we have needed to increase our taxes. It has 
meant that we needed to find the revenue because we did not 
want to undertake more significant cuts into the public sector 
and into public services than what we have already announced 
in this budget. 
 
We decided instead that we wanted to repriorize; we decided 
that we wanted to strengthen our post-secondary sector; we 
decided that we wanted to put a focus on young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite will say there is nothing 
new in this budget. I can tell you there is new funding; I can tell 
you there is a new priority in here as we go to expand the 
graduate tax credit that this party promised in its election 
campaign and is fulfilling. 
 
We have implemented in this budget now a $500 per year credit 
for graduates, $500, which allows those recent graduates to 
shelter more than $4,500 worth of their income from tax. That 
allows a tax shelter for graduates of more than $4,500. Why 
have we done that? We have done that because we want to 
ensure that young people have an opportunity to get a good start 
on their careers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
say oh, we’re not going fast enough. The members opposite say 
we’re not putting enough in. The members opposite say that 
they are on the side of the angels, and they say that we should 
increase expenditure, and they say that we should cut taxes. 
And they say so knowing, knowing that in this last provincial 
election campaign when we asked Saskatchewan people who 

they trust to make the tough choices that is government, they 
opted for the New Democratic Party under the leadership of the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I listened to the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose opposite. I have welcomed his participation in 
this House in the short time that he has been here. I can tell you 
that he has added a great deal to the debate in this province and 
he has helped make it clear to Saskatchewan people what the 
alternatives and the options were in that provincial campaign. 
That member provided a campaign platform that was clear in 
terms of what their agenda was, as have we. 
 
Saskatchewan people on November 5 picked who they trusted. 
They picked who they trusted. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 
it was not the member for Rosetown-Elrose and it was not the 
Saskatchewan Party. And so while I welcome the advice that 
they yell across in this House, I can tell you that as we look 
forward to building our agenda, that we look to the campaign 
platform, that we look to the discussion that we had with 
Saskatchewan people and we will move that forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have provided new funds in this budget for 
education because we believe in education, because we believe 
that young people should have access to high-quality education, 
because we believe that our universities can generate 
employment because they can generate research, because they 
can generate innovation. And we support that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have put more money into health care. 
The single biggest increase in this budget in new money goes 
into health care. 
 
In 1999, the provincial budget was spending about 38 per cent 
on health care. This budget introduced this past week now 
provides 44 per cent of the spending, of its spending, is 
dedicated to health care. Forty four per cent and we believe — 
and I think everyone in this House believes — that that number 
will continue to grow. 
 
Today we spend more than $2.7 billion on health care. How can 
we afford it? Well we afford it because we have made health a 
priority. We afford it because in this particular budget, while 
there is $160 million more going into health care, we have been 
able to offset some of that by having $130 million increase in 
the provincial sales tax. 
 
This was a tough choice. This was a tough choice but, Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you it was a choice that was based on what 
we believed matched up with Saskatchewan people’s priorities 
in that they wanted to see increases in the Department of Health 
because, as the members opposite stand up and do every day in 
this House, they call for more health care services. At the same 
time then they stand up and criticize us for attempting to fund it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at the increases that are going 
in, it is interesting to note that more money is required simply to 
fund the health care budget than we will take in out of the 
provincial sales tax. Now the members opposite, I know, have 
little to say about that. I know the members opposite don’t have 
a great deal to say about the initiatives now that are in this 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

budget that this health care funding will go to. 
 
I can tell you that when I look at this from the perspective of 
Regina and southern Saskatchewan and I see the fact that 
there’s $2 million in additional funding in this budget to make 
sure there’s another MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) here in 
Regina, I know that that is exactly what Saskatchewan people 
want because they want to make sure that people have access to 
that advanced diagnostic equipment. I see $1.8 million more in 
this budget to make sure that we’ve got CT (computerized 
tomography) scanners. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members ought to be quite 
cognizant that the purpose of this Assembly is to allow 
members to speak up individually, and they ought not to be 
impeded in that. I ask all members for their co-operation. 
 
I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
When I look at this budget and I see the priorities and the 
decisions that this caucus has made and this government has 
made, I am proud to support this budget because it puts in 
increased capacity for Saskatchewan people to get access to CT 
scans, to be able to get access to MRIs. And we know that there 
will be a 40 per cent, or more than 40 per cent increase in the 
number of MRIs that are done in this province. 
 
This is a positive step forward. This is an important step 
forward, and it does this within the context of a publicly funded, 
publicly administered medicare plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is an important concept, and that is something 
that we need to make sure that does not get lost in the debate. 
And that is that we are putting more money in to protect 
medicare and to make sure that we continue to have access for 
all Saskatchewan citizens to these services. 
 
Are there wait lists? Yes. Are there wait times? Yes. And are 
we doing something about it? Absolutely. Absolutely, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also note that there is $2.5 million more in this 
budget for high priority surgeries. Despite the fact that 
Saskatchewan today is tied in terms of the number of 
arthroscopic procedures, in terms of the number of hip and knee 
replacements that are done, the fact that we are on the national 
leading edge in terms of providing these procedures, we know 
there’s more demand. 
 
(19:15) 
 
What we need to make sure is that we have the resources in 
place to do that. The Action Plan for Health Care that was 
introduced, the increases in the budget that are there to fund 
these, the increases for advanced diagnostic technologies, the 
increases that are there for the drug plan, the increases that are 
there for new services, these are all there within the context of 
medicare. 
 
The members opposite will say medicare doesn’t work. They 
will say it doesn’t work and we’ve got to have private clinics. 
They say we’ve got to have access to private MRIs. They say 

that we have to allow in privatization of that health care system. 
I tell you this, Mr. Speaker. The only reason the Department of 
Health is under attack is because the members opposite do not 
believe in a publicly funded, publicly administered medicare 
system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The members opposite will say there is 
not enough access to our health care system. Forty-four per cent 
of this province’s budget today goes to health care — 4.5 
million visits to doctors, 4.5 million visits to doctors. This is a 
huge number, Mr. Speaker. We see more than 100,000 surgeries 
done in this province. We see the largest numbers of surgeries 
done for hips and knees. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan health 
care system is under stress, but it works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — As I listen to the members opposite 
speak from their seat, I am shocked, absolutely shocked at what 
they say which can be deemed as nothing more than an absolute 
condemnation of the men and women who work within the 
health care system — that they would say that this is treated in a 
callous way, that they would say that people are dying because 
of inaction. This is not what this budget serves to do. This 
budget puts more money into health care and increases our 
funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I listen to these members opposite, as I listen to 
them talk about how we need more for everything — more for 
health care, more for education, more for provincial parks, more 
for public services, more privatization . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Now I would just ask members 
to maintain the order — not for two seconds or three seconds or 
ten seconds. The members should distinguish between a heckle 
and a harangue, and what I’m hearing is harangue. I would ask 
members to cease on that, members on both sides of the house. 
 
Why is the member from Regina Coronation Park on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: —Mr. Speaker, I am requesting leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank my hon. 
colleague, the member for Regina South, and all members of 
the legislature for granting me this opportunity to introduce 
some friends in the government . . . friends of the government, 
some friends in the trade union movement seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The list includes Rick Byrne, the regional director of the 
Canadian Labour Congress; Larry Hubick, the president of the 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour; Judy Boehmer, Wanda 
Bartlett, Chris Banting, Marv Michael, Bob Bymoen, Greg 
Eyre, Lily Olson, Dan Bichel, and Gord Gunoff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government caucus had an opportunity during 
the break to meet with this fine group of friends, and I thank 
them for meeting with us. It’s always good to meet with friends. 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming this esteemed group. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This budget that has been introduced in this House balances the 
increases for demand on provincial services, on public services, 
with the ability of Saskatchewan people to afford those. It 
balances the need for us to repriorize within existing 
expenditures and to make sure that there are new expenditures 
in priority areas. It balances between those issues the 
Saskatchewan people have asked for us to deal with, and it does 
so in a way that takes into account the need for new revenue at 
the same time that we need new expenditures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that health care has been 
rising at a rate of more than 6.6 per cent annually since 1999. It 
is interesting to note that the cost of growth within the 
education system has exceeded the growth either in GDP (gross 
domestic product) or in terms of inflation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to meet these needs, in order to meet the 
demands that we have for new services and continued 
excellence in our public services, we have made the difficult 
choice to increase the provincial sales tax. Mr. Speaker, I can 
tell you that this choice was made as we took a look at what the 
overall needs were within the province, and I can tell you that it 
has been a difficult one. 
 
We know that the provincial sales tax increase will have an 
impact on an average family of about $130 a year. I note, Mr. 
Speaker, that we should also be aware that this year we 
continue to rebalance income tax and that there was, in fact, a 
benefit to the average Saskatchewan family of about $70 a year. 
The overall net impact will be about $50. That is, Mr. Speaker, 
that is I think affordable when we take into account the benefits 
that are coming in here. 
 
I listen, Mr. Speaker, to the folks across the way, the members 
of the opposition who now throw on their guise as the friend of 
labour. As I listen — and I see the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose who’s just aching to get back into the debate 

and talk about where the deadwood is, that he said — I know 
that those members are just thinking about how it is that they 
wish they could have implemented a hit list that they had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, budgets are about making tough choices, but 
they’re about making these tough choices based on fair 
assumptions. And that is exactly what this budget does, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When we take a look at where we are at in terms of our 
expenditures, where we’re at in terms of our revenues, where 
we’re at in terms of our priorities, I can tell you that it has been 
a balanced approach. 
 
I want to conclude tonight by talking very briefly, very briefly 
about an issue which comes up regularly and that is the 
education property tax. The members opposite have spent much 
of the first many days in this House petitioning against the 
implementation of the Boughen report. They introduced I think 
what may well be a record number of signatures petitioning 
against the implementation of that report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you in this budget we have provided $28 
million in new revenue to municipalities and school boards to 
make sure that the impact on their pressures to deal with 
property tax increases is mitigated. That is $28 million, Mr. 
Speaker. The members opposite say, of course, that that is not 
enough. 
 
So the members opposite have stood in this House now and 
introduced petitions for day after day after day calling for us not 
to implement Boughen. They then stand up in the House and 
say, when are you going to implement Boughen? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, which is it? Do they want to listen to their 
constituents who said don’t implement it? Or do they want to 
listen to the lobbyists who say implement it? Or do they want to 
at some point come up with any kind of a consistent policy in 
terms of where to move forward, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I can tell you this. We will in the coming weeks bring forward 
to this Assembly a plan to deal with restructuring in education, 
for us to bring back into line, to bring back into line an 
educational infrastructure which is now stressed in terms of its 
sustainability as we have declining enrolment numbers, as we 
have now 3,000 fewer children going into kindergarten than are 
graduating out in grade 12, as we have pressure on us to make 
sure that we maintain services throughout this province, and as 
we have pressure, as we have pressure from taxpayers who say 
they do not want any more to pay for that system. 
 
Whether it is through a new sales tax or whether it is through 
continued property tax, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you what I will 
present is a series of options that I believe will give legislators 
an opportunity to come together to take a look at what is the 
best set of options and I would hope, I would hope to find 
consensus in terms of how we can move forward. And I will 
welcome the advice of the members opposite and their ideas 
and their genuine sincere commitment to move forward on this, 
as we do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tonight I want to conclude by simply saying that 
this budget was based on a number of choices that were 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

difficult, that this budget was based on what I believe were the 
principles Saskatchewan people told us they wanted to maintain 
— high-quality health care services, high-quality education 
services, and support for agricultural sector. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this budget does that. 
 
I congratulate the Minister of Finance and my colleagues for the 
budget that they have developed and introduced, and I will be 
supporting this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I am very 
pleased to enter into this budget debate. It’s a fairly devastating 
budget for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I hear the rumblings like from the member that just spoke. 
There’s a couple of sad things about it. The budget itself is sad 
but sadder yet is when the member from Regina South can get 
up and he actually believes what he is talking about. And that’s 
sad. That is very sad for the people of Saskatchewan when he 
talks, when he talks about fairness. 
 
Tell us again. Tell us again, a $75,000 ad — how fair it is. Tell 
us how this whole fairness thing works. Tell us. Can this 
government be trusted? Can these members be trusted? Did 
these members, were they honest during the campaign vis-à-vis 
what this budget does? 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the budget took place, travelling around the 
city, constituency, Moose Jaw, and here, here are some, here are 
some words. Here are some words that I copied down that the 
people of Saskatchewan are saying about the budget. Not us, 
not the members over there, but the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s only a few of the words that I can 
actually use in the House. Arrogant. An arrogant group of men 
and women over there. 
 
They talked about the budget. The budget was a disgrace. It was 
shameful, dishonourable, because they are talking one thing and 
doing another. Deceitful — and I think we’ve heard that from 
members of our side talking about the budget. But this is people 
of Saskatchewan that are talking about it. Purposely misled. 
And that is what people are saying that the members opposite 
were doing in the election campaign, now to the budget — 
purposely misled the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I had people say that they were duped. Now that’s a good word 
because they were duped by the socialist government over 
there, the socialist campaigners. 
 
Disloyal. They failed the people of Saskatchewan because they 
were untrustworthy. Disingenuous, untruthful. Really what they 
were saying, that was an untruthful group of men and women. 
My favourite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member for Wood River. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — . . . favourite word that was used by one 
constituent was mendacious and that’s exactly what those men 
and women were doing. They were acting in a mendacious 
attitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I sat here and listened to the budget it was 
extremely, it was extremely interesting for me. I had the 
opportunity to have my son here and he sat right behind my 
place. He got here a couple of hours early so he could get in line 
and sit here. And, Mr. Speaker, my son has spent the last 10 
years in Alberta where so many of our young men and women 
have been. Him and his fiancée moved back to Saskatchewan in 
May. They moved back partially because I talked them into it, 
thinking that there was going to be a change in this province. As 
soon as the budget was over, as soon as the budget was over he 
said to me, Dad, I guess I move back to Alberta. 
 
That is how bad this budget is and yet members over there have 
the audacity to stand up and say, it’s good, it’s going to keep 
people here. Welcome to reality; welcome to reality. Hello, the 
light’s on; nobody’s home over there. 
 
When men and women around this province start talking . . . 
and I have been receiving, and I’m sure everybody has been 
receiving piles and piles of e-mails and letters and phone calls 
related to this budget and the lack of foresight in it, a typical 
socialist budget. 
 
Here’s one. And I’m going to paraphrase some of these because 
I would be here all night to read all of the letters and e-mails 
that I’ve received. Why doesn’t anybody call the budget like it 
really is? Rural people are being punished by the NDP. 

 
And the bottom line in this one, and it says and I quote: 
 

They’re alienating us quicker than the feds did, and they 
have the audacity to blame it on health care. They show 
such disdain for our intelligence. We are the only 
intelligent people in the province — we didn’t vote for 
them! 

 
And that’s why the people of rural Saskatchewan feel they’re 
being punished. And tell us again; tell us again how fair that 
group of men and women are over there that orchestrated this 
budget. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, on that note there’s a couple of quotes that I 
would like to read in. This is the way people are thinking today 
but I would like to make a couple of quotes: 
 

The problem in this province is that . . . (the) government 
has spent way, way too much. 

 
Who said that? The current Premier. Quote from Hansard, May 
31, 1991. As Yogi Berra would say, déjà vu all over again. 
 

. . . Saskatchewan people have said enough is enough. 
They want a government that will begin to set a goal of 
living within its means. 
 

Who said that? The current Premier back in the earlier days. 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

. . . we need a government in this province that views the 
treasury as a trust . . . not as a trough. 
 

Who said that? The current Premier. There is a bit of a pattern. 
 
Then we get the current Finance minister and he’s probably 
pretty proud of some of the statements he made back in the 
1991 time frame. 
 

Well now it all begins, it seems to me, with the simple 
truth: if you spend more than you bring in, you’re going to 
have a deficit and you’re going to have problems. 

 
That’s from the current Finance minister, Mr. Speaker, the 
current Finance minister. And he has the audacity to sit in this 
house and say he’s got a balanced budget. We know there’s 
been four consecutive deficit budgets and yet he’ll sit in this 
house and try and pass it off as a balanced budget. That is not 
being truthful with the people of this province and that seems to 
be a theme from those members is not being truthful to the 
people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a whole bunch of quotes here. Here’s one 
that I also like: 
 

Why don’t you cut out the waste, cut out the 
mismanagement? Save the taxpayers some money. Waste 
not, want not. Why don’t you follow that approach for a 
change instead of gouging and gouging and gouging and 
gouging the way that you do? 

 
That was the Minister of Finance in 1991. And what, Mr. 
Speaker, is that Minister of Finance and those men and women 
doing right today? Tell us again. Tell us again how fair it is. 
Only $75,000, you’re trying to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
how fair it was. Tell us again. 
 
Can they be trusted? Can the Premier be trusted? Can he be 
trusted to tell what’s going on and tell the truth about what’s 
going in this province? And I think not. And the proof is in the 
pudding on the deficit budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to talk on the Throne Speech, and 
we had at that time talking about how this government was 
going to support rural Saskatchewan. Well that was a bit of a 
joke in the budget. And it’s not a funny, ha ha type of a joke 
because the people out there are hurting, and then they got 
slapped. They got slapped by this government. 
 
When I talked in the Throne Speech debate about the cattle 
industry in this province and how we are shipping the cattle out 
to Alberta to be fed, we’re shipping our feed to feed them. And 
we’re shipping our young people. And what do we do? Tack on 
a sales tax. Can any man or woman on that side of the House 
tell me how that is going to help our cattle industry in this 
province? Will it save one animal from being shipped to 
Alberta? I think not. And yet they can stand in their place and 
say, we’re supporters of agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these have been read into the record before, but I 
think it’s worthwhile to note how some of these attacks on rural 
Saskatchewan, how this government betrayed the whole 
province of Saskatchewan but how they really took attack at 

rural Saskatchewan — the closure of 22 of the province’s 31 
rural service centres; closure of 9 Saskatchewan Environment 
offices. 
 
I’ll get more into health care in a little while, but they’re closing 
health care facilities and converting some. And yet the member 
that just spoke has the audacity to stand up and say how good 
health care is, and there’s nothing wrong with waiting lists, and 
there’s nothing wrong with people dying on waiting lists. He 
has the audacity to say that in this House. 
 
Reducing the number of long care beds, the seniors . . . and I’ll 
get more into health, but that’s just some of the things attacking 
rural Saskatchewan. How are the seniors going to put up with 
this in rural Saskatchewan? This is an attack on seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a 20 per cent reduction on the rebate of bulk farm 
fuel purchases. That is sure going to help rural Saskatchewan, 
isn’t it? Cancellation of the farm family opportunities initiative 
and Conservation Cover Program. There’s another great one 
that helps rural Saskatchewan. I can just see people clamouring 
to vote for these socialists just because of they’re doing 
something like that. 
 
Increased park fees. And I will have more to talk about on 
increased park fees because how ridiculous can these people 
be? Putting up . . . There’s pages and pages of fees that are 
being put up. Oh, but we’re fair; we’re fair. Tell us again; tell us 
again how fair we are. This is the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
ad, and it says tell us again how this whole fairness things work. 
 
Can they be trusted? I suggest they cannot be trusted at all. 
 
Now in the park fees that have gone up, it’s quite interesting. 
We hear them shortening summer. The minister can stand up in 
his place and say well, we saved $100,000 and we’re going to 
put it to good use. Mr. Speaker, how much is it costing 
businesses? How much is it costing other people out there? 
 
There’s not a socialist amongst the group that consider anything 
about the businesses. That’s a socialist budget — you tax, you 
tax, you gouge. You pull everything in but don’t take one thing 
into consideration for the businesses. 
 
We talked to one business and he figures he’s going to lose 
between 30 and 50,000. That’s one business associated with the 
park. But it’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, because we’re saving 
$100,000 by putting rocks on the entrance to the parks. 
 
How much is it going to cost to hire somebody to put rocks at 
the entrance to the parks, I might ask. A hundred thousand 
bucks? That might even cost $150,000 by the time you get them 
there and take them away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is just absolutely ludicrous the amount of 
increases that have gone up —like I say, pages. But the one that 
caught me probably the worst is the one, is the one that deals 
with taxing after death. Because the fees went up for 
registration when a child is born — we know under this 
government we’re taxed all our lives — but now when you die 
you’re getting it again. You’re getting it in the ear after you die 
because they’re upping the rate from 600 to $900 after you’re 
dead. They can’t even leave a poor body alone; they’ve got to 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

throw more tax on it. And now they’re all sitting there happy 
and laughing about it. They think it’s funny and they think it’s 
good. 
 
It is a slap, it is a total slap at the people of the province. 
 
And we hear members get up and they talk and they say well, 
well, over there, you people on the other side of the House, tell 
us where you’d get the money from. Well I’d like, I’d like to 
show you one place where there’s money available, and I’m 
reading from the budget, and it says: 
 

Investment Saskatchewan has a mandate to invest an 
estimated $50 million annually in commercial investment 
opportunities . . . 
 

Fifty million dollars a year to compete against private business; 
$50 million to get the government into business of being in 
business — that’s a socialist way. 
 
Now if the government would get out of the way of private 
business, this economy could and would grow. But when the 
government starts tinkering in business it impedes growth. And 
I’d like to hear from the masters of industry on that side of the 
House just how well some of their investments have worked. 
And I’m going to enlighten you somewhat. And I’m going to go 
back a few years but we’ll start looking at some track record of 
how this government . . . 
 
And they just are talking about another $50 million a year of 
investing, but we can go back to such things like Guyana. Well 
that’s okay, Mr. Speaker, that was only a couple of million 
dollars. 
 
How about NST (NST Network Services of Chicago)? How 
about NST? Well we only lost $16 million in NST. That was 
small potatoes. Oh, speaking of potatoes, I’m sorry about that, 
that was a Freudian slip. Yes, we only lost 28 million on 
potatoes, and it’s climbing. 
 
How about Retx.com? Now again, these giants of industry from 
that side of the House getting into the dot-com market, Mr. 
Speaker. Well Retx only lost 14.5 million and they’re pretty 
happy about that. It was only 14.5. How about tappedinto? Oh 
we didn’t even worry about that; that was only a couple million. 
Clickabid, yes, that’s only a couple of million too. 
 
Well Navigata got up there a little bit more — 13.5 and 
climbing. There’s more in there now. How about Coachman 
Insurance? That’s only 17.2 million. 
 
And of all the great things, and after we heard from the current 
Premier and other people about how gaming — this is back a 
number of years ago — how we can’t draw money from 
gaming, now it’s their livelihood basically in government. So 
they went into mega bingo. Well that’s only a few million 
dollars; that was only $8 million or something. Craig Wireless, 
10 million. 
 
The point being, Mr. Speaker, these are investments that that 
government made and these are losing ventures, and . . . and we 
have people over there who get up and say, you guys, where 
would you get the money from? Do you know what this little 

sheet adds up to, Mr. Speaker — $312 million, 312 million. 
Now I’d like somebody to get up on that side of the House and 
tell me how good this loss of 312 million was for health care, 
how good was $312 million for education. How good was the 
loss of $312 million for long-term beds in rural Saskatchewan? 
Get somebody up on that side of the House to say, oh it was a 
good thing, it was the right thing to do. 
 
Well I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there is money 
available if it’s looked after and managed right. But these 
people, these people have this whole fixation that the only way 
anything will work is if government get their fingers in it. And 
proof is in the pudding, Mr. Speaker. When government gets 
their fingers in it, it doesn’t work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear an awful lot from the, we hear a lot from 
the people getting up on that side of the House and they have to 
have something that they can talk about. So what are they 
saying? We’re investing in health care. We’re investing in 
education. We’re investing in a green economy. 
 
Has anybody over there yet got up and told us what a green 
economy is? They don’t know. They don’t know what a green 
economy is. They can say there’s wind power, that’s green 
energy, but what is a green economy? 
 
They took away the cover crop. That was a green economy 
item. But what is it? So they’re getting up and speaking on 
rhetoric after rhetoric and the sad part is they’re actually 
believing their own rhetoric. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we see things in the budget and it is 
just rhetoric. We talk about improving the transportation 
efficiency in roads. How do they do that? If you remember of a 
year ago or so, the then minister of Highways got up and said, 
well we’ve got a plan for the highway system; we’re going to 
make farmers carry their grain in the wintertime so it doesn’t 
hurt the roads. That’s the kind of plan that comes out of the 
NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a long letter from a constituent of mine 
that deals with one of the roads. And I’d be glad to table it, but 
she is very much concerned for her and her children’s lives by 
travelling Highway 43. And it’s been mocked by members 
opposite when we get up and cite petitions of Highway 43. It’s 
only been going on for about three years. And what do these 
people do? Nothing. 
 
A friend of mine was killed on a highway just outside of 
Assiniboia about three years ago from potholes in the road, and 
then something was done. And that’s this lady’s concern, is 
they’re going to wait until somebody is killed because of the 
lack of repair of this road, and then maybe something will be 
done. But she says it’s a total unacceptable risk for them to 
drive on the road. And this lady goes on and it says, please 
don’t tell me our hope lies with the recent address, or the rather 
non-address, in the budget. 

 
That is how, that is how people of this province actually think 
of this budget. There is nothing in there for rural people or for 
highways, although they got a big amount of money scheduled 
for it. 
 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

But, Mr. Speaker, now I want to talk a little bit about health 
care. We’ve heard health care from that side of the House — 
we’re investing in health care, we are doing everything for 
health care, we’re the only people in this province that can do 
anything with health care. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Well I would suggest let’s take a look at the record of health 
care in this province. In 1993, in 1993 the budget was roughly 
$1.5 billion for health care in 1993. The NDP government 
closed 52 rural hospitals — 52 rural hospitals. Mr. Speaker, can 
any member over there get up and tell me how much it saved by 
closing 52 rural hospitals in 1993? Let’s hear the loud chirp 
from the member from Moose Jaw North. Can he get up and 
say how much money was saved by that? Because, Mr. 
Speaker, shortly after that the budget kept going up and up and 
up and the waiting lists kept going up and up and up to the 
point, Mr. Speaker, where today we’re spending $2.7 billion on 
health care, the waiting lists are the worst in the country, and 
they say it’s good. 
 
So they are saying that closing 52 rural hospitals was good 
because now we’ve got a waiting list. Before we didn’t have 
one. And now we’ve got a waiting list that they over there can 
be proud of. Well, Mr. Speaker, they should be ashamed, very 
much ashamed of what they have done to the health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and now they’re saying well we’re going to close 
more hospitals. How much did closing the Plains save them? 
Has anybody ever stood up in this House from that side and 
said closing the Plains saved us X number of dollars and 
shortened waiting lists? I think not, because it’s not true. 
 
And so now they’re talking about closing more health care 
facilities. What are they trying to do, save more money? They 
didn’t save it before. What is the rationale behind it? 
 
I wonder if any person on that side of the House ever looked at 
how it’s managed. Even the former premier of this province 
says throwing money at the health care system is not the 
answer. There has got to be some fundamental changes. 
 
Do they have the will to make the changes? They have the 
audacity to stand up in the House and say oh, we’re making 
changes. Have they announced anything other than up taxes and 
close hospitals? What else have they asked for or done in the 
health care system? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go on a bit about the MRI. I spoke 
about the MRI three or four months ago. And I was asked and 
said, was I in favour of a new MRI in this province? And my 
answer was very simple. It said why don’t we utilize the ones 
we’ve got? We do not have the men and women to run the three 
MRIs we have. We don’t have them. So is buying another one 
going to help? If we can’t even run three, how can we run four? 
Is there a plan from those people to have more, more 
radiologists running them? No there isn’t. They can sit and talk 
rhetoric but they can’t even run the three that we’ve got. 
 
And so driving the other day, driving the other day a young 
person had said to me, when you go into a mall as a young 

person they’ve got these machines that you can go in and have 
your picture taken. You insert quarters in and you get four 
pictures taken or whatever it is. And I got thinking if this is 
what the NDP government was thinking about the MRI. You 
could design an MRI where you go in and you pull out 11 $100 
bills and you shove it in and you get self-service MRI. Is that 
what they are thinking about? Because they don’t have the men 
and women to run the ones we’ve got, so how the goodness are 
we going to run another one when we can’t run the ones we’ve 
got? So is that, is that good planning? Is that helping the health 
care system? Is that going to reduce the waiting lists? I would 
like somebody from that side of the House to get up and explain 
to me how this is going to help. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I also want to touch base of the 
increases to the health system. Now I met with my local health 
. . . a local hospital, not the health authority. I met with the 
hospital board and they said to me, over the last few years from 
this government, every penny, every penny of increase went to 
wages. Nothing for inflation, nothing for any program. As a 
matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, in this hospital they said they had to 
cut services. They had to cut services because they were given 
no money. Now the members get up and say, we’re putting 
another $163 million into health care. Where is it going and 
how is it helping the people of this province? Mr. Speaker, this 
is absolutely ridiculous of how this is being run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know my time is getting long here. I’m not 
trying to compete with the previous speaker although he was up 
a lot longer, but I do want to, I do want to read parts of a letter 
or an article that was sent to me recently . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the member from Prince Albert couldn’t 
tell the difference. He’s so engrossed in potatoes over there yet 
that he couldn’t tell the difference anyway. This letter is from 
The Calgary Sun and it’s immediately after the election. And I 
would like to read parts of this letter because it . . . I’d like to 
read it all but time won’t permit me. It says: 
 

Flight of the bright: Young flee socialist Saskatchewan in 
hordes. 

 
Weep for Saskatchewan. Last week our neighbouring 
province was sentenced to four more years of socialist 
rule. Of course, nobody inflicted an NDP government on 
(Saskatchewan). They did it to themselves . . . 

 
And it goes on: 
 

There is no denying it: Saskatchewan’s default state is 
socialism. It’s not that Saskatchewan doesn’t give birth to 
entrepreneurs, investors, conservatives and others who 
typically vote to shuck off big government. It’s that more 
and more of those kind of people are fleeing Saskatchewan 
. . . 
 
Premier Lorne Calvert’s win will only speed up this trend. 
Saskatchewan loses 500 citizens a month more than it 
gains — the only province other than Newfoundland from 
which Canadians are fleeing. 
 
Alberta, by contrast, gains nearly 5,000 a month. 
 
Those migrants aren’t seniors — they’re young 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

Saskatchewanians, typically after they finish high school 
or university . . . Seniors on pensions might like big 
government, NDP-style, but young entrepreneurs with 
young families don’t. 
 
It’s a bright future. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, this is an article in The 
Calgary Sun and I think it says it all. People in this province are 
tired of a socialist government. Yes, they won; they won the 
seats through a fear campaign, through a fear campaign that 
obviously worked. 
 
I got a letter, received a letter today from people that work at 
Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw. And I spoke about this 
during the Throne Speech, how this group of men and women 
or their people had gone in and just put the fear into the 
members at Valley View. And I commented about how these 
are the most vulnerable people in our society and somebody had 
the gall . . . And I don’t know which one of those over there 
would stand up and say they’re proud of what they did. I don’t 
know if any one of them would. There are some that I think 
might, because some of them think that is funny that they can 
get up and scare people to that extent. 
 
Well I received a letter today from Valley View and the NDP 
are now talking of closing it. After they put that fear into the 
people at that facility and now they themselves are talking 
about closing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely cruel. So I would like again for 
all of those members over there to tell us again how this whole 
fairness things work. Tell us again how they can be trusted. Tell 
us again how the Premier can be trusted. 
 
I’ll be voting for the amendment and not the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is good to enter the 
budget debate, along with the Throne Speech debate. 
 
One of the themes I talked about on the Throne Speech, what 
the legacy of this government is going to be, and with the 
budget it never changed. It is going to be one, people are going 
to talk about this government, will be with disgust and contempt 
again. It will be of losing people in Saskatchewan, of basically 
writing off rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You look at 19 quarters of population loss out of 21. When 
people look back under this government’s regime in ’91, of 
what has happened in rural Saskatchewan, what has even 
happened throughout Saskatchewan — a province with the 
potential here to grow, to grow with the agriculture and the 
mining and the forestry and the tourism, all the things that this 
province has and they haven’t grown it in 12 years. 
 
The economy is suffering. They are running deficit budgets the 

last three years. How shameful is that under that regime? 
 
When you look at this budget, there is no change in that — no 
direction and no hope to grow this province. And that is what 
this budget talks about, that there is absolutely no hope to grow 
this province, and that’s what the people are talking about. They 
were looking forward that maybe this government would be 
bringing something forward that would help grow this province 
— some long-term plans, some long-term ranges that were 
going to help. 
 
What did they get? 
 
I will start with the parks. We’ve talked about tourism. Over 
there they have talked about tourism, a green and prosperous 
economy. Numerous times they have gotten up and said what 
great potential there is for tourism — the Environment minister 
over there, many ministers have mentioned in their speeches. 
 
What have they done to tourism? Not opened the parks, most of 
the parks until the middle of June and they did not even get it 
right in their brochure. I mean what kind of message does that 
send out to people? This brochure is sent out all through the 
country, outside to the United States. These people come, look 
at this brochure, thinking a park is open, getting there the 
middle of May, June 1 — it’s not open. They aren’t going to 
come back. When they go home, they’re going to tell the people 
that. 
 
How can you not promote tourism? That is one of the mainstays 
of this province, along with agriculture — the many things that 
can grow in this province. And they basically cut that back, 
saving roughly they feel . . . they are not even sure. The 
minister couldn’t even say; he thought maybe $100,000 at that. 
 
Well I talked to the manager of the golf course at Harbour Golf. 
He figures closing Douglas is going to cost him $50,000 for that 
loss of time, for people that aren’t going to come there and 
camp, because a lot of people come there with their families. 
The guy goes golfing; the wife will take the kids swimming 
lessons. They will camp out. He says they’re not going to come 
there. They’re going to go to one of the other parks that are 
open, one of the few parks, so they’re not going to come. 
 
But he said there’s lots of people that came there and lots of 
examples of where guys have phoned him now and says they 
were booked in for a tournament and they’re not going to come 
there golfing for that, till . . . basically it doesn’t open until the 
middle of June. So he figures he’s going to lose up to $50,000 
worth of business. That’s a golf course that they lease from this 
province. 
 
How is that going to help . . . how is that going to help grow 
Saskatchewan, this budget? And these people have talked about 
how is that going to help grow this province, Mr. Speaker, at 
that end of it. 
 
You talk about infrastructure and highways. I’ve read numerous 
petitions about highways. They’ve talked about how important 
it is in the Throne Speech, how highways and transportation is 
to tourism up north and to business. 
 
I mean we have highways that are basically beat. I’ve got one 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

from 15 Highway running east from the junction of 20 to the 
junction of 6 that you can’t even drive a vehicle on. You know 
it’s just a total, total wreck and a shame. Yet people that will 
come down there with a motorhome. They never come back on 
that highway again and that’s impacting the growth of this 
province. 
 
Business that wants to run down 15 Highway — it’s probably 
the only corridor running east from there in the province to west 
and the trucks can’t go down it. So nobody wants to put any 
business out in that area of the province because basically you 
can’t get your goods in or out on that, or if they are they’re 
beaten. 
 
I’ve got Bergen Industries; they make trailers. He said, we used 
to pull them into Saskatoon to sell them. He says: we pull them 
in; we’ve got to repaint them, there’s so many stone chips going 
down some of them highways there. He says, that’s an extra 
cost, he says. How can I compete with other businesses at that 
end? 
 
That’s what impacts out in rural Saskatchewan. That’s why 
there is no businesses growing. That’s one of the reasons, 
because there is no infrastructure out there. And that budget 
does not address that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another area is agriculture, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 
Yorkton — and I wish him well — if he’s watching that budget 
on TV, he must have felt . . . I don’t think he felt that good, felt 
betrayed. Because he, at least he, I think he fought it, tried to 
fight at the cabinet table for some money for agriculture. But 
the current minister they have, I don’t think did any fighting for 
agriculture at the table. He basically just kind of, ah whatever 
they want to take, let it take out of there. 
 
(20:00) 
 
We can start with the closing of 22 rural service centres. With 
value-added coming into this province or that’s how . . . one of 
the areas we want to grow. There’s many new crops that people 
are looking at growing, at developing, whether it’s . . . my area 
is . . . coriander is a crop that the first time I heard of it was last 
year. I had a neighbour grow it. 
 
Losing the agrologist and the rural service centre in that area is 
going to be an impact on a lot of them growing these new crops. 
They say they can use the Internet, but you look at the average 
age of farmers out in our area where, 55 years old, 50, a lot of 
them don’t use the Internet, don’t use computers. 
 
They dealt with the rural service centre, they dealt with an 
agrologist person-to-person. They had somebody that came out 
to their field, looked at the wheat problem with this different, 
different crops they’ve got out there. So it’s definitely going to 
be an impact on it. 
 
Plus a lot of the programs that are out there, crop insurance. 
You look at what this government has did to that — increases 
again to crop insurance and reducing the rates. Now how is that 
going to help agriculture grow? They say they want more 
people on it. I think if you check the stats when the crop 
insurance is done, it’s going to be down this year because 
people just basically can’t, can’t afford it at that end. 

Another thing on agriculture, basically we can talk about 
they’re not committing the final money to CFIP (Canadian 
Farm Income Program) on their 88 per cent. I’ve talked about, 
how they talk about the feds don’t do their commitment. Does 
this government follow through on their commitment? 
 
I can remember the member from Yorkton — I said in the 
Throne Speech and I’ll say it again — he said that we will be 
funding CFIP 100 per cent. Our commitment is we’re doing our 
40 per cent and that is our commitment. And obviously the new 
minister decided to renege on that. 
 
They talk about this budget as a . . . well basically it doesn’t 
have a name. A lot of my constituents would like to give it a 
name but I don’t think I could use a lot of them here, and 
because I think I would be sat down. I could see they could be 
embarrassed about this, about this budget. 
 
As a new government, or new, newly elected government, the 
people were — put them in just by slim, very slim majority — 
were looking for some direction, some hope. I think that’s 
going to change next election. Like I say, I think the disgust and 
the contempt is growing. It has grown through rural 
Saskatchewan. But it’s going to be growing into places like 
Yorkton with the agriculture end of it; Meadow Lake, where 
they already lost, Melville last time. 
 
It’s creeping into the cities and it’s going to stay for a long time. 
And basically the hurt and the disgust for this government is 
going to stay for a very long time at that. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
is going to be their legacy. 
 
They talk about hospital closures, Mr. Speaker. We’re cut to the 
bone out there in rural Saskatchewan. Over the last four years 
of my term I’ve read numerous petitions dealing with health 
care — Davidson, Imperial, Craik centres. These are small little 
hospitals but they still have two doctors there. You close them, 
people are looking at travelling 40, 50, 60 miles for broken 
arms, stitches. 
 
A lot of people . . . It’s going to be very hard closing long-term 
beds. There’s waiting lists out there already in rural 
Saskatchewan in these small centres. How is closing more beds 
going to help? How is it going to help the cities? I mean, it 
doesn’t address that. It should be addressing that there should 
be more beds out there, more money to keep these facilities 
going. And this budget is looking at closing more beds and 
closing more facilities at that end. 
 
Also we can talk about the fees that are going up across the 
board, water testing fees. How is that going to help the small 
towns that are already dealing with crunches out there? 
 
They changed the per capita which isn’t going to help a lot of 
the small towns. They were hoping that the formula would be a 
little different on them. They have, a lot of them have major 
changes to make to water treatment plants due to the new rules 
and regulations that are coming in from SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) and the Environment. 
 
They won’t be able to deal with that in that budget. There is no 
money in this budget to deal with that. I don’t know what towns 
are going to do. I’ve got a couple of small towns in my area that 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

just say, we don’t know what we’ll do with it. 
 
When the regulations come in, we’re either going to have to 
turn the towns over to the province and let them basically run it 
because we can’t afford it. We can’t borrow money. We can’t 
run deficit budgets like the province does. Mr. Speaker, those 
are the problems that they’re out there facing. And those are 
problems that weren’t addressed in this budget. 
 
There’s many things that weren’t addressed in the budget. 
Basically the property tax relief out there wasn’t addressed. 
That was a promise that was made by the Premier two years ago 
and talked about it again this year at SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), and basically just I would 
say betrayed the voters out there. I mean there were people that 
honestly thought he was going to deal with that, that took him at 
his word, that aren’t going to take him at his word any more at 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Talk about the fuel rebate on gasoline. You know agriculture, 
they talk about how agriculture has been taking a hit over a 
number of years. And who do they hit the hardest in this 
budget? It looks like it’s agriculture at that end of it. 
Elimination of the fuel tax rebate at retail outlets and the 20 per 
cent reduction on bulk fuel purchases — that’s going to be a 
major impact on farms out there already that are already on the 
cash crunch, dealing with the BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) out there. 
 
In the budget there was no money for BSE. And we don’t know 
if the border’s going to open. I hope it does but I, honestly I 
don’t think it’s going to. And if it does, I don’t think the price 
of cattle are going to be down for quite some time. And there is 
nothing in the budget dealing with the long-range plans on that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I haven’t seen in this budget anything about growth for this 
province; anything for long-range plans; anything to bring 
population back to this province to make it grow. Like the one 
member said, the only thing that is growing unfortunately is the 
deficit — something that some of the members rallied against at 
hard in the ’80s and now all of a sudden it doesn’t seem to be a 
problem to them any more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The sales tax going up 7 per cent — I mean that’s hard on 
everybody, Mr. Speaker. That’s not going to encourage 
business from one end of the province to the other. 
 
Basically this budget is a budget by, to me, a dying, dead 
government that has no ideas out there, that it’s . . . that is going 
down but with it unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, is taking the 
province down with it. And that is very sad. Yes. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Estevan on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — With leave to introduce a guest. With leave to 
introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Estevan has requested 
leave to make an introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, and thank you to the 
member from Arm River-Watrous for his . . . for allowing me to 
interrupt his speech. 
 
And I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through 
you to all members of this Assembly, a gentleman that is 
certainly no stranger to this Legislative Building. His name is 
Craig Dutton, and he is seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
And Craig was a former principal secretary to Premier Devine, 
and he does now have a law practice in the town of, city of 
Humboldt. So I ask all members to join me in welcoming Craig 
here this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Talking about rural 
Saskatchewan, I’ve got the closure of the Simpson School 
coming up, possibly the Semans School coming up — two 
schools going down in my constituency. Last time there was 
one in Marquis that went down. That’s a recurring occurrence 
out there in rural Saskatchewan, the closure of schools. 
 
You know why, Mr. Speaker? Population loss. There is nothing 
to grow these towns, no businesses, and that’s throughout 
Saskatchewan. I mean, look at Regina; it hasn’t grown. You 
know, Moose Jaw hasn’t grown; P.A. (Prince Albert) hasn’t 
grown. This province is not growing. 
 
Talking about health care, Watrous has put the money aside for 
a new hospital, waiting for the government to commit their 
share. They’ve waited for a number of years. There was nothing 
I see in this budget that’s going out for capital expenditures like 
Watrous. Outlook was another one that made an announcement 
where they promised that construction would be beginning this 
year on the Outlook hospital. Still waiting for the ground to be 
broken on that one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the Watrous one, they’ve worked a long, long time to put 
that money together, and their hospital is in very bad shape. 
They’re looking for the government for their commitment, a 
government that hasn’t kept a word at that end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that just seems to be almost a theme of this government of 
breaking their word on numerous promises, especially through 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

the election year, Mr. Speaker, and it just seems to be growing 
at that end. 
 
One of the things going on about Davidson, with the Craik, two 
very small hospitals there — people are very worried there that 
they’re going to be closed, the beds there. There is waiting lists 
on the beds right now, and the members don’t take that in 
account. 
 
They don’t know, I don’t think they have an idea what it’s like 
when you have, when there is no bed out there for a loved one. 
That’s probably the hardest thing as an MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) to deal with them kind of calls, when 
you’ll get a call from a distraught person whose mother they 
can’t get her in the home at a time. They can’t look at her. 
There is no money in this budget for extra even home care. 
These people are at their wits’ end. They can’t care for these 
people at home. There is no beds for them anywhere. And I 
can’t see them calls being addressed in that budget coming up, 
Mr. Speaker, at that end of it. 
 
With that, I cannot support this budget. I will be supporting the 
amendment and I know the people in my constituency are not 
supporting it. I’ve been told numerous times that if there was 
any way that you could possibly defeat this budget or this 
government, go for it. Some of the members over there, if they 
vote with this budget they must not have much of a conscience. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont, 
the Minister of Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to be able to share with you some thoughts on the 
budget tonight, and through you to the members of the 
Assembly. I’ll just start out by clearing the air on the question 
of, do I support the budget? Yes I do, Mr. Speaker. Do I like it 
all? Well no I don’t, Mr. Speaker. There’s many things I would 
like to do. 
 
I’m always very ambitious for the work of the public service 
and for government, but I have found out the hard way in my 
own personal life that sometimes when things don’t go the way 
you expect them to and when your revenues are not exceeding 
your expenditures sufficiently, that you have to make 
adjustments. And I don’t think anybody ever likes to do that but 
when you listen to any financial planner one of the first things 
they say is that you have to do that if you want to in fact 
increase your overall prospects of long-term financial success. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, over the years we’ve had Action 
Saskatchewan, the mayor in Regina, many people identifying 
that attitude is the main issue for growth in Saskatchewan. And 
the one thing I haven’t seen change in the entire time that I’ve 
been in this legislature is the attitude of the opposition. They 
will continue to criticize everything about Saskatchewan, 
everyone in Saskatchewan, and every effort that anyone makes 
to improve Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, I took the time to read the c.v.’s (curriculum 
vitae) of the newly elected people over there and I actually was 

surprised at the very high calibre of background — surprised 
because these people would be experienced enough to know 
that in business it’s not always what you do but there is such a 
matter as the climate for your area of business. And I would 
have thought that people with the background that many of 
these people had would have a little more respect for the facts 
and a little more respect for what it takes to credibly run a 
budget. 
 
(20:15) 
 
And so I’m a little surprised to see one member after the other 
stand up with not more innovative ways of how to save and 
redirect money, but 1,000 more ideas on how to spend money. 
And I just don’t see that this is really getting us anywhere. 
 
I want to go to the issue for a moment, and I know it’s 
controversial, Mr. Speaker, but I want to go to the issue of rural 
services because for many years businesses have been closing 
in rural Saskatchewan. And I guess it’s a bit of a 
chicken-and-egg problem. But if you ask people why those 
businesses are closing, it’s because people drive right past them 
and go into the larger centres to do their shopping. 
 
We have the same issue with many of our rural service facilities 
out there. People drive right past them and go into the city 
where they believe they’ll have access to more specialists or 
access to a higher level of service. And the fact of the matter is, 
is you cannot force people to use a local service if they are 
determined to use a different one. 
 
And I think there has to be a little reality about where the 
population is choosing to live in Saskatchewan and that there is 
some obligation at some point to have funding follow the trends 
in population. 
 
The other thing I want to mention, which is just a fact and there 
doesn’t seem to be any acknowledgement of it, is that we have 
the highest number of long-term care beds of anywhere in 
Canada. And there doesn’t seem to be any acknowledgement of 
that as well. It’s just a fact. 
 
So I see a lot of this negativity driven by ideology, not by facts. 
And it’s troubling again, considering the calibre of people that 
have been elected who I thought would have a little more 
commitment to a factual debate in the legislature. 
 
The other night I was at a banquet, and I was sitting with 
someone from central mortgage and housing. And I said, you 
know, people talk about population loss in the province, and yet 
I see all these big boxes going up; I see a lot of business 
expansion in Regina; I see very good numbers for new housing 
starts. So I said to this person, what’s your opinion on why 
there’s all this business activity, and yet we keep having reports 
of population loss? 
 
So he shared with me that from 1996 to 2001 we did suffer net 
out-migration of 18,452 persons. However, the census tells us 
that the province grew from 372,820 households in 1996 to 
379,675 in the 2001, which is a net improvement of 6,900 
households. And certainly we have seen a great deal of 
in-migration and he said to me that most of that, of people 
forming households, is from Alberta. And I will explain in a 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

minute, Mr. Speaker, why I think that is in terms of 
affordability. 
 
But in that time period when I mentioned that 18,000 people 
had left, 89,639 people in-migrated to Saskatchewan, 87 per 
cent of which were from other provinces; and the remainder 
were people who came in through international migration. 
 
Now why would folks be choosing Saskatchewan to establish a 
household? Well again if you look at the facts, Mr. Speaker, 
from the Leader-Post, on April 1, 2004, there is an intercity 
comparison of taxes and household charges for a two-income 
family at a $50,000 income level. And this includes — I’ll just 
quickly run through the list — income tax, tax credits and 
rebates, health premiums, retail sales tax, gasoline tax, 
mortgage cost, property taxes, home heating, electricity, 
telephone, and auto insurance. 
 
So the base on which this was compared was the same from 
province to province across Canada. So what does it tell us? In 
Vancouver that package of services is $23,090. In Toronto it’s 
$23,292; Calgary, 17,317; Halifax, 17,765. 
 
Then we get down to the 15,000 folks: St. John’s, 15,876; 
Charlottetown, 15,692; St. John, 15,611; Montreal, 15,827; 
Winnipeg, 15,053; leaving us, Mr. Speaker, with the very 
cheapest place in Canada for a total package for a household — 
$14,383 in Saskatoon. Now that’s I think a pretty plain fact. 
And in fact, when I talked to our mayor he says, I don’t know 
why people keep complaining because the facts don’t prove it 
out. 
 
And why is it that intelligent business people with a background 
in economic development are unwilling to acknowledge the 
facts about the fact that this is just one heck of a terrific place 
for families to live? Certainly the CMHC (Canada Mortgage 
and Housing Corporation) stats would prove out that people are 
making that decision. But no, we have instead a group of people 
led by the member from Swift Current, who have an ideology 
about business. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t like to attack people individually, 
but when you look at the background of the newly appointed 
leader, the fact of the matter is, is that he doesn’t have business 
background. His huge dedication to the private sector is all 
theoretical; he’s never actually tested himself in the waters of 
the private sector, a little like the member from Wood River 
who has also spent his entire life living on the public purse. So 
what we have here is a theoretical commitment to an ideology 
but no particular desire in their own lives to walk the talk. 
 
We look for indications of what their policies are and are 
confronted with a blank policy page that indicates absolutely 
nothing about what their policies are. 
 
Then we find out that the new Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party worked for John Gerich, Devine’s caucus Whip and 
associate minister of Economic Development and Tourism. 
Well I don’t have to say too much. Anybody who knows the 
history of the time knows what that member must have 
witnessed in that particular situation. 
 
And when we talk about new ideas, the economic policies that 

we’re seeing put forward by the members opposite would make 
Adam Smith turn in his grave. These are policies that haven’t 
been around since 1790. So I just . . . that before people start 
talking about growth perhaps they should walk the talk and 
actually get involved in a little business activity of their own. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — When we . . . actually the member — 
although the folks at home wouldn’t necessarily benefit from all 
the side comments here — wonder about my business 
background. 
 
Well in fact I have run several businesses, Mr. Speaker, and 
very successfully, and in fact got an award and was nominated 
for a business award when I was a member of the chamber of 
commerce in La Ronge. What can you do, Mr. Speaker? Some 
people are just natural risk takers, and others aren’t, and there 
doesn’t seem to be a lot that you can do about that. 
 
But I do want to speak for a moment about some of the 
comments the member from Wood River made about losses in 
Crown investments. Again, any business people would know 
that there is no way to be 100 per cent sure if you’re perhaps 
part of an investment firm and you’re deciding what to invest in 
to benefit your shareholders, your stockholders. And what you 
know, that in any portfolio you’re going to have some losses 
and some that make money. But what is important, Mr. 
Speaker, is that overall you have a net profit in your portfolio. 
 
Well overall since SaskTel started investing in international 
investments, they are net 111 million to the good. And in fact 
many of the businesses cited by the member today are moving 
into their five-year success that most small businesses 
experience when they’re going through the trajectory towards 
success. 
 
So when we talk about what the priorities are in this budget, 
well obviously public health care is one of our great priorities 
because it’s what differentiates us from other places in the 
world where people lose their businesses, their homes, and have 
to sacrifice everything, even for the cost of having a child, 
never mind having a serious illness. We live next door to the 
United States where 40 million people aren’t covered by any 
kind of health care. We’ve seen exposés on the home care down 
there where many seniors are just tied in their beds. Many are 
not fed properly. 
 
We don’t have that kind of a system here because it’s not the 
kind of system we believe in. We believe in a publicly funded 
system where people are treated with dignity and where there’s 
fairness in the application of the system. And that system there, 
the HMOs (health maintenance organization) that run people’s 
health plans, even tell them which doctor they can go to see, 
which services they can get. And your chances of getting 
private insurance go down if there’s any chance you might 
actually need it. 
 
So it’s not the right kind of system, and I think we need the full 
support of both sides of the House here to continue to support a 
public system in Canada, even though we do know that we have 
to make changes continually to improve this system and the 
way it works. 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

As you know, 85 per cent of all increased spending in the 
budget went to health care, so I think it’s pretty clear that this is 
a very substantial priority. The next increase to education and 
then the next most substantial amount to rural Saskatchewan . . . 
and I think that does reflect the priorities of people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to speak just for a moment, Mr. Speaker, about taxation. 
We talked about continuing to cut taxes responsibly without 
jeopardizing health and education. And I have to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that even with the small tax increase of 1 per cent that 
happened in this particular budget, Saskatchewan people are 
still on a net basis better off than we were before we began tax 
reform. We managed to cut taxes for an average of $1,000 for 
the average Saskatchewan family, and this will be a very small 
bite out of that tax reform. So people are still net beneficiaries 
of the tax reforms that we took in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it did take us four years to accomplish that, and during the 
past election our platform had a modest cost of 152 million. 
And what was the Sask Party’s platform promise? It was 500 
million, Mr. Speaker, with a lot of missing money and expenses 
that weren’t accounted for — a platform that their own former 
leader of the opposition admitted in The Star Phoenix on 
November 4 was missing a gap of about 150 million in 
revenues to support this. 
 
And you know, they say that the government was hiding the 
financial situation. Well that seems rather odd when they had a 
press conference in August of 2003 prior to the election which 
states, and I quote, Mr. Speaker. This is a quote actually from 
the auditor’s report as well: 
 

The government’s accumulated deficit is large and its 
finances are vulnerable to changes in commodity prices, 
interest rates, and the weather, said Wendel, the Provincial 
Auditor. (The story continues.) The auditor’s report 
describes the demands on government finances caused by 
the weather. The 2002-03 results show the government’s 
support to farmers and for fire suppression are costly 
during periods of drought, and for example the 
government’s cost for its crop insurance program was (are 
you listening in the opposition . . . for the crop insurance 
program) was 200 million in 2002 and 480 million in 
2003. 

 
Please do tell me how that constitutes a decline in support for 
people in rural Saskatchewan who we have gone the distance 
with in this particular situation. 
 
So I’m saying that you clearly knew, and you had a press 
conference about the fact that you knew. And you know I have 
a lot more to tell you about a budget of a government that cares 
for the most vulnerable people: the disabled, the working poor. 
And we’ve done a great deal in this budget to support folks who 
are trying to get on their feet and get into the workplace. But 
I’m going to have to leave that to another one of my colleagues 
to tell that story. 
 
(20:30) 
 
So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and what we need here 
is a little more appreciation of the facts, a little less dedication 

to ideology. And I will be supporting this budget. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been elected to this legislature for nine years, 
and this is without a doubt the most devastating budget that I 
have ever seen brought forward to the people of Saskatchewan: 
devastating to the farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker — and 
I’ll get into that more in a few minutes — devastating to 
businesses of all kinds, devastating to union workers and 
non-union workers alike, devastating to the provincial growth 
of this province which should be so crucial in the mind of 
whoever is government at this time. 
 
Population growth — we see again the population’s been 
dropping in the province of Saskatchewan. Everything in this 
budget is going to help drive our population down instead of up, 
Mr. Speaker, which the government should be dealing with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I notice Murray Mandryk had a write-up this last 
weekend in the paper saying that . . . well I believe he was 
saying that this budget didn’t even warrant a name. And I was 
trying to think of what this name could really be for this budget 
because the last eight budgets there’s always been something in 
there, whether it’s growth or prosperity or whatever — usually 
a myth under the NDP — but there’s been a name. But nothing 
on this one. 
 
But I come to the conclusion it probably should be called the 
Pinocchio file, Mr. Speaker, because if you go back to the 
November election, from what the Premier and the NDP said 
they were going to do to what they did in this budget . . . is 
totally, totally the opposite. I mean it’s totally disingenuous; it’s 
deceiving. And the scare tactics that they ran in the election, 
Mr. Speaker, there was nothing in this budget that they said 
they were going to do in the November election. 
 
I want to go over some of the highlights. And the highlights I 
might add, Mr. Speaker, are all negative to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I start, Mr. Speaker, with the 1 per cent PST (provincial sales 
tax) increase. This is not a rural issue. This is not just a urban 
issue. This hurts everybody in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to go through the highlights first by agriculture, the ones 
that affect our farmers and our ranchers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And listen, Mr. Speaker, because there’s a long 
list of things that negatively affect our farmers. 
 
The elimination of the farm fuel tax rebate on gasoline and 
propane effective January 1, 2004. Effective April 7, 2004, the 
fuel tax rebate of 15 per cent will apply to 20 per cent of 
gasoline and propane purchases at bulk fuel outlets. Also, Mr. 
Speaker, that affects rural and urban people. 
 
Farmers also . . . no new indexation of income tax rates. The 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

livestock and horticultural facilities incentive program will not 
be renewed. There goes another program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One that was announced a couple of days before the budget, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s really going to affect rural Saskatchewan 
but will affect all of Saskatchewan is increased vehicle 
registration fees. And it’s our understanding, Mr. Speaker, that 
some farm vehicles — trucks, pups, and trailers behind trucks 
— will go up as much as $1,200. Mr. Speaker, that just keeps 
adding to the bottom line at a time when farmers can least 
afford it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also talk about in the budget, we see the 
absence of no property tax relief. And that’s interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, because I have some quotes here from the Premier 
when he talked in Yorkton — I believe it was — on October 17 
when he was putting out the NDP platform. And I quote, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

It’s a platform that is financially achievable and financially 
viable. (And, Mr. Speaker) It is a platform that provides 
for the room to receive the recommendations of the 
Boughen Commission on the funding of education. It’s a 
platform that is realistic, practical, and above all 
affordable. 

 
Well the Pinocchio files come to life once again, Mr. Speaker. 
The noses are growing on that side, and I can’t go any further as 
you well know, Mr. Speaker, or I won’t be on my feet long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised they were going to deal with 
the Boughen report. If they weren’t, what on earth did they pay 
cash dollars to have it done? Why did they have it done at all if 
they weren’t going to listen to it? But then I thought, well go a 
little deeper into the Boughen report. He also recommended that 
they expand and raise the PST. And they did that; they raised 
the PST. But they forgot to read further because he said, address 
the education tax on property, both urban and rural, but 
especially on farm land, Mr. Speaker. So they read part of the 
report. They forgot to go further and read the other part of the 
report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also went into . . . and this really affects rural 
Saskatchewan, in fact not just rural Saskatchewan but mainly 
rural Saskatchewan. Health care facilities will be closed. 
 
Well déjà vu because in 1992 that government, the NDP 
government closed 52 rural hospitals. I know, Mr. Speaker, 
because some of mine were closed. In fact they were planning 
to rebuild the one in Langenburg where they had $3 million 
raised. And this government come along and squashed the idea, 
cancelled it — 52 hospitals gone. 
 
Then we saw in ’95, Mr. Speaker, nothing mentioned in the 
election of course, three, four more hospitals closed. And let’s 
remember back to those years because the Plains was one of 
those hospitals, Mr. Speaker. Served all of rural Saskatchewan, 
was a very good hospital, and right now the mess they’ve got us 
in with health care, wouldn’t the Plains look good to shorten the 
waiting lists in Saskatchewan, both urban and rural? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — They went on in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
to say that they’re going to close or shut down some of the 
long-term care beds in Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s put the fear of God in our seniors in this province. I went 
home on the weekend and from the administrator to the workers 
to my parents, along with every other person in that care home, 
are scared of this government. 
 
And I find that amazing, Mr. Speaker, after the election in 
November when they said, watch the Sask Party; they’ll close 
facilities like this. Well that’s the party that’s closing them right 
now. That’s the party we can’t trust. That’s the party that’s 
disingenuous, and in the next election I don’t think scare tactics 
will work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t think the people of this province are going to fall for that 
one twice. I don’t think union members in this province are 
going to fall for that one twice. And I know one thing, Mr. 
Speaker; I know my mother ain’t going to fall for that one. She 
didn’t vote for them this time and I can be darn sure she’s never 
going to vote for them after this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Water testing fee increases. That’s going to 
cost urban and rural towns and RMs out there. Hearing care 
fees increased. 
 
Now we get into one of the big ones, Mr. Speaker. Never 
mentioned a word about this in the election. They’re closing 22 
rural service centres. Well here we go again. Many towns, and a 
lot of them small towns in this province, have people working 
in those rural service centres that have lost their job now. 
They’re gone. So another nail in the coffin of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But we should be used to it, Mr. Speaker, because since 1992 
there isn’t a member on that side now, or ones that have been 
here and gone, that really cared about rural Saskatchewan — 
never highlighted like it has been in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And again, Mr. Speaker, I talk about the 
loss of hundreds of employees, but many of them that live in 
rural Saskatchewan. The cancellation of the farm family 
opportunities initiative and Conservation Cover Program — 
another program that farmers use, Mr. Speaker — $700,000 
reduction to base funding for Prairie Diagnostic Services lab, 
and this was responsible for all CWD (chronic wasting disease) 
testing in Saskatchewan. The elimination of the short-term hog 
loan program. Livestock drought loan program — gone, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And here’s one that’s been a continual thing the NDP 
government have hit on — crop insurance budget cut by $6 
million. That’s after last year increasing premiums by 52 per 
cent, increasing premiums this year by 13 per cent, at the same 
time cutting the coverage that farmers have. The last time I 
looked, we’ve had droughts in this province. At a time when 
they can least afford cuts in the program, this government sees 
fit to make cuts to agriculture programs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

What a way to grow Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
No wonder our farm kids are leaving for Alberta. They see what 
their parents are going through in agriculture and they also see 
that this government is not standing behind our farmers and 
helping them through bad times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also closure of extension services branches. And now 
we get to a pet peeve of mine, Mr. Speaker, only $1.6 million in 
revenue-sharing funding to rural municipalities. Now if you 
take, Mr. Speaker, the 1 per cent increase in the PST and many 
of the cuts that I’ve listed already and many more that I am 
going to go through, if you add that together, RMs (rural 
municipality) are once again being downloaded on. They didn’t 
get an increase in revenue sharing. They lost money, Mr. 
Speaker, once again. 
 
In ’92, RMs and urban municipalities all over this province took 
a hit. Well this time if I was SARM and the municipalities . . . 
And I’m sure I don’t have to carry the torch for them; they’ll be 
speaking for themselves. In fact, I would be very surprised if 
they’re not out in front of this building before this session’s 
over after this budget, Mr. Speaker — probably along with a lot 
of union members that will be joining them out front of this 
building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they can’t take any more downloading from this 
government. They’re the fibre and the backbone, the 
municipalities in this province, and they need funding from this 
government to help them carry through, especially when 
farmers are having a bad time, and especially when education 
tax is on the rise out on the farm because this government sees 
fit not to deal with that problem. 
 
Where we were in ’92 where the farmers paid 40 per cent and 
the government paid 60, and urban taxpayers for the education 
tax paid 40 per cent and the government paid 60 — well guess 
where we are now, Mr. Speaker. Because the new money that 
this government in this budget put into education, it will last 
until about August, Mr. Speaker. And after that, guess who’s 
going to pick the tab up. Local school divisions have nowhere 
but to pass that on to the local taxpayer. And once again this 
government has turned its back on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just rural; it’s urban and rural. Again 
we go back to health care. It’s not just rural cuts out there that 
are going to hurt rural people. When our hospitals are closed, 
we come into Regina and Saskatoon for treatment. Guess what? 
The waiting lists are going to increase here. City people are on 
those same waiting lists that us rural people are and are going to 
have to wait just as long as we are, Mr. Speaker. This budget 
hurts everybody in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We go to SERM, Mr. Speaker. And I know some of the 
members on that side are quite interested in this one. SERM 
offices will be closed in nine communities. SERM offices will 
no longer sell fishing, hunting, and trapping licences — the 
same licences, I might add. Maybe some of these offices 
couldn’t collect that much because they have all gone up, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Change to SERM will mean about 200 employees will lose 
their jobs. Now I find that amazing, Mr. Speaker, after the 
November election when the Premier and those MLAs on that 

side went around this province and their supporters said, don’t 
elect the Saskatchewan Party; you should be scared of them for 
what they’ll do to this province. Elect us because we can be 
trusted. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, after this budget, I don’t think there’s 
anybody, even NDP supporters, that will trust that NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, they’re closing six SERM fire 
bases and three historical parks are going to open later than 
usual — that’s historical parks. 
 
Now we can go to another problem we have out there, and 
again affects both urban and rural people in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re not going to open 12 parks in this province until 
the middle of June. My God, we might as well call off summer, 
Mr. Speaker, because it’s half over by then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, somebody on that side of the House has to shake 
their head and see what we’re doing. We’re killing the economy 
of Saskatchewan. We have business people that are either in the 
parks, outside the parks, that rely on our five months of summer 
if it’s a good summer. 
 
And what we’ve done now is taken away about a third of their 
income. But we’ve hurt the province, because on their income 
they pay tax. There’s PST, there’s a number of taxes out there. 
There’s gas tax out there for tourists coming in. 
 
Tourism should be one of the biggest highlights that we have in 
this province. It could be a growth industry for the province of 
Saskatchewan. And what do we do? We say, well you’re not 
welcome here in Saskatchewan; we’re closing our parks. 
 
Why are we closing our parks? To save $100,000. And the 
Minister of Environment today, Mr. Speaker, says every penny 
counts. Well it does. But when you close the parks and don’t 
open them till June 15 to save $100,000 and you lose $1 
million, somebody has no sense on that side at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — It doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure 
out you’re killing Saskatchewan, and I’m not even sure that the 
minister understands what he just did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I found it interesting this afternoon that the 
Minister of Health was talking about books that the members on 
this side of the House should read. While he was doing that I 
thought, you know, there must be books that members on that 
side should read. Because number one is they certainly need an 
education on how you grow a province. 
 
And I was thinking, you know, the budget — well we’ve had 
four deficit budgets — and I was thinking, well maybe we 
could get them the book called creative accounting. All of them 
do. But then I thought they must have all read that, because for 
the last four years under this Premier, there’s been some 
tremendous creative accounting done over there to try and let on 
they’ve balanced the books. 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Also, Mr. Speaker, I thought maybe . . . 
There’s a number of stories that Pinocchio has out. I know 
when I was a kid I read them and I didn’t pay much attention. 
But I certainly see there was some value to them at that time, 
because there was kind of some reasoning in there that I see that 
really fits the members across. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about creative accounting, and I 
notice the Minister of Finance got up the other day and he was 
so proud with his little flower and he said, this is the 11th 
balanced budget. Well you know what the problem was? There 
is about only 28 people in the province of Saskatchewan that 
actually believe that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Because that one fooled for a while Mr. 
Speaker, but nobody is falling for that one now. Before this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, there was about $1.5 billion of new debt 
in the province of Saskatchewan because the rainy day fund 
does not exist. 
 
It would be like me, Mr. Speaker, wanting to buy a new car and 
not having any money — and I know what that is like, Mr. 
Speaker. But I will go out and I’ll borrow the money from one 
of the banks, finance company or something. But you know I 
don’t want the wife to know I borrowed that money. So you 
know what I am going to do? I am going to create a fiscal 
stabilization fund for myself. So I am going to borrow from the 
bank. I am going to take that money and I’m going to put it over 
in this account. And when the wife looks, I’ve got a brand new 
car but I don’t owe them nothing. 
 
But do you know the problem with that, Mr. Speaker? My kids 
are going to have to pay that off because I am not going to have 
the nerve. I can’t tell the wife. She can’t know. I’m going to let 
the kids do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And I haven’t told them, Mr. Speaker. If 
they are watching tonight, they will know. I hate, Mr. Speaker, 
to break it to my family like that, but I couldn’t think of a better 
example, Mr. Speaker. The rainy day fund I was going to call it 
and I thought no, I want to be like the Minister of Finance — 
it’s the fiscal stabilization. And as the Minister of Agriculture 
would say, it is the right thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I could go on, but I know 
there’s other members that are just hurting to get up. 
 
Once again I will say, Mr. Speaker, because I think it is actually 
important that the people of Saskatchewan understand, that after 
all the hurt that they have put on Saskatchewan people we have 
another deficit budget of $312 million. It doesn’t matter what 
way you shake. If you did it like I did my car, if you do it like 
the Minister of Finance, we still owe 312 million more than we 

did before that budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know something? The debt of the province 
of Saskatchewan is higher now than when Grant Devine left 
office. How did that happen? I remember for about eight years 
that government did nothing but blame Grant Devine. Then 
they graduated to the federal government. Well right now I 
think what they should do is look in the mirror because, Mr. 
Speaker, after 12 years of being in government, you had better 
start pointing the finger at yourself. You did it; you created the 
mess. And, you know, I think they were surprised when they 
won the last election. They can clean up their own mess, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you know when the next election comes, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it’s Thursday, Friday, a year from now, two years from 
now, four years from now — it will depend how glued to their 
seat they stay, Mr. Speaker — the people of Saskatchewan are 
not falling for that campaign in the next election like they ran in 
November, and they certainly are not going to fall for a budget 
like we just saw. Mr. Speaker, you’ve probably come to this 
conclusion too. I can’t support the budget but I can support the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a pleasure to enter into this debate, Mr. Speaker, on the 
budget. And given that I have the opportunity to welcome you 
when standing to my feet this time, I want to take a moment just 
to say congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, and to commend the 
historic moment that you were the absolute very first Speaker 
re-elected by the members of our House. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to join others here who have extended their personal 
congratulations to you and extend confidence in your chairing 
of our sessions here. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened with some interest and amusement 
to the hon. member for Melville-Saltcoats who just talked about 
. . . and the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, he says he’s been in the 
House for a while and he’s seen a number of budgets, nine I 
think he said, and I’m a bit surprised, Mr. Speaker, that after 
having seen nine budgets he’s still having a hard time figuring 
out how to read these things. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is I’m proud to join 
with the members on this side of the House to vote, when we 
come to the vote, for the 11th consecutive balanced budget in 
all of Canada. It is the highest number and the first. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know the hon. member, he has an analogy 
— he has an analogy about how his family manages or 
mismanages their finances. Mr. Speaker, as complicated as he 
tries to make it, it just ain’t that complicated. Sorry about that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the fact of the matter is there are people in this province 
who have children and what they have is a bank account, a 
chequing account, and they have a savings account. What goes 
into the chequing account, Mr. Speaker, is the monthly income 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

and the expenses that go out, and what’s in the savings account 
are the savings that have been there and they have been built up 
over a period of time. 
 
Now the hon. member says there’s no cash. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
they all have . . . none of them . . . the savings account don’t 
have a box with a bunch of $100 bills or $1,000 bills. There’s 
no secret box with $1,000 bills. No, no, Mr. Speaker. What 
there is, there’s a savings account book. It’s a book. It’s got a 
number in it. And when you take it to your credit union to get 
your money, they look at the book. They say, there’s that 
amount of money, and you want money that’s less than that, we 
give it to you because it’s yours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. The people of 
Saskatchewan believe in saving for the future, for a rainy day. 
So does their government. We will manage the finances of the 
people of Saskatchewan just as prudently as the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they will have none of this hocus-pocus 
financial stuff that we get offered as explanations of high 
financing by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind why they’re there 
and we’re here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened with some interest 
as the hon. member talks about the attack on rural 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to 
what he has to say and I pick up a recent copy of The Western 
Producer, the March 25 edition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s an article in there about a recent provincial 
report about the province. It says there is a provincial 
government report that acknowledged that the growth in the 
province has been mainly on the main corridor between the two 
larger cities in the province. It goes on to say that: 
 

. . . (the) per capita income (in the province) was . . . 
(2,700), but in (the) rural . . . (area) it ranged from . . . 
(only 13) to $16,000. (In fact) few rural residents have 
access to high-paying jobs and few companies are willing 
to locate in rural areas because of poorer services. 

 
It goes on to say that the main, one of the main concerns is 
access to the management of water. Well, Mr. Speaker, there 
were two government MLAs on this report and it says that they 
spent more than a year reviewing the previous reports and 
talking to hundreds of rural residents to come up with a picture 
of rural life. And then it says, Mr. Speaker, note this. I listened 
to the hon. member’s remarks and it says: 
 

That picture — of volunteer burnout, crumbling arenas, 
hospitals that can’t keep doctors and towns that can’t 
attract (business) . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, what’s the province? The Alberta report 
recognizes rural hardship — the province is their beloved 
Alberta, their beloved Alberta. The hon. member says he 
encourages his family members to go to their beloved Alberta 
where the rural report is pointing to hardship. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I say that not to depress the people of Alberta but 
to make it clear to the people of Saskatchewan that we live in 
the real world here. We live in the real world. One of the great 
advantages, and in fact I think the hon. member for 
Saltcoats-Melville in his annual report to his constituency 
quoted here just a week or two ago in his local newspaper, said 
that one of the things they’re going to have watch out for now 
that the numbers are close is they’re going to have to watch 
what they actually say in opposition because they’re going to be 
held accountable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — But it hasn’t happened yet, hasn’t happened yet. 
Listen to his . . . What a wake-up call; what a wake-up call. Mr. 
Speaker, there are people on this side of the House who get up 
every morning and are prepared to be held accountable for the 
decisions they make. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — This isn’t something that . . . This is not a game 
that we’re playing here, Mr. Speaker. This is about real life. 
 
And as I look at what is going on in the budget that we have 
before us, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that there are three 
characteristics that will mark a good budget in any year: one, 
that the budget puts forth a plan that is sustainable; secondly, 
that it aids those who are the most vulnerable of our citizens; 
and thirdly, that it responds to the top priorities of the people of 
the province. Surely that’s the characteristic of a good budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me say, in spades, in my view this 
budget, although it required difficult decision making, it was 
made by people who are prepared to accept the mantle of 
responsibility that was given to us by the people of 
Saskatchewan by democratic decision. And the top two 
priorities very clearly for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, are health care and education — very clearly, very 
clearly. There will be nobody who will argue differently that 
those are the top two priorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this budget — health care clearly the top priority — 160 new 
million dollars of two and a quarter million dollars in total that 
are new. In addition to that, another $45 million new money in 
education. You put the two together, Mr. Speaker, over 90 per 
cent of the new money going to the top two priorities. 
 
How is it being realized? Well in health care, Mr. Speaker, $2.7 
billion in spending this year in the health care budget. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s $2,700 for every man, woman, and child in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Over $5,000 a year a family of two; 
a family of four, Mr. Speaker, over $10,000 a year being spent 
on their behalf in the interest of their good health. Mr. Speaker, 
not too shabby, now 44 per cent of the total of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that increase to some important areas that 
we’ve been hearing concerns about on this side of the House for 
a long time — we don’t have to come to the House here to hear 
concerns; we do it every day at home in our constituency — 
increase in funding to support the needs of the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency. And, Mr. Speaker, one that’s important in my 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

home constituency as well as at here in the city of Regina, an 
increase by one MRI machine, Mr. Speaker, that will help to 
deal with the needs for diagnosis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the world of education, $1.2 billion for 
education in this budget. And of interest to those in the world of 
post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker, there is an increase in 
Canada’s first post-secondary graduate tax credit, increase in it 
in this budget from $350 to $500 and a plan, Mr. Speaker, to 
raise that to $1,000 over the course of the next four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in this budget one of the 
tough decisions made was to increase the sales tax by 1 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, the decision to do that will generate some 
additional $130 million, Mr. Speaker — almost, almost 
equivalent to the increase in the health care spending of $160 
million. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes people will tend to be of the view 
that health care is free. And I would argue, Mr. Speaker, health 
care is not free. Health care is not free. There is, Mr. Speaker, a 
commitment by every single Saskatchewan citizen to contribute 
towards their health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget there is an increase to the sales tax. 
There have been debates over the years, Mr. Speaker, there 
have debates over the years about the appropriate way of 
funding your health care system. In Alberta they have a system 
where they charge a health care premium — $528 I believe it is 
for a single individual in Alberta, $528. Well the hon. member 
says they might as well come to Saskatchewan. It is the first 
sensible thing I have heard from that side of the House in the 
entire budget debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I am impressed. The hon. member 
from Cannington has had a vision; the light has been turned on. 
Because he has recognized, he has recognized that in 
Saskatchewan the health care premium is the provincial sales 
tax. 
 
I have argued for many years, Mr. Speaker — maybe some year 
I will get my way — that here in Saskatchewan it would be 
more appropriate to call it the provincial health tax. Because as 
a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, in my judgment it is, it is the 
health care premium that we pay in this province already. We 
have been for years and we will continue to do it. And we will 
do it on the basis of consumption, on a basis of ability to pay 
instead of the Alberta way — the Saskatchewan Party, the 
Alberta envy party way of $528 if you’re a single individual; 
and if you are in a family, then you get to pay a health care 
premium in Alberta of $1,058, I think it is. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not our way. Here in Saskatchewan 
we made a decision that contributes to the sustainability of the 
budget which I think is an important criteria in any good 
budget. And I will stand in defence of the importance of the 
increase of the sales tax. 
 
(21:00) 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, I do want to address 
the matter of support for people who are the most vulnerable 
because surely it should ought to be the responsibility of all of 
us when we come to these hon. chambers, Mr. Speaker, to make 
decisions that will ensure the stability and the protection of 
those who are the most vulnerable in our society. And I’m very, 
very proud, Mr. Speaker, of some of the decisions that are in 
this budget that I’d like to make quick reference to. 
 
And I find it very, very interesting that not once, not once have 
I heard any of the hon. members opposite make any reference to 
any of the social funding improvements in this budget — none. 
It has gone completely over their heads; it’s completely outside 
their vision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would be very, very interested in hearing whoever’s 
speaking next — I think it may be the hon. member for 
Cannington — I’m sure he’s going to want to expand on the 
social conscience of the Saskatchewan Party because here he is 
now, he’s on record, he understands that it is better to be in 
Saskatchewan than his beloved Alberta. And I’m sure he’s 
going to want to tell us just why that is, why this province is so 
much more preferable in terms of our social programs in the 
vision of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have in the province of Saskatchewan a very 
progressive program called Building Independence, which is 
support for low-income families with children that make it 
always, always, always, without fail, better off for them to be 
working than not working. Mr. Speaker, a very important part 
of that system is the employment supplement. And in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, there is an increase of $2 million which 
provides the employment supplement to be extended by, we 
estimate, an additional 680 families in addition to those some 
7,000 families who are currently eligible for and receiving the 
employment supplement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very important part of that as well is the family 
benefits. This is for families who are not receiving social 
assistance, and an increase in funding of some $1.4 million will 
extend back to some 2,700 more Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prior to the budget of a year ago I remember the 
Premier, and that time the minister of Community Resources 
and Employment, making an announcement together that in last 
year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, there was the greatest increase in 
child care spaces that there has ever been in the history of the 
province. And there was in fact stated at that time, Mr. Speaker, 
not just a one-year plan, but a four-year plan, and that four-year 
plan continues right on schedule, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this year, in addition to the 500 new spaces announced last 
year on the way to 1,200 spaces over the course of four years, 
there will be an additional 200 new licensed spaces for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very important support for low-income 
families to ensure that their parents have the ability to 
participate in learning, improving their educations, or going to 
work as part of supporting their families and lending stability 
and security to the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is also important to me that there is an 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

integrated plan bringing together child care and early learning 
as part of a thoughtful plan that will support early learning and 
child care in the province in the years ahead. Mr. Speaker, this 
will bring the number by the end of the year of licensed spaces 
here in Saskatchewan to 8,100. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just take a moment or two if I may as 
well, to reflect on the announcements in this budget that refer to 
housing. 
 
For those of us who are fortunate enough to have our own 
homes, oftentimes we don’t think about the significance of this. 
But the fact of the matter is that when you have low income, 
one of the things that oftentimes unfortunately seems beyond 
your wildest dreams is the ability to own, to literally own your 
own home. Far too often, Mr. Speaker, for lower-income 
families whose families unfortunately will also have a higher 
level of illness and so on, higher degrees of insecurity, where 
you live, you tend to think of as where I am now and it really 
doesn’t have a whole lot more meaning than that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for families to be able to raise their children in a 
place that they call their own — our place; this place where our 
family is growing together in our neighbourhood, where we are 
building our future, where a child can have his or her room that 
is his or her place — Mr. Speaker, to far too many families this 
is beyond their wildest dreams. I am so pleased, Mr. Speaker — 
it means a great deal to me personally — that in this budget 
there is movement forward in the area of housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it may come as a surprise to many to know that in 
this year’s budget there is over $200 million being spent in 
support of housing support for over 17,000 Saskatchewan 
families. That is the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker. In this 
budget there will be, and over the course of the next few months 
there will be introduced a new housing supplement that will be 
intended to be linked to better quality housing for families with 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have talked to many families across the province 
over the last several years for whom this will make a huge 
difference in their security about the place they live in and the 
quality of that place in order to raise children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will become . . . also announced by the 
Minister of Community Resources and Employment, minister 
responsible for Housing, at a later time, a new program as well 
which will provide greater opportunity for Saskatchewan 
families, lower-income Saskatchewan families to become home 
owners. 
 
We’ve got some programs in place already. There is the 
centenary affordable housing program. Mr. Speaker, in this 
budget . . . is being announced that we’re moving towards the 
target of 2,000 new homes for low- and moderate-income 
families over the course of a five-year period, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s part of this that’s been previously announced. 
 
There are other neighbourhood development organizations . . . 
supported homes. There are co-op housing. There are a number 
of structures that have been in place, and there will be some 
additional structures being put in place to assist those 
vulnerable families here in the province of Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, for that I feel very, very proud to be associated 
with the good work of the people on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, together inner cities will be rejuvenated. There 
will be a strengthening of northern communities. And in the 
process of this, Mr. Speaker, there will also be some expansion 
to the economy as some . . . over a hundred million dollars in 
new house building takes place in order to achieve the 
objectives of these programs. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a brief reference to 
supports for people with disabilities. For far too long in our 
society, Mr. Speaker, people with disabilities have been the 
forgotten citizens, and it was the experience of this government, 
Mr. Speaker, that we received the report of the Saskatchewan 
council on disabilities and their action plan back in ’01, Mr. 
Speaker. And since that time, this government has been busy 
beavering away in a series, a steady series of progress for 
people with disabilities, towards the objective of becoming full, 
participating citizens in our province to enjoy full citizenship, 
full citizenship, Mr. Speaker, in a number of ways to be fully 
participating in all elements of our society. 
 
For far too long, for far too long, the barriers have been left to 
be. And they will only go away, Mr. Speaker, one way, and 
that’s if the provincial government — together with the federal 
government and our municipal governments as well, but largely 
initiated by the provincial government — if those disability 
barriers are attacked one by one, are broken down and enable, 
as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, people with disabilities to 
participate in mainstream activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, being a full citizen when you’re disabled means 
being able to go work — being able to go to work, not just at 
what some will call a plastic job. I remember, Mr. Speaker, very 
clearly talking with some people with disabilities about a year 
and a half ago who said to me, whatever you do, don’t do those 
plastic jobs. I asked them what they meant, and they said, those 
jobs, you know where you give out some money for people to 
hire us for a while, and they said you know what happens. You 
know how long those jobs last. They said from the point of 
view of the government, you may say, oh well at least people 
with disabilities got some work experience. But they told 
something I’ll never forget. They said to us it feels like we lost 
another job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people with disabilities don’t want plastic jobs. 
They want real jobs — no better, no worse than every other 
citizen in our society would wish to have for ourselves or for 
our family or for our neighbours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is support in this budget for attachment to 
mainstream employment. That’s been introduced. That’s 
continued. There is support for people with disabilities to have 
access to housing supplement. There will continue to be the 
support, Mr. Speaker, for housing. There will continue to be, 
Mr. Speaker, support for replacement of transit vehicles, 
paratransit vehicles as being part of the tradition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will continue to be support for early 
childhood development and intervention programs. Mr. 
Speaker, there will continue to be the increase last year 
announced in the social assistance program for people receiving 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

the disability allowance. And, Mr. Speaker, there is also — 
alive and well and working very hard — one full-time person 
who is with the Saskatchewan public service who is working 
very hard on an initiative to more employ people with 
disabilities in the public service of Saskatchewan, serving all 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s what a conscientious employer does. 
And that is also, Mr. Speaker, the sign of a wise employer who 
recognizes that, as the labour market is tightening, there is an 
untapped pool of potential, people who have got knowledge and 
skills who — because they have some barriers — have not been 
able to participate in the workforce. You address the barriers, 
Mr. Speaker, and you make available to you and access people 
who have got disabilities. They have got skills. They have got 
knowledge and who want to go to work and to support their 
own families and build their own potential for pensions and so 
that they can look forward to retiring in dignity just like 
everybody else. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is with all of those things in mind that I 
come to this debate, and I will stand in my place very, very 
proudly and without hesitation on Thursday when we entertain 
the amendment moved by the hon. members opposite who have 
threatened the people of Saskatchewan with an election with 
their non-confidence vote which is . . . non-confidence motion 
which has been moved, Mr. Speaker, in every budget in every 
legislature since the creation of parliamentary democracy over 
the centuries. 
 
So we’re going to have the amendment. Mr. Speaker, I predict 
the amendment will go the way of the dodo bird, and it will go 
the way it belongs, Mr. Speaker, when we stand to vote in 
favour of a plan for the future of Saskatchewan that is 
sustainable, that puts the priorities of Saskatchewan people first 
— health care and education — and which promises to improve 
the lot of those who are most vulnerable in our society. 
 
I will, Mr. Speaker, I will stand and join very, very proudly 
with the members of government. I will be voting in favour of 
the budget motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to start off with congratulating you on 
your election of Speaker again. I know that you find this, the 
job of Speaker, to be a very interesting and enjoyable one, and I 
wish to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that I will do my part in 
making sure that your job of Speaker is interesting and 
enjoyable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of people across the 
province who have looked at this budget and have noticed the 
fact that there is no name for it. And I think everybody across 
the province has been kind of playing the name-the-budget 
game, and I wanted to put in my submission, Mr. Speaker. And 
I came up with what I felt was a very appropriate name for this 
budget, that described the budget, described the development of 
this budget, described the campaign that led up to the 
presentation of this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

And the name that I’ve come up with for this budget is, needed 
within: truth and honesty. Mr. Speaker, that describes what this 
budget needs. It needs to have the light of truth and honesty 
shone upon this budget, Mr. Speaker, because this budget is a 
sham. The campaign was a sham, Mr. Speaker, and the delivery 
of this budget was a sham. 
 
I was interested to listen to the comments made by the member 
from Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker. And I specifically asked 
her a question while she was speaking . . . and perhaps Mr. 
Speaker didn’t notice that because he would have called me on 
it if he had have. But I asked her the question, Mr. Speaker: are 
you saying that the opposition should have known what the 
financial situation of the province was prior to the election? 
 
And as she went through her litany, she said yes, you should 
have known because you were quoting from the Provincial 
Auditor as to what the financial position of the province was. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we had a good idea what the financial 
position of the province was, and it was not a strong position, 
Mr. Speaker. But the minister of Community Services, Mr. 
Speaker, seemed to be indicating that she understood what the 
financial position of the province was. 
 
(21:15) 
 
So I have to ask, well if the minister of Social Services, the 
member from Regina Rosemont knew what the financial 
position of the province was, why wouldn’t the Finance 
minister know what the position of the province was? I’d like to 
quote from the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, from a radio 
show on the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio 
of January 13. And the reporter obviously asked the question of 
the minister, and the minister responded: 
 

During the campaign (and this is a quote, Mr. Speaker) it 
wasn’t very clear what the immediate financial situation 
holds and would hold for Saskatchewan. 

 
Well that’s kind of strange, Mr. Speaker. Here we have the 
minister of Community Services, not that long ago in the House 
. . . says that the opposition should know what the financial 
position of the province was because we were quoting from the 
Provincial Auditor who clearly outlined what the position was. 
But the Minister of Finance says he didn’t know what the 
financial position of the province was during the election 
campaign. 
 
So how is that, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition can know what 
the position of the province is financially, the minister of 
Community Services can know, but the Finance minister 
doesn’t? Was the Premier not telling him? Was he being kept 
out of the loop by the Finance department, Mr. Speaker? I mean 
this is a strange situation. And perhaps the Premier should have 
another one of his infamous commissions to look into this. Why 
did the Minister of Finance have no knowledge of the position 
of the province’s finances? 
 
He says it wasn’t very clear on what the immediate financial 
situation holds and would hold for Saskatchewan. We were 
supposed to know. The minister of Social Services . . . 
Community Services seemed to know, but the Minister of 
Finance was in the dark. That’s a strange situation, Mr. 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

Speaker, a very strange situation indeed. Makes you wonder 
why that would happen, it does indeed. 
 
The Minister of Finance goes on to say, “I don’t think there was 
any mistaking the province’s financial situation during the 
course of the provincial election.” Let me read that again: “I 
don’t think there was any mistaking the province’s financial 
situation during the course of the provincial election” — a 
direct quote from the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, on 
January 13, CBC radio show. 
 
But that’s a direct contradiction, Mr. Speaker, from his previous 
sentence on the very same page in the very same interview. One 
question he doesn’t know. It wasn’t clear what the financial 
situation was, and the second quote, Mr. Speaker, in the same 
interview: “I don’t think there was any mistaking the province’s 
financial situation.” 
 
So did the Minister of Finance know, or did the Minister of 
Finance not know? He can’t have both. One of them can’t be 
true, Mr. Speaker. He either knew or he didn’t know, but he 
said both of them, so which one is the truth, Mr. Speaker? And I 
think that speaks directly to the title that I gave the Minister of 
Finance’s budget, needed within: truth and honesty. 
 
Well a little bit later in the interview, Mr. Speaker, the reporter 
asked the Minister of Finance about tax hikes. And the Minister 
of Finance, the member from Regina Victoria — Douglas Park, 
I think the name of it is now, Regina Douglas Park — said: 
 

Why don’t parties want to talk about tax hikes during 
elections? I don’t know. Again it’s another one of those 
conundrums perhaps. I suspect that anyone who talks 
about tax hikes is not likely to be very popular during the 
course of an election campaign. 

 
Maybe that was why the Minister of Finance was confused in 
his first statement, Mr. Speaker, where it talks about the 
financial situation wasn’t clear. But then if that’s the case, why 
would he say in his second statement that it was impossible to 
mistake the position of the province’s finances during the 
election campaign? Again, Mr. Speaker, I guess it comes back 
to what is true here. It comes back to that debatable point, Mr. 
Speaker, of what is the truth in this House. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this is what people across this 
province are referring to as a budget of betrayal and a budget of 
hopelessness. When the Minister of Finance is confused about 
the very position of the financial situation of Saskatchewan, it’s 
certainly easy to confuse the electorate — especially if you set 
out to do so, Mr. Speaker, which is clearly what happened 
during the election campaign. The minister of Social Services 
seemed to have it clear and she felt that the opposition should 
have it clear. But it wasn’t necessary for the Minister of Finance 
or the Premier to have it clear. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think when you take a look at this budget 
and you start to question the things that have been presented by 
the Minister of Finance, you find that they don’t add up. They 
don’t add up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know I listened to a number of the . . . to the member from 
Regina Albert South, Regina South now, give his address. And 

he talked very much about balance, Mr. Speaker, balance in the 
budget, that the budget was balanced, Mr. Speaker. Well when 
you look at the numbers, Mr. Speaker, in the budget books, you 
find out just how balanced the budget is. 
 
On page 42 it talks about the GRF, general revenue fund budget 
balances. For the year of 2004-2005 in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, you come up with a balance of point one million — 
$100,000, Mr. Speaker, is the cumulative balance. And next 
year they’re projecting point two or 200,000; and then point 
three in 2006, that’s 300,000. And then a whopping, Mr. 
Speaker, a whopping $42 million in 2007. 
 
But if you talk to the Finance department people, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ll tell you to check a different number because the GRF 
fund is easily manipulated, manipulated through use of the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
They tell us, Mr. Speaker, that the numbers you really need to 
check to understand the financial position of the government — 
and maybe this is why the Finance minister was confused, shall 
we say, on this issue; he wasn’t checking these numbers — you 
look on page 78 of this budget and it says, summary statement 
of changes in net debt. 
 
And it outlines the decrease or increase in net debt for this fiscal 
year, Mr. Speaker. So that’s the amount of money that we’re 
either over, for income over expenditures, or less income than 
expenditures. And this year, Mr. Speaker, it’s 312 million and 
point one, 100,000 . . . so that’s $312 million more debt. That’s 
what the deficit is this year, Mr. Speaker. There is no balance 
here; $312 million in debt; $312 million in debt. Last year, Mr. 
Speaker, it was 299 million. 
 
So while the Minister of Finance is talking about balancing the 
GRF over four years —remember 100,000, 200,000, 300,000, 
and then 42 million — he hasn’t even touched the $312 million 
debt this year, Mr. Speaker, and that is going to continue to 
grow. That is going to continue to grow next year, Mr. Speaker. 
And if this government doesn’t do something to get this 
province growing, it’s going to grow every year after that until 
we simply are bankrupt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this province is heading in that direction. We have more 
debt now than we’ve ever had, Mr. Speaker, and it continues to 
grow under this NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was paying attention to what some of the 
members were talking about, and they were talking about the 
improvements to the health care system. Well I attended a 
meeting last week put on by the Minister of Health that talked 
about the surgical waiting lists in this province and how the 
minister had a plan in place to cure those surgical waiting lists 
by measuring them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, his plan was that we’re going to get the 
maximum waiting time down for surgeries in this province to 
18 months. It’s a laudable goal, Mr. Speaker, to reduce the 
waiting list, but I submit to you that 18 months waiting for a 
needed surgery is still too long. 
 
But that’s not even the bad part yet, Mr. Speaker. It was going 
to take two years to get the surgical waiting list in 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

Saskatchewan down to that 18-month period. The minister was 
going to put in place six different categories: one that you got in 
immediately; one you got in with three or four days; and one 
that was six weeks; one that was three months; one that was six 
months, one that was eighteen months. 
 
Then the minister says, as we measure this, if one of those 
categories is doing better than its target — let’s say the target is 
six weeks; let’s say the average surgery in that category is 
happening now in five weeks, which would be a good thing — 
but what the minister is going to do, he’s going to pull resources 
out of that category and shift them into another category, raising 
that level back up to the target of six weeks. So rather than it 
becoming a maximum waiting time, Mr. Speaker, of six weeks, 
it becomes a minimum waiting time of six weeks or three 
months or eighteen months, whatever the case may be, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s no way to run a health care system where the 
maximum becomes the minimum waiting period of time. 
 
So if you need a knee surgery, which right now you’re going to 
wait for 32 months for . . . Now it would be nice to be able to 
say to that person, the minimum you’re going to wait is 18 
months because that’s supposed to be the maximum as well, but 
it’s going to take you two years. 
 
But if all of a sudden the surgeries in that category were at 12 
months and the minister is going to come up and say, sorry, the 
minimum waiting time is now 18 months. We’re taking nurses 
and doctors out of there and shuffling them off into another 
category, Mr. Speaker. That’s an unacceptable way to run a 
health care system. 
 
The minister talks about purchasing a new MRI. Certainly not 
to say that we don’t need another MRI in this province but what 
we need even more, Mr. Speaker, than another MRI is to use 
the MRIs we already have here. The current system, Mr. 
Speaker, in Regina utilizes the MRI here for five days a week, 
five days the next week, and four days on the third week, and 
they don’t operate 12 hours a day, they don’t operate 24 hours a 
day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you even just ran them the same hourly schedule, but ran 
them over the weekends and ran them on the third Friday, you 
would increase your MRI times by 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 50 
per cent, and your only cost there would be staffing. 
 
You buy a new MRI, it’s going to cost you a million bucks. It’s 
going to cost you money to install. You’re going to have to 
have space in whatever facility that it’s going into that’s going 
to have to be renovated, and you still, Mr. Speaker, need new 
staff to operate that MRI. So operate the current MRIs that we 
have, Mr. Speaker, which are in place already and you can 
increase your production there by 50 per cent. But that just goes 
right over the minister’s head, Mr. Speaker, just missed it 
totally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member from Moose Jaw, Moose 
Jaw North, in his talk and he talked about how hard it seemed to 
be to read a budget and to understand it. And I can understand, 
Mr. Speaker, why the NDP have trouble presenting budgets 
when they find them that hard to read. 
 
(21:30) 

I had the discussion, Mr. Speaker, about three years ago about 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund from . . . with the minister of 
Finance of the time, the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 
And, Mr. Speaker, at that time he admitted that there was no 
savings account — that the money that he had allocated to that 
account was totally, completely gone; not one red penny left in 
that account, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when the member from Moose Jaw North goes into his 
piggy bank, what he’s going to find is that the member from 
Saskatoon Massey Place has already spent the money. There 
was no money there. So when he goes to get into his piggy 
bank, into his savings account, he’s got to borrow the money. 
And that’s why it’s important to know what the net debt is of 
the province, rather than the jiggery-pokery that goes on in the 
General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the real number is $312 million of new debt for the 
province of Saskatchewan for 2004-2005, and growing 
thereafter, Mr. Speaker. So it’s another part of the need for a 
title for this budget — needed within: truth and honesty, Mr. 
Speaker, truth and honesty. 
 
While I was out campaigning, since I’m talking about the 
member from Regina . . . Moose Jaw North, Mr. Speaker, I did 
a little campaigning in Moose Jaw during the campaign. And 
one of the things that came forward on the doorsteps, Mr. 
Speaker, was people were telling me as I would knock on their 
door: you, the Sask Party, you’re going to close Valley View 
hospital. No, Mr. Speaker, we had never said a word about 
Valley View. But I know what was going on. 
 
What was going on, Mr. Speaker, is that the NDP campaigners 
were running around, especially to the people working in 
Valley View or the people who had family members in Valley 
View, telling them that the facility was going to close. Now 
why would they be doing that? 
 
Well let’s take a step back, Mr. Speaker, prior to the campaign. 
I’m sure that somebody within the Premier’s office, within the 
ministry of Finance, went to the minister, to the Finance 
department, to the bureaucrats and said, what do we need to do 
to straighten out the economy of Saskatchewan? And the 
bureaucrats within the Department of Finance laid out some 
possible scenarios, Mr. Speaker. They laid out scenarios such as 
increasing taxation. They laid out scenarios of job cuts within 
the civil service. They laid out scenarios of closures of facilities 
such as Valley View, such as long-term care facilities, such as 
hospitals across this province. 
 
Going into the campaign the NDP had no expectations of 
winning. But they did have an expectation of what the 
bureaucrats would advise a new government coming in, that 
they would be advising that you — to get the finances of the 
province under control, the mess that has been left by the 
previous administration — you are going to have to raise taxes. 
You are going to have to cut programs. You are going to have 
to fire bureaucrats. You are going to have to close health care 
facilities. So they took that scenario, Mr. Speaker, that the 
bureaucrats had informed the Minister of Finance, the Premier 
of, and they went around the province scaring people, blaming 
it on the opposition, Mr. Speaker, blaming it on the opposition. 
 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2004 

And now what do we see? What do we see? We see the very 
same things that the NDP Party went across the province 
declaring dire warnings that would happen if the Saskatchewan 
Party got elected, are the very same things that this budget 
contains, Mr. Speaker. This budget presented by the Minister of 
Finance, presented by the Premier, presented by the member 
from Saskatoon. 
 
They all support the firing of civil servants. They all support the 
closure of more health care facilities. They all support the 
increase in taxation which was not one iota mentioned in their 
campaign, Mr. Speaker, not one. They gave the impression — 
the statements; the Premier made a statement, Mr. Speaker — 
no health care premiums. Absolutely no health care premiums. 
And yet he is musing, Mr. Speaker, he is musing in the news 
this week that there could be health care premiums imposed on 
the people of Saskatchewan. That wasn’t the campaign that was 
run, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why the title for this budget should 
be, needed within: truth and honesty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I campaigned in Yorkton I talked 
to a number of nurses on the doorstep. And one of the things 
that they were concerned about, Mr. Speaker, was something 
called joint job evaluation. And they were concerned as whether 
or not they were going to receive this pay benefit. They were 
unhappy that the minister, the deputy minister had spent $50 
million building a palace to booze in Yorkton, rather than 
providing them with a new long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker, 
because they felt that was needed much more than a new liquor 
store was needed — a palatial liquor store, Mr. Speaker. And so 
they were concerned about that and they were concerned about 
their jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now what do we see? We see in this budget that health care 
facilities are going to be closed again across this province, that 
nurses, that LPNs (licensed practical nurse) that support staff, 
Mr. Speaker, are going to be out of a job. 
 
You know one of the things that the members opposite have 
always spoke against, including the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana, is privatization of health care, Mr. Speaker. And so 
what does this, what does this budget do? It privatizes, Mr. 
Speaker. It privatizes health care, it privatizes health care in 
long-term care facilities. Because what it’s doing is it’s closing 
down long-term care facilities, forcing people to go into private 
care homes. That’s privatization, Mr. Speaker. I don’t care how 
you slice it, that’s privatizing the health care system and that is 
what the member from Saskatoon Nutana is doing in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. That member is supporting the 
privatization of long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s certainly not what they campaigned on. 
 
You know you talk about this budget had a lot to talk about 
youth, Mr. Speaker. It was about youth, you know, and one of 
the things that youth need in this province is education, is 
education. And so the government says, well look at how much 
more money we’ve put into K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) 
system. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, there is indeed more money. There is more 
money. And if you talk, Mr. Speaker, to the head of the School 
Trustees Association, what’ll he tell you? He says the new 
money, Mr. Speaker, will take us to August 31. Mr. Speaker, 

the school year hasn’t even started yet for next year and the 
money has run out. So where does the rest of the money come 
from? Where does the money come from? 
 
We hear there is going to be an increase in SaskPower rates. 
Where does that money come from? Where does the cost for 
SaskEnergy increases come from? Telephone? Gas prices? Mr. 
Speaker, where does the money come from for the support staff 
salary increases? Well it comes from one place — property 
taxes, Mr. Speaker. It comes from property taxes. 
 
The Premier during the election campaign in Yorkton, Mr. 
Speaker, when asked, specifically said there’s enough money in 
the province’s budget to safely handle the Boughen report, Mr. 
Speaker. He said the money is there. We can deal with the 
Boughen report and provide relief from property taxes, without 
any doubt. 
 
Well Boughen was recommending an increase in the PST of 1 
per cent to pay for the reduction in property taxes. Well the 
Premier got half of it right. He increased the PST but he forgot 
to lower the property taxes. It was a set-up, Mr. Speaker, and 
the Premier got elected. And so he increased the PST and forgot 
all about the Boughen report and the reduction to the property 
taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it doesn’t affect just rural Saskatchewan. It affects every 
property owner in this province, rural and urban. It affects 
everybody who rents, Mr. Speaker. Whether they own it or not, 
they’re all paying the property taxes — each and every one of 
us. You go down to the grocery store to buy a chocolate bar, 
Mr. Speaker, and you’re helping to pay for that property tax, 
Mr. Speaker. Even if it is a diet chocolate bar, you’re still 
paying that property tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this government says, whenever you 
ask them a question, well what would you do; what would you 
do — to the opposition. Well a number of my colleagues who 
are gathered around me in support have talked about the 
$75,000 ad that was paid by this government to convince one 
person. It didn’t seem to work — yet, at least. 
 
Seventy-five thousand dollars to convince Ralph Goodale that 
he should take a look at the equalization formula. You know, 
the Premier was on the stand with him last weekend. All he had 
to do was to lean over to Ralph and say, hey Ralph, how about 
giving us a break on the equalization payments? You know, I 
wonder if he did that. It was a lot cheaper than 75 thousand 
bucks, a lot more personal, and probably would have been a lot 
more effective. That $75,000, Mr. Speaker, would have opened 
up nine of the twelve parks that they’re leaving closed, Mr. 
Speaker, until the middle of June or later. Nine of them. 
 
I mean, they only had to find another $25,000. You know, get 
rid of one of the hacks. The past minister of Finance, when he 
first got elected, got elected on a platform of get rid of the hacks 
and flacks. Well, Mr. Speaker, as soon as he got the chance he 
got lots of them. He never fired any of them. 
 
You know, so if the ministers, one of the ministers was to 
voluntarily, you know, maybe the Minister of the Environment 
. . . maybe the Minister of the Environment could let go of one 
of his assistants in his office and keep the other three parks 



April 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

open. That’s all it would take. You know, don’t pay for that ad; 
get rid of one of the minister’s staff and you’d keep all 12 parks 
open, Mr. Speaker. It’s not that big a deal. 
 
You know they say, well, what else could we do? What else 
could we do? Well the government blew 15 million more 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, on Navigata, a company in BC (British 
Columbia). Fifteen million dollars in BC. Doesn’t seem to do a 
lot for Saskatchewan, but they’re in BC — $15 million. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? That $15 million is more than 
the increase to the Agriculture budget; it’s more than the 
increase to the Community Resources budget — which actually 
took a cut this year; it’s more than the increase to Corrections; 
it’s more than the increase to Culture and Youth; it’s more, Mr. 
Speaker, more than the increase to Highways, and more than 
the increase to Justice. And that’s only a few of them. 
 
It’s more than most of the increases. Probably only two 
budgets, maybe three, that got a bigger increase than that $15 
million, Mr. Speaker. Why not put that $15 million, Mr. 
Speaker, into any one — any one — of those departments? 
 
I’m sure the people in Community Resources would certainly 
have loved to have $15 million to support the programs for FAS 
(fetal alcohol syndrome), for single mothers, Mr. Speaker, for 
the housing programs that the member from Moose Jaw North, 
Mr. Speaker, was talking about. 
 
There are a lot of things in this province that that $15 million 
could have funded, but no — blow it off in BC. You know it’s a 
nice place to go visit in January, Mr. Speaker, so why spend the 
money here in Saskatchewan? 
 
(21:45) 
 
You know, the member from Moose Jaw North was explaining 
about how caring a government that they are; how socially 
conscious they are; the need for more housing; the need for 
more child care services, Mr. Speaker, you know. 
 
And there was a member, Mr. Speaker, who sat . . . I think he 
sat in that very chair actually when he was the minister of 
Community Services, then known as Social Services, Bob 
Pringle. And in an interview, Mr. Speaker, on the radio right 
after the budget, Mr. Pringle was in tears. Not tears of joy, Mr. 
Speaker, but tears of despair for the abandonment of those very, 
very important social programs that this government was doing, 
Mr. Speaker. He had nothing but condemnation for this 
government, he didn’t have praise. And this was the 
government that he was a part of; this was the government that 
he had been the Social Services minister of and he had nothing 
good to say for what this government was doing to that 
department, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet they stand here so sanctimoniously and praise to high 
heaven the good job they’re doing. Well they should listen to 
the people who sat in those seats for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of response that this budget is 
engendering across this province on both sides of the political 
spectrum, Mr. Speaker. This budget is nothing but a budget of 
betrayal and hopelessness. It leaves the people of Saskatchewan 

with no hope for the future, with no vision that it’s going to get 
better, Mr. Speaker. This is simply a budget of decline, of rot, 
Mr. Speaker, and does not deserve the support of any member 
of this House. 
 
And I challenge one of those members over there to stand up 
for these people that Bob Pringle was crying for. That, Mr. 
Speaker, would show leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget, and I ask one 
of those members to not support it as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip, the 
member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to rise on 
my feet and make a few remarks about the budget. But at this 
time seeing the late hour, Mr. Speaker, I’d move we adjourn the 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Whip 
that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:48. 
 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................373 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................381 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................379 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................382 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................384 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................391 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................395 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 




